[PAGE 001]


to Practicing*

Compassion-

Focused Therapy


A step-by-step guide to help clients:

e Develop self-compassion * Learn mindfulness skills
e Balance difficult emotions


RUSSELL L. KOLTS, PHD
Foreword by PAUL GILBERT, PHD
Afterword by STEVEN C. HAYES, PHD

[PAGE 002]

“This book is not just simple. It is elegant and powerful. Through engaging didactics and detailed
clinical examples, Russell Kolts demonstrates how we can bring compassion to clients’ lives by
applying innovative and precise techniques of compassion-focused therapy (CFT). You will learn
to use perspective-taking shifts and imagery techniques formally and through natural conversations. You will learn to help clients understand and overcome their struggles using evolution and
contextual sciences. Be kind to yourself and to your clients: read CFT Made Simple.”

—Matthieu Villatte, PhD, coauthor of Mastering the Clinical Conversation


“An excellent book. Well written, easy to read, insightful, and inspiring. And bursting with practical ideas that will be useful for any health professional with an interest in compassion and mindfulness. A valuable contribution to the field of health and well-being.”

—Russ Harris, author of The Happiness Trap and ACT Made Simple


“A clinician’s ability to be compassionate, to help clients face their pain with kindness and courage,
is at the core of all effective therapies. Bringing together evolutionary psychology, affective neuroscience, attachment theory, behaviorism, and mindfulness approaches, Russell Kolts provides a
compendium filled with heartfelt wisdom, step-by-step guidelines, and exercises that therapists of
any orientation can use immediately to help their clients reclaim warmth, affiliation, safeness, and
hope in their lives. This indispensable volume is a must-have in any clinician’s library.”

—Robert Kohlenberg, PhD, ABPP and Mavis Tsai, PhD, codevelopers of functional
analytic psychotherapy (FAP)


“CFT is a revolutionary new approach to therapy firmly rooted in ancient wisdom and modern
science. The author has an uncanny ability to present this multidimensional model in a practical,
straightforward manner without losing any of its subtlety. This book is a wonderful resource for
clinicians who wish to dive deeply into CFT, or who simply want to integrate key aspects of the
approach into their existing practices. Drawing directly on our innate capacity for compassion,
CFT offers compelling insights for therapy and how we may live our daily lives more fully. Highly
recommended!”

—Christopher Germer, PhD, author of The Mindful Path to Self-Compassion, and
coeditor of Mindfulness and Psychotherapy


“This is a phenomenal book that manages to convey the complex theory underlying CFT into
extremely simple ideas and practices that translate directly into clinical practice. This book will be
an essential tool for any therapist wanting to effectively incorporate compassion into their work
with clients.”

—Kristin Neff, PhD, associate professor in the department of educational
psychology at the University of Texas at Austin, and author of Self-Compassion

[PAGE 004]

The Made Simple Series

Written by leaders and researchers in their fields, the Made Simple
series offers accessible, step-by-step guides for understanding
and implementing a number of evidence-based modalities in
clinical practice, such as acceptance and commitment therapy
(ACT), dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), compassion-focused
therapy (CFT), functional analytic psychotherapy (FAP), and
other proven-effective therapies.


For use by mental health professionals of any theoretical
background, these easy-to-use books break down complex
therapeutic methods and put them into simple steps—giving
clinicians everything they need to put theory into practice to
best benefit clients and create successful treatment outcomes.


Visit www.newharbinger.com for
more books in this series.

[PAGE 006]

PSYCHOLOGY


An Accessible Guide to Learning and
Applying CFT in Clinical Practice


Cormpsssion foctsed therapy (CFT) can help clients develop compassion and kindness
toward themselves and others, work through feelings of shame and self-criticism, and
improve emotion regulation and distress tolerance. However, the theoretical aspects behind
CFT—evolutionary psychology, attachment theory, and affective neuroscience—can appear
daunting. As a clinician interested in CFT, you need a user-friendly guide that will help you
hit the ground running.


CFT Made Simple provides everything you need to start implementing CFT in practice, either
as a primary therapy modality or as an adjunctive approach to other therapies. You'll find
practical tools to help clients develop self-compassion, learn mindfulness skills, and balance
difficult emotions. This book articulates the theoretical basis of the therapy in simple, easyto-follow language, and offers practical guidance and strategies on how to tailor your CFT
approach to specific client populations.


“This is a phenomenal book that manages to convey the complex
theory underlying compassion-focused therapy into extremely simple
ideas and practices that translate directly into clinical practice.”
—KRISTIN NEFF, PHD, author of Self-Compassion


RUSSELL L. KOLTS, PHD, is a licensed clinical psychologist and professor of psychology at
Eastern Washington University. Kolts has authored or coauthored numerous books, including The
Compassionate-Mind Guide to Managing Your Anger.


Foreword writer PAUL GILBERT, PHD, is developer of CFT and author of The Compassionate Mind
and Overcoming Depression.


Afterword writer STEVEN C. HAYES, PHD, is codeveloper of acceptance and commitment
therapy (ACT).


(Sp "ewharbingerpublications
ED www.newharbinger.com

Also available as an e-book

[PAGE 007]

Cri
made simple
A Clinician’s Guide to Practicing

Compassion-Focused Therapy


New Harbinger Publications, Inc.

[PAGE 008]

Publisher's Note

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold
with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering psychological, financial, legal, or other professional
services. If expert assistance or counseling is needed, the services of a competent professional should be sought.


“On Pain” from THE PROPHET by Kahlil Gibran, copyright © 1923 by Kahlil Gibran and renewed
1951 by Administrators C.T.A. of Kahlil Gibran Estate and Mary G. Gibran. Used by permission of
Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of the Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, a division of Penguin
Random House LLC. All rights reserved.


The table in the section “Compassionate Thinking and Reasoning” in chapter 10 is adapted from
Kolts, THE COMPASSIONATE MIND GUIDE TO MANAGING YOUR ANGER (2012), with
permission from Little, Brown Book Group.


Distributed in Canada by Raincoast Books


Copyright © 2016 by Russell L. Kolts
New Harbinger Publications, Inc.
5674 Shattuck Avenue
Oakland, CA 94609
www.newharbinger.com


Cover design by Sara Christian; Acquired by Melissa Kirk;
Edited by Gretel Hakanson; Indexed by James Minkin

All Rights Reserved


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data on file


Printed in the United States of America


18 17 16

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 First printing

[PAGE 009]

For my dear friend, colleague, and mentor Paul Gilbert. Paul, your brilliant work,
inspiration, nurturance, and tutelage have made this book possible, and have given me a
professional life that is more meaningful and rewarding than | had ever dared to dream.

[PAGE 011]

Contents


Foreword vil


Introduction


Origins and Basic Themes


Introducing Compassion 25


Compassionate Relating: Roles of the Therapist in CFT 33


Compassionate Understanding: How Evolution Has Shaped Our Brains 49


Compassionate Understanding: Three Types of Emotion 6|


Compassionate Understanding: The Social Shaping of the Self 75


Compassionate Awareness: Cultivating Mindfulness 91


Committing to Compassion: Working with Self-Criticism 107


Cultivating the Compassionate Self 115


Compassionate Thinking and Reasoning 129


Using Compassionate Imagery 141


Embodying Compassion: Chair Work in CFT 155

[PAGE 012]

CFT Made Simple


Compassionate
Integration: Case Formulation in CFT 171


Exploring Affect: The Multiple Selves Practice 181


Riding the Third Wave: Integrating CFT into Your Therapy 195


Conclusion 203


Afterword: Unpacking the Compassionate Mind 205


Acknowledgments 207


Appendix: Reproducible Forms 209


References 217


About
the author 223


Index 225


vi

[PAGE 013]

Foreword


In this beautifully and skillfully written book, Russell Kolts uses his experience to outline the key
themes in compassion-focused therapy (CFT). It’s very easy to think that compassion approaches
to psychological therapies are just about helping people be kind to themselves and others. In
reality, the center of compassion—particularly in the therapeutic arena—is courage. Russell himself
has worked with anger problems in prison inmates and has developed a CFT approach that he calls
the True Strength program, highlighting compassion as the strength and courage to turn toward our
suffering, and that of others.
I must confess that | was dubious about “making therapies simple” because this can easily be
seen as dumbing them down. It’s important to note that compassion-focused therapy is in some
ways very complex: based in consideration of basic scientifically established psychological processes; the ways in which emotions, motives, and cognitions operate; and the manner in which
humans are deeply socially embedded and organized through their social relationships. So when
you read this in terms of “made simple,” don’t think that Russell is saying the therapy is “simple.”
Rather, he is outlining some of the crucial concepts of CFT in the hope that they will be useful to
you, and perhaps excite you to learn more.
I'm delighted to say that Russell achieves his goal brilliantly and in a way I never could. | am one
of those people who tend to see complexity rather than simplicity. So here is a wonderful guide to
introduce you to the realities of the toughness, difficulties, and complexities of CFT—but, as
Russell says, creating the layers and building blocks in relatively straightforward and simple ways.
As explained in this book, CFT began in a relatively simple and straightforward way in the
1980s. It started with just noticing the importance of understanding the emotional tone people created
in their heads when they tried to be helpful to themselves. For example, imagine you are trying to
generate helpful thoughts when you're feeling depressed. But imagine “hearing” and experiencing

[PAGE 014]

CFT Made Simple


these thoughts in a very hostile way, as if you are irritated and contemptuous even as you say them
in your mind. How will that be? Even an encouraging phrase like You can do it becomes venomous
when communicated in a hostile mental “tone of voice.” You might try saying that to yourself in a
contemptuous, sort of hostile way and notice how that feels. Notice whether you feel encouraged.
Then imagine that you can really focus on warmth and empathic understanding in the words,
focusing on the feeling— maybe as if you were hearing somebody who really cared about you say
it with a heart that wishes for you to be free of your depression, or maybe as if hearing your own
voice as supportive, kind, and validating with the same intention. Actually doing exercises like this
is helpful, because in CFT getting personal experience by doing the practices yourself is key to the
development of your therapeutic skills.
What I found all those years ago was that while people could “cognitively” learn to generate
new perspectives and coping thoughts, they often did so with a contemptuous or hostile, irritable
tone. Indeed, they often found it very difficult to experience coping thoughts that involved two
important aspects that are now recognized as being core to our understanding of compassion.
First, they struggled to direct these thoughts toward themselves with a heartfelt motivation that is
based on empathic concern to address the deeper causes of the difficulties (compassionate motivation). Many patients actually blamed themselves, or thought they did not deserve compassion, or
that compassion was weakness in some way—just too soft! Sometimes they were very avoidant of
the causes of their suffering—for example, not wanting to address the traumatic experiences
underpinning their depression, or the fact that they needed to make life changes. It takes courage
to begin working on these difficult issues. Second, they tended to struggle with generating supportive, kind, understanding, and validating emotions when they actually created those thoughts in
their mind (compassionate action).
So CFT began with trying to think about how to help clients generate compassionate motivation and
care-orientated emotions, and also within that motivation, to create certain kinds of emotional
balancing within the mind. As Russell says, we use a standard definition of compassion—one that
captures the heartfelt wish for suffering to cease, a preparedness to develop “sensitivity to suffering
of the self and others with a commitment to try to alleviate and prevent it.” The prevention part is
important, because the training that we do is aimed at reducing suffering both in the present and
in the future. So the first psychology of compassion is about how we begin to address our suffering
and really start to understand it. As Russell outlines here, there are many competencies that we are
going to need, such as how we pay attention, how we experience being in contact with distress,
how we tolerate our distress, and how we empathically understand it without being judgmental or
critical.
The second psychology of compassion is really about developing the wisdom of knowing how
to be genuinely helpful. True helpfulness requires the development of wisdom—we must understand the nature of suffering before we are well equipped to work with it. Minds are very tricky and
are full of conflicted motives and emotions. Also, although warmth and gentleness can be part of
compassion, compassion requires a certain toughness, assertiveness, and a great deal of courage as
well. Parents are prepared to argue with their children over their diets or going out late at night


viii

[PAGE 015]

Foreword


because they want to protect them, even though this may cause conflicts. In some therapy encounters, clients are frightened of their anger or anxiety or grief. Therapists may then need to encourage these clients to experience such emotions, even when a client is reluctant to do so, and even
when doing so may not be pleasant at the time, because that is what’s required to help this client
learn to experience and work with these difficult feelings. It’s a therapeutic skill and wisdom that
allows the therapist to know how and when to do this. Indeed, some years ago, studies showed that
some of the warmest therapists were behaviorists! That makes sense, because behavior therapy
often has to encourage clients to engage with things they'd rather not connect with.
CFT also uses evolutionary functional analysis to help us understand how our emotions work.
As Russ clearly outlines, we consider emotions in terms of three functionally distinct types of
emotion-regulation system: there are emotions for dealing with threats and trying to protect us,
emotions that are stimulating us to go out and achieve and acquire resources, and emotions that
give rise to feelings of contentment, safeness, and slowing down—which are sometimes linked to
the parasympathetic functions of rest and digestion. Many of our clients are very out of balance
with these emotions, and the capacity for contentedness and peaceful feelings can be almost impossible for them to access. Studies of the parasympathetic nervous system have shown that this
system is out of balance in many people with mental health problems, with the major emotionbalancing and regulating systems not operating appropriately. In such cases, we have to help them
get these feelings of safeness online. In this way, building and cultivating the capacity for slowing
down, grounding, and experiencing safeness, connectedness, and affiliation are central treatment
targets for CFT. This creates the competencies and strengths for people to then engage with
feared material—be these things they need to do in the outside world, or in the internal one.
Given that CFT is an evolutionary-based therapy, it will not be surprising to hear that it draws
from attachment theory and its extensive research base. Attachment theory tells us that relationships with caring others can provide a secure base (which can be the platform to enable us to go
out and try things, take risks) and a safe haven (a safe and secure base where we can be soothed,
helped, and supported when we've gotten into difficulties). CFT helps clients begin to experience
and develop this internalized secure base and safe haven.
Once a person understands the nature of those three different types of emotion we visited
earlier, then a lot of things fall into place. For example, when soldiers are trained, their secure base
and safe haven can shift away from their families and toward their combat buddies—because that
is indeed the source of their safeness in combat. When they go out on sorties they will be in highstakes arousal, and when they come back they will calm down and find that safe haven within the
company of their buddies. So the soothing systems have been rewired to respond in connection
with these combat buddies. When they come home, they can then lose the secure base and safe
haven that their brains have gotten wired up for, and there will be fewer intense “dopamine rushes.”
Even though they are now at home with their families in a physically safe environment, it can be
very difficult and even stressful, because those families are not now the source of the secure base
and safe haven.

[PAGE 016]

CFT Made Simple


CFT outlines these kinds of processes clearly because it contains an emotional model capable
of dealing with that degree of complexity. This example is reflective of a common aspect of CFT:
the CFT therapist is very interested in how patients are able to calm and ground themselves, feel
connected to a secure base and safe haven, and then develop the courage necessary to engage with
feared and avoided experiences. Key too is the development of the internal affiliative relationship;
that is, one learns to relate to oneself in a friendly, supportive way rather than in a critical manner
that will continue to stimulate the threat system.
Good therapists want to know the evidence behind the therapies they utilize. Given the
purpose of this book, Russell has not overwhelmed it with evidence, but makes clear that a lot of
the evidence for CFT is process evidence. That is, we don't have many theoretical concepts, but
rather try to understand and draw upon what the science tells us about things like motivation and
emotion—for example, what we know about the importance of the frontal cortex and how that
develops during childhood or is affected by trauma. We know that the affiliative motives (such as
attachment or group belonging) and emotions played a very major role in mammalian evolution and
in particular the evolution of human intelligence. We also know that affiliative relationships are very
powerful regulators of motives and emotions. It follows, therefore, that these would be targets for
therapeutic intervention.
The backbone of CFT is found in detailed knowledge of how our brains have become the way
they are, understanding the evolutionary function of emotions, understanding core regulating processes of motives and how motives are linked to self-identity, and understanding how self-identity
can be cultivated in the therapeutic process. All over the world now, we are beginning to recognize
that the human mind is full of complex emotions and conflicts partly because of its evolved
design—an awareness that is increasingly reflected even in popular culture, such as the Disney
movie Inside Out (2015). The human brain is very tricky, easily pushed into doing bad things to
others and harmful things to ourselves. Compassionate motives, however, help to bring harmony
and reduce the risks of both.
CFT is an integrative therapy, which makes use of many evidence-based intervention strategies. These include Socratic dialogue, guided discovery, identification of safety behaviors, focus on
avoidance and exposure, inference chaining, reappraisal, behavioral experiments, mindfulness,
body/emotion awareness and breath training, imagery practices, supporting maturation—and more
besides. However, CFT also features a number of unique features:

e Psychoeducation about our evolved “tricky” brains

e Models of affect regulation with special focus on affiliation and the parasympathetic
nervous system


e A specific focus on the complex functions and forms of self-criticism and self-conscious
emotions, highlighting distinctions between different types of shame and guilt

e Building compassion-focused motives, competencies, and identities as inner organizing
systems

[PAGE 017]

Foreword


e Utilizing self-identity as the means for organizing and developing compassionate
motives and competencies

e Working with fears, blocks and resistances to compassion, positive feelings, and espe-
cially affiliative emotions

One of the key aspects of CFT is the idea that motives are major organizers of our minds. They
are linked to phenotypes in complex ways that are beyond the scope of the current discussion. But
for example, imagine that you are invited to a party and you are motivated by competitive social rank.
You want to impress the people there, and avoid making mistakes or being rejected, and you want
to take any opportunity you can to identify the more dominant members of the group and impress
them. Now let’s change that motivation and imagine you have a motivation that’s focused on caring
or friendship. Now your attention is not on who is dominant or whom you can impress (or how you
can impress them), but on finding out more about them. You are interested in sharing values, and
perhaps developing friendships. You will be considering people in terms of whether you like them
and want to spend time with them or not. The ways we think, pay attention, and act are guided by
motivations. Of course, beliefs and things like organizing schemas come into it—in fact, these are
linked to motives—but the crucial issue is motivation. When we see how powerful these motives
can be in organizing our minds, it becomes clear why compassion and prosocial motivations are
central in CFT.
Research has revealed that many people with mental health problems are motivated primarily
through competitive social rank systems which play out in terms of harsh self-judgments, self-criticizing,
and worries of being seen as inferior or incompetent in some way and rejected, often with intense
feelings of loneliness. These individuals may often feel they are stuck in low-rank, low-status, or
undesirable positions. Of course, there are others who are hyper-focused on attaining dominance;
focused on getting ahead and taking control regardless of the impact it has on others. Switching to
caring-focused or compassionate motivations can be a revelation to such clients, but can also be
quite frightening. Different types of clients can experience resistance toward cultivating compassionate and prosocial motives rather than competitive social rank-focused ones. CFT teaches
people how to think about different motivational and emotional states and to practice switching
between them. When we learn how to create within us a wise, strong, compassionate motivation
and then to anchor that motivation at the center of our sense of self, we discover that it brings with
it a wisdom for how to deal with life crises, orienting us to our own suffering and those of others in
very different ways. We discover that it’s a way of liberating ourselves from suffering and learning
how to tolerate that which can’t be changed. A very simple depiction of the essence of why developing a compassionate sense of self is important can be seen in “Compassion for Voices,” a very
short film about how people who hear voices can develop a compassionate self: https://www
youtube.com/watch?v=V Rql4lxuXAw.
Russell guides readers through the processes by which we need to pay attention to our bodies,
learn how to identify which emotion motivational systems are operating through us (motives which
can be activated quite automatically and exert considerable control over our thoughts and


xi

[PAGE 018]

CFT Made Simple


behaviors unless we develop more mindful awareness), and cultivate care-focused motives, emotions, and self-identity using a range of techniques drawn from standard therapies, contemplative
traditions, and acting traditions. As Russell makes clear, the details of CFT can indeed be complex,
but the layered approach presented here helps to organize these complexities in a straightforward,
understandable way. I'm delighted to see Russell write this book in such a clear and easy-tounderstand, step-by-step way. | hope it will entice you to learn more—perhaps to get more training, and perhaps even motivate you to cultivate an ever-deepening compassionate motivation
within yourself. As Russell points out, there’s nothing like personal practice and insight to see how
these processes work.
All that I can do now is to leave you in the talented and capable hands of your author and hope
this inspires you to learn more about the nature of compassion and how we can bring it into
therapy, and of course, into all aspects of our lives.

—Paul Gilbert, PhD, FBPsS, OBE


Xii

[PAGE 019]

Introduction


And a woman spoke, saying, “Tell us of Pain.”

And be said: Your pain is the breaking of the shell that encloses your understanding.

Even as the stone of the fruit must break, that its beart may stand in the sun, so must you know pain.

And could you keep your heart in wonder at the daily miracles of your life, your pain would not seem less wondrous than
your joy;


And you would accept the seasons of your heart, even as you have always accepted the seasons that pass over your fields.

And you would watch with serenity through the winters of your grief.


From The Prophet, by Kahlil Gibran


Compassion involves allowing ourselves to be moved by suffering, and experiencing the motivation
to help alleviate and prevent it. Compassion is born of the recognition that deep down, we all just
want to be happy and don’t want to suffer. In this book, you'll learn about compassion-focused
therapy (CFT), a therapy that focuses on the purposeful cultivation of compassion, the skills and
strengths that flow from it, and how to use these to work effectively with human suffering. When
we see what we
re up against—the situation were all in together, just by the virtue of having human
lives—there’s a deep realization that can arise: With all the potential suffering and struggle that we and all
humans will face, compassion is the only response that makes sense.
Why do we need compassion? We need compassion because life is hard. Even if we're born into
a relatively advantaged existence, with ready access to food, a comfortable place to live, people

[PAGE 020]

CFT Made Simple


who love us, education, and opportunities to pursue our goals—even if we have all of this—we will
all face tremendous pain in our lives. We'll all get sick, grow old, and die. We'll all lose people we
love. We'll all sometimes do our very best in pursuit of goals we desperately desire, and fail. Most
of us will have our hearts broken, if not once, then several times. To have a human life means we
will face pain. It’s the price of admission. Life is hard, for everyone.
But we can forget this. We can forget that all of us hurt, and that these feelings are universal—
part of what binds us together as human beings. Many of us, and many of those we seek to help,
can instead experience these struggles and emotions as isolating, as signs that there is something wrong
with me. Instead of reaching out for help, we may pull back from others. Instead of supporting,
encouraging, and reassuring ourselves, we may meet our struggles with criticism, attacks, and
shame. And even when we know better, it can be hard for us to feel reassured. This business of being
human can be tricky indeed. And for some people—such as the psychotherapy clients we seek to
help—things are exponentially more difficult.


COMPASSION-FOCUSED THERAPY

It was observations like these that inspired my dear friend and colleague Paul Gilbert to develop
compassion-focused therapy. CFT was designed to assist therapists in helping clients understand
their mental suffering in nonshaming ways, and to give them effective ways to work with this suffering. Over the last few years, CFT has been increasingly used by mental health providers—first
in the United Kingdom where it was developed, and increasingly in other parts of the world as well.
It’s also been the focus of a growing body of empirical work.


What Is CFT and How Is It Useful?
CFT represents the integration of various science-based approaches for understanding the
human condition with mind-training practices that are literally thousands of years old. Finding its
scientific footing in evolutionary psychology, affective neuroscience (particularly the neuroscience
of affiliation), the science of attachment, behaviorism and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), and
the growing body of literature supporting the efficacy of mindfulness and compassion practices,
CFT is focused on helping clients relate to their difficulties in compassionate ways and on giving
them effective methods for working with challenging emotions and situations.
CFT was originally developed for use with patients who have a tendency toward shame and
self-criticism, who may struggle in treatment even while engaging in evidence-based therapeutic
protocols such as CBT (Gilbert, 2009a, Rector et al., 2000). For example, such patients may be
able to generate thoughts such as I know that what happened wasn't my fault, but struggle to feel reassured
by such thoughts. A focus of CFT is to create an emotional congruence between what clients think
(for example, helpful thoughts) and what they feel (for example, reassured). CFT helps patients
learn to engage with their struggles and those of others in warm, accepting, and encouraging ways,

[PAGE 021]

Introduction


to help themselves feel safe and confident in working with challenging affects and life difficulties.
CFT has been applied to a growing list of problems including depression (Gilbert, 2009a, Gilbert,
2009b), psychosis (Braehler et al., 2013), binge-eating disorder (Kelly & Carter, 2014; Goss, 2011),
anxiety (Tirch, 2012), anger (Kolts, 2012), trauma (Lee & James, 2011), social anxiety (Henderson,
2010), and personality disorders (Lucre & Corten, 2013).


The CFT Approach
A growing body of empirical research supports the potential use of compassion interventions
in psychotherapy (Hofmann, Grossman, & Hinton, 2011). One thing that distinguishes CFT from
other therapies that incorporate compassion is our focus on helping clients understand their challenges in the context of evolution (how our brains evolved to produce basic motives and emotions),
the dynamics of how emotions play out in the brain, and the social factors that shape the self, particularly early in life. None of these factors are chosen or designed by our clients, but they play a
huge role in their struggles. In this book, you'll learn to help clients apply these understandings to
their problems, so that they can stop shaming and attacking themselves for things that aren’t their
fault, and focus on taking responsibility for building better lives. Whereas shame is linked with
avoidance that can contribute to our clients’ struggles (Carvalho, Dinis, Pinto-Gouveia, &
Estanqueiro, 2013), compassion can give them a way to approach their difficulties with acceptance
and warmth, to face them and work with them.
In CFT, clients learn about how different emotions and basic motives evolved to serve certain
functions, exploring how these emotions play out in ways that can create interesting challenges
when combined with modern environments and new-brain capacities for imagery, meaning-making,
and symbolic thought. For example, clients learn how the confusing dynamics of threat emotions
like anxiety and anger make complete sense when viewed through the lens of evolution. Such
understanding reveals why it’s so easy to get “stuck” in such emotions, which can help lessen
clients’ tendencies to shame themselves for their feelings. CFT also explores how social contexts
and attachment relationships can serve to transform our underlying genetic potential into challenging behaviors and emotions. This exploration creates a context for self-compassion to take root, as
patients begin to realize how many of the factors that create and maintain their problems were not
of their choice or design, and hence, not their fault.
In CFT, this de-shaming process is accompanied by a simultaneous building of responsibility
and emotional courage through the cultivation of compassion. Patients learn to work with evolved
emotion-regulation systems to help themselves feel safe and confident as they approach and actively
engage with life challenges. They are guided in developing adaptive, compassionate strategies for
working with emotions, relationships, and difficult life situations. In CFT, the emphasis is on helping
clients learn to stop blaming themselves for things they didn’t get to choose or design, and to skillfully work with the factors they can impact to build a repertoire of skills for working with life challenges and building fulfilling, meaningful lives. As we will explore, this is done through both implicit

[PAGE 022]

CFT Made Simple


aspects of the therapy, such as the therapeutic relationship and the therapeutic emphasis upon
guided discovery, as well as specific techniques such as imagery, compassion cultivation practices,
and the development of compassionate reasoning.


The Evidence Base for CFT
One of the most important movements in the field of mental health over the past century or so
is the emphasis on having our treatments grounded in solid science. The evidence base in support
of CFT is twofold: First, there is the growing body of research supporting the efficacy of CFT
interventions. Second, there are several underlying bodies of literature that provide the scientific
basis for the theory behind CFT as well as the process-level components of the therapy. While the
focus of this book is on learning the therapy, I wanted to take a moment to briefly introduce you
to the science underlying CFT.


EVIDENCE FOR CFT INTERVENTIONS

Of course, the first question to consider is Does CFT work? There is a relatively small but rapidly
growing body of research documenting the efficacy of CFT interventions. Research has shown
that CFT can help to reduce self-criticism, shame, stress, depression, and anxiety (Gilbert &
Proctor, 2006; Judge, Cleghorn, McEwan, & Gilbert, 2012). Other studies have documented positive outcomes using CFT with people suffering from psychotic disorders (Braehler et al., 2013;
Laithwaite et al., 2009), eating disorders (Kelly & Carter, 2014; Gale, Gilbert, Read, & Goss, 2014),
personality disorders (Lucre & Corten, 2013), problematic anger (Kolts, 2013), and traumatic brain
injury (Ashworth, Gracey, & Gilbert, 2011), and in conjunction with eye movement desensitization
and reprocessing for the treatment of trauma (Beaumont & Hollins Martin, 2013).
The primary limitation of the current literature supporting the efficacy of CFT is the relative
lack of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) documenting its effectiveness. At the time of this
writing, there are two such RCTs in print. One of these (Kelly & Carter, 2014) showed significant
impacts of CFT in reducing binges, global eating disorder pathology, and eating and weight concerns, and increasing self-compassion in individuals with binge-eating disorder. The second
(Braehler et al., 2013), documented the impact of CFT upon clinical improvement in patients suffering from psychosis relative to controls, along with increases in compassion that were associated
with reductions in depression and perceived social marginalization. A recent systematic review of
the literature on CFT (Leaviss & Uttley, 2014) concluded that CFT shows promise in treating psychological disorders, particularly for highly self-critical individuals, but notes that more highquality clinical trials are needed before definitive statements can be made about CFT being an
evidence-based treatment approach. We in the CFT community agree with this assessment, believing that a therapy model is only as good as the science behind it, and are committed to the growing
production of rigorous research examining CFT’s effectiveness.

[PAGE 023]

Introduction


THE SCIENCE UNDERLYING THE CFT MODEL

A second question to ask in considering the science behind CFT is Where does CFT come from? In
developing CFT, Paul Gilbert’s goal was not to create an entirely new model of psychotherapy in
competition with other therapy models, but to integrate and build upon what existing science tells
us about how humans get to be the way they are, and how we can best help them work with suffering when things go wrong (personal communication, 2009). As such, CFT finds its roots in a large
and varied body of scientific research, including the neuroscience of emotion and affiliation (e.g.
Depue & Morrone-Strupinsky, 2005; Cozolino, 2010), the existence and dynamics of basic evolved
emotion-regulation systems (e.g. Panksepp, 1998; Panksepp & Riven, 2012), and the social shaping
of the self through attachment relationships (e.g. Schore, 1999; Siegel, 2012).
In its approach to understanding the dynamics of emotion, CFT also draws heavily on behaviorism (e.g. Ramneró & Tórneke, 2008) and upon cognitive science regarding things like the
working of our implicit and explicit memory and emotion systems (e.g. Teasdale & Barnard, 1993).
Likewise, in structuring our approach to treatment, CFT draws upon science documenting the
social regulation of emotion (e.g. Cozolino, 2010; Porges, 2011) and growing evidence supporting
the use of compassion practices (Hofmann, Grossman, & Hinton, 2011) and related therapeutic
strategies in the treatment of psychological disturbances—strategies such as mindfulness, mentalization, and other interventions we'll explore in this book. We won't dive too much more deeply
into the scientific basis of the therapy here, as the focus of this book is on the application of CFT, and
there are existing resources that provide a detailed articulation of both the theoretical basis of CFT
and the science that underlies it (see Gilbert, 2009a; 2010; 2014).


The Practice of CFT
My goal in writing this book is to give you an accessible guide to learning and applying CFT.
CFT Made Simple is primarily designed to be an entry point for mental health professionals who want
to learn the CFT model and begin applying it in their clinical practice. It may also be useful for
clients, or anyone who is interested in CFT and wants to learn more about it and how it is used in
therapy.


LAYERED PROCESSES AND PRACTICES

My hope is that after reading this book, you will understand CFT not as a collection of techniques, but as a set of layered processes and practices that interact and strengthen one another. These
layered processes and practices are aimed at helping clients to establish and elaborate upon two
common themes: developing compassion for themselves and others, and cultivating a repertoire of
compassionate capacities for working courageously with suffering. This book will be loosely organized to mirror this layered approach to CFT. Many of our clients will enter therapy with deeply
seated shame and self-criticism, or with lives that are defined by experiences of threat and

[PAGE 024]

CFT Made Simple


emotional distance, volatility, and ambivalence. In the beginning, such clients may not be ready to
benefit from diving into traditional self-compassion practices. As with the practice of master gardeners, the first few layers of CFT are designed to prepare the soil, so that when planted, the seeds
of compassion will flourish. Let’s explore this layering:


| | Therapeutic Relationship
Zi


Compassionate Understanding


| Mindful Awareness


| Compassionate Practices
SEN

Figure |: Layered Processes and Practices in CFT


After a brief orientation to the origins and basic concepts of CFT in chapter 1, chapter 2 will
provide an introduction to compassion and how it is operationalized in CFT, giving us a context for
what is to come. In chapter 3 we'll focus on the first layer in our approach: the therapeutic relationship. In the context of an unconditionally warm therapeutic relationship designed to help clients
learn to feel safe, we'll orient ourselves to the process of the therapy. We'll explore the presence and
roles served by the CFT therapist, and the general therapeutic approach used in CFT—one of
guided discovery. This relationship forms the first layer of compassion in CFT, as clients gradually
learn to feel safe in relationship to the therapist, and to experience compassion coming to them, from this
person who is committed to their well-being.
In chapters 4 through 6, we'll begin exploring the second layer of compassion in CFT: compassionate understanding. We'll learn how CFT helps clients to begin to understand their emotions
and life experiences in nonblaming, compassionate ways. This work is done via the development of
understanding about how their minds and lives have been shaped by forces that they neither chose nor
designed—evolution, social shaping, and the ways these interact. We'll revisit this theme later in
the book, introducing a CFT-based model of case formulation in chapter 13.

[PAGE 025]

Introduction


In chapter 7, we'll turn our focus to compassionate, mindful awareness, which is the third layer
of compassion in CFT. We’ll explore strategies to rapidly help clients increase their awareness of
their emotions, thoughts, and motives. We'll also consider ways to help our clients not get caught
up in some of the common obstacles that often hamper beginners in their efforts to learn
mindfulness.
In chapters 8 through 15 we’ll formally turn our focus to the fourth layer: compassionate practices for working with suffering. In chapter 8, we'll explore how to help clients develop motivation
to shift from a self-critical to a compassionate perspective in working with their challenges. In
chapter 9, we'll explore how to help clients develop the compassionate self—a wise, kind, courageous,
adaptive version of themselves that will serve as a reference point from which they can develop the
courage to work with the things that terrify them, and the compassionate strengths to use in doing
so. We'll then explore ways to help clients cultivate compassionate thinking and reasoning (chapter
10) and the ability to use compassionate imagery to self-soothe and deepen compassion for themselves and others (chapter 11), and introduce the use of chair work and perspective-taking exercises
in helping clients strengthen the compassionate self, giving it a central role in their lives (chapter
12). In chapter 14, we'll explore the Multiple Selves exercise—a powerful method for bringing
compassion to difficult emotions and situations—and in chapter 15, we'll explore how the compassionate perspective offered by a CFT approach can fit with and enhance the tools you already use
in your therapy practice.
Together, these layers provide a framework for learning CFT and for how CFT can be used in
conjunction with empirically supported technologies of change such as behavior activation or
exposure. Hopefully you're beginning to realize that CFT is not simply a recycled form of cognitive behavioral therapy with some compassion practices pulled from Buddhism added in for good
measure. We're working to layer an interactive set of processes—nurturing relationships, powerful
understandings, deepening awareness, and the purposeful cultivation of compassionate strengths—
to help clients shift away from threat-focused ways of existing in the world and toward a perspective that is kind, wise, and confident, and which draws upon a body of effective skills for working
directly and courageously with life challenges.


WHAT IF MY CLIENT DOESN’T BELIEVE
IN EVOLUTION?

One factor distinguishing CFT from other therapy models is that we consider human emotions,
motives, and behavior in an evolutionary context. This understanding helps facilitate compassion
for ourselves and other people, because much about how these experiences play out in us makes a lot
of sense given our evolutionary history. Given the current cultural environment in the West, | thought
it might be useful to consider what to do if we find ourselves working with someone who doesn’t
agree with the theory of evolution. News articles indicate that approximately one-third of Americans
don’t believe in evolution theory, instead ascribing human origins to the action of a supreme being.

[PAGE 026]

CFT Made Simple


In fact, evidence suggests that rates of belief in evolution may be declining in some groups (Kaleem,
2013). So it’s likely that at some point we'll encounter clients who simply don't subscribe to the
theory of evolution. | certainly have.
Is this a problem for CFT? Well, yes and no. Certainly CFT therapists do not have an agenda
around challenging clients’ spiritual beliefs or religion, and there are plenty of CFT therapists who
have religious beliefs of their own. Trying to change the mind of someone who is motivated to
reject the idea of evolution is probably not going to be helpful, and may actively undermine the
therapeutic relationship. There are a few ways we could work with this issue. We could refer such
clients to clinicians who utilize approaches that don’t emphasize evolution—which is pretty easy
to do, as there are many therapies that don't speak to it at all. Alternatively, we could continue with
CFT, leaving out the evolution pieces. | don't see either of these solutions as optimal. There are lots
of people who may not believe in evolution, but who could still benefit from CFT. At the same
time, evolution isn’t a small facet of the therapy—
it plays a significant role in how we conceptualize
the brain, the mind, and the problems our clients bring us.
Pd suggest some middle ground, which can actually help us create a model for how to work
with difficult issues that will come up in therapy: Honestly discuss the issue in a way that names the
situation, and enlist the client in considering how to work with it. We can also soften or omit language around evolution across species, instead emphasizing adaptation within the human species—
referring to how our challenging characteristics may have been quite useful for our human ancestors
(who faced very different threats and demands than we do now), even as these qualities play out in
ways that aren't very well suited to modern life. Here's an example of how that conversation might
take shape:

Therapist. Evan, as we continue to explore our emotions and how they work, | wanted to
mention that [ll be talking about evolution—specifically about how our
emotions make sense when we look at them in an evolutionary context. | know
that some people don’t accept the theory of evolution, and I wanted to touch
base about that.

Evan: (stiffening a bit) | don’t believe in evolution. | believe that God created humans,
just as we are.


Therapist: Good—that's what I wanted to clarify. | want to say at the outset that | don't
have any agenda around challenging or changing anyone's religious beliefs.
People have different beliefs, and there are different ways of understanding how
we got here, and how we got to be the way we are. So I’m not going to try and
push any beliefs on you.

Evan: (visibly relaxing) Good. Because that wouldn't have gone very well.

Therapist: (smiling warmly) | don't imagine it would have! So | want you to know that |
respect your beliefs, but at the same time, the therapy we'll be doing is based

[PAGE 027]

Introduction


on science, and so I'll sometimes be talking about things from a scientific
perspective—because it can help us make sense of how our emotions work. You
don’t need to accept the theory of evolution for us to proceed. All I need you
to accept is that we have brains and minds that sometimes work in tricky ways
to produce emotions that can be hard for us to handle. How does that sound?

Evan: That's not hard to accept. I’ve definitely got some emotions that are hard to handle.

Therapist: Most of us do. Now, Pl! probably still talk about evolution from time to time,
because | come from a scientific perspective, and that's the way I make sense
of things. How about when I do that, Pl talk about it as “from the scientific
perspective,” which you can choose to agree with or disregard—taking what
is helpful and ignoring the rest. What do you think?

Evan: Sounds like it's worth a try.

Therapist: We can also focus on things as they played out for humans across the years, as
our societies have changed. The idea is that our brains work in ways that may
have helped our ancestors—say, humans who lived in isolated villages in a harsh
world that included lots of very real physical threats—but which can be less
useful in the modern world, in which most of the threats we face are very
different. What do you think?

Evan: I don't have any problem with that. | know humans have lived in different ways
over time. It’s the “coming from monkeys” stuff that I don’t believe.

Therapist: It sounds like we've got lots of room to work with, then. Also, if it does seem like
this issue is getting in the way of our therapy, I’d appreciate it if you'd let me
know. If that were to happen, we could explore it together and figure out a way
to work with it. What I don’t want to happen is for you to be uncomfortable or
unhappy with the therapy and for me to be clueless about it.

Evan: Sounds good.

Pve found that once clients understand that I respect their right to hold different beliefs and am
not trying to change them, the evolutionary perspective becomes much less of an issue. I’ve also
found that using the phrase “from a scientific perspective...” allows me to continue talking about
things in the manner we'll explore in this book, and that clients can often accept it—because were
acknowledging that there are other, valid perspectives as well. !’ve even had clients come up with
alternative explanations, such as “This tricky brain is a riddle that God gave me to figure out.”
Sometimes, I’ve found that as clients see how the information I’m presenting fits with their lived
experience and helps explain how their emotions work, they tend to soften to the evolutionary
perspective (without giving up any of their religious beliefs).

[PAGE 028]

CFT Made Simple


Even clients who generally reject the concept of evolution are often willing to consider adaptations occurring within the human race that fit better with some times in our history than others,
and that’s a good thing. The evolutionary piece isn't just about deshaming emotions by considering
why we have them. It also helps us clarify and understand the ways that different emotions play out
in us. When we consider that threat emotions like anger and anxiety evolved to help us identify
threats and rapidly do what is needed to deal with them, it makes complete sense that when we
perceive a threat, our attention, thoughts, and imagery would all be drawn to the threat until the
situation is resolved—in the harsh world faced by our ancestors, ignoring sources of threat could
mean injury or death. The problem is that these threat responses are better suited to the savannahs
and forests faced by our ancestors than to the boardrooms and relationships that form most of our
modern-day threats—and they are of no use at all in facing the multitude of threats dreamt up
entirely via our “new-brain” capacities for thought, imagery, and fantasy.


CFT AND OTHER THERAPIES
One of the things I like best about CFT is that it is generally quite compatible with other therapy
models. We'll explore this compatibility in the final chapter of the book, and will highlight it along
the way. Regardless of whether you want to become a “CFT therapist” or simply want to use a
compassion focus to enhance and deepen your work within your current therapeutic modality, |
hope you'll find much here to draw upon.
CFT isn’t intended to be an entirely new model of therapy, but rather a basis for compassionately understanding and working with psychological difficulties. Relative to other therapies, you
may find that CFT is distinguished by its emphasis on compassion as well as on conceptualizing
human problems in terms of evolution; how emotions and basic motives play out in our brains, or
minds; and the ways we can learn to help ourselves feel safe as we confront and work with the
things that scare us the most. At the technical level, you'll likely find a number of new therapeutic
tools here, but there will be things you'll recognize from other therapies as well.
I think it’s fair to say that CFT fits well into the “third wave” of behavioral and cognitive behavioral therapies, alongside acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT), dialectical behavior therapy
(DBT), functional analytic psychotherapy (FAP), mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT),
and emotion-focused therapy (EFT). As with these therapies, we rely on behavioral principles and
don’t seek to change the content of problematic cognitions and emotions so much as to change our
relationship to these mental experiences (while cultivating more helpful ways of attending and thinking). As with many of these other approaches, mindfulness plays an important role in CFT. | think
the experiential emphasis and perspective-taking practices used in CFT will resonate with practitioners of ACT, and as with DBT, we place a significant emphasis on things like distress tolerance
and learning to work with acutely difficult emotional experiences.
Longstanding cognitive therapists may find new ways to approach thought work that can help
to facilitate affective congruence in their clients—so that new, reassuring thoughts feel reassuring


10

[PAGE 029]

Introduction


to them. You may also find that the ways compassion is brought into CFT therapy have the potential to “warm up” longstanding approaches such as exposure therapy, to make them more accessible
for clients and more comfortable for therapists. | think practitioners will also discover aspects of
CFT that can enhance and deepen their existing therapy practice—things like considering emotions and motives in an evolutionary context, helping clients work with evolved affective systems
to create feelings of safeness, and applying the purposeful cultivation of compassion in facilitating
one’s willingness and ability to work directly with suffering.


Our Current Approach
Particularly in psychotherapy, | think it’s nice when a learning process models, shapes, and
reinforces the content that is being learned. That's what we're going to strive for here. The process
of CFT—regardless of what we happen to be working on with our clients at the time—is one of
warmth, guided discovery, courage, and commitment.
You'll find that this book features a fair number of experiential exercises. Occasionally, I'll ask
you to do some of the same things that CFT therapists ask their clients to do, and Pd like to formally encourage you to practice all of the exercises yourself before trying them out with clients.
We can learn about things like compassion, mindfulness, and safeness, but if we really want to understand them, we need to experience them. Personal practice can give us a depth of understanding with
regard to these practices—the nuances, potential obstacles, and how to overcome them—that can
be very difficult to get any other way.
With that in mind, I'd like to begin this book with a motivation-setting exercise drawn from my
experiences learning from Buddhist teachers. These teachers believed that our motivation or intention, the reason we are engaging in a particular activity, is highly related to the outcome of the activity. As I’ve already mentioned, motivation is also a core component of compassion, and it’s a
component that we'll be working to help our clients cultivate. So let’s do that now.


WORKING WITH MOTIVATION AND INTENTION
As we go through life, we'll do lots of different things, for lots of different reasons. Sometimes our activities will
be driven by feelings of obligation, sometimes by excitement or ambition. We go through the day figuratively
(and sometimes literally) checking off items on our list, doing things simply so that we can move on to the next
thing that needs to be done. But motivation and intention are aspects of life we can work with.
So right now, I'd like you to consider your motivation for doing this activity. Why are you reading this book?
Perhaps you've heard about CFT and were curious to learn more? Perhaps you've been looking for ways to
deepen or enliven your existing therapy practice? Perhaps you're a psychotherapy client whose therapist uses
CFT, and you wanted to learn more about it? Maybe something about the cover caught your eye, and you
impulsively bought the book to see what it was about, as | often do.

[PAGE 030]

CFT Made Simple


Compassionate motivation is something we can choose to cultivate. Now that we've found ourselves
here together, let's see if we can bring up a kind, committed sort of motivation as we go about exploring

compassion-focused therapy.


Consider the therapy situation. Our clients come to us at their most vulnerable, sharing their struggles
and suffering, and asking, “Will you help me?” Could anyone ever pay us any greater honor than this?
Open yourself to the feeling of wanting to help them work with this suffering.


Is it possible that we can do this—me thinking, organizing, and writing; you reading, considering, and
practicing—out of a deep commitment to help alleviate suffering in our clients, ourselves, and the
world?


What if we really felt that commitment to alleviate suffering—felt a deep wish to help those who are
struggling?


Don't worry about whether you do or don't feel it right now. Instead, simply try to imagine what it
would be like if you really did feel it—this deep desire to further your ability to help those who suffer
most.


What if that were our motivation? How might it shape the way we engage in learning about and
practicing CFT?


Let's see if we can carry that compassionate motivation with us as we proceed.

[PAGE 031]

CHAPTER |


Origins and Basic Themes


In this chapter we'll briefly explore the origins of CFT, and how it developed out of the desire to
better help individuals who suffer from shame and self-criticism. We'll also explore some of the
basic ideas behind the CFT approach, with an emphasis on considering how the theoretical roots
of CFT—found in evolutionary psychology, affective neuroscience, attachment theory, behaviorism, and the power of cultivating compassion—are translated into what we do in the therapy room.


THE ORIGINS OF CFT

The beginnings of CFT go back to the 1980s, in the form of observations by British psychologist
Paul Gilbert. Paul approached psychotherapy from a diverse training background that included
cognitive behavioral therapy, Jungian analysis, evolutionary psychology, neurophysiology, and
attachment (Gilbert, 2009a). In his therapy work, Paul noticed that many of his clients seemed to
have deep-seated self-criticism, shame, and self-loathing. He also noted that for these patients in
particular, traditional cognitive therapy exercises like cognitive restructuring often didn't work terribly well. For example, these clients were able to identify their maladaptive thoughts, identify
them as irrational, and perhaps even categorize them in terms of thinking errors they featured.
They were able to look at the reality of their lives, and generate more rational, evidence-based
alternative thoughts. But there was a problem: despite all of this work, they didn't feel any better (Gilbert,
2010). In these clients, Paul observed a lack of congruence between what they thought and what
they felt—a cognition—emotion mismatch—that hampered their therapy. He found that reassuring
thoughts were helpful only when they led clients to feel reassured. And in highly self-critical clients,
they often didn't.

[PAGE 032]

CFT Made Simple


As a result of these observations, Paul set about finding ways to warm up the cognitive behavioral work he was doing with his clients, and began to notice dynamics that, although not often
spoken to in his CBT training, very powerfully impacted his clients’ experience. For example,
looking more closely at their experiences, he noticed that while many clients could generate new,
evidence-based thoughts that seemed like they should be helpful, the mental “tone of voice” in
which these thoughts were expressed was often harsh and critical.
Asa result of observations like these, Paul gradually developed what would become compassionfocused therapy. In doing so, he sought to help therapists make use of existing technologies of
change while helping clients relate to their experiences in warmer, more compassionate ways. This
developing approach focused on helping clients understand and work with their emotions to help
themselves feel safe, and emphasized the cultivation of compassionate strengths that would help
them approach and work effectively with their difficulties.


CFT: CORE IDEAS
There are a few basic ideas that form the core of CFT. Let’s introduce some of these ideas now.


Shame and Self-Criticism Can Be Crippling
As I've mentioned, CFT was originally developed to assist individuals who struggle with shame
and self-criticism (Gilbert, 2010). Shame can be defined as an acutely painful affective state related
to negative evaluations of the self as bad, undesirable, defective, and worthless (Tangney, Wagner,
& Gramzow, 1992, Gilbert, 1998). We can distinguish between internalized shame—in which we
harbor negative personal judgments of ourselves—and external shame, in which we perceive that
others see us as inferior, defective, and unattractive (Gilbert, 2002).
A growing body of literature has shown that shame and self-criticism isn’t very good for us.
Research shows that shameful memories can function in similar ways to traumatic memories,
becoming central to individuals’ identities in a manner that is linked with depression, anxiety,
stress, and post-traumatic stress reactions (Pinto-Gouveia & Matos, 2011). Shame and self-criticism
have been linked with a wide variety of mental health problems (Kim, Thibodeau, & Jorgenson,
2011; Kannan & Levitt, 2013), including depression (Andrews & Hunter, 1997, Andrews, Quian, &
Valentine, 2002), anxiety (Gilbert & Irons, 2005), social anxiety (Gilbert, 2000), eating disorders
(Goss & Allan, 2009), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD, Andrews, Brewin, Rose, & Kirk, 2000),
borderline personality disorder (Rüsch et al., 2007), and overall psychological maladjustment
(Tangney, Wagner, & Gramzow, 1992). In terms of psychological processes, shame has been linked
to experiential avoidance—the unwillingness to be in contact with one's private experiences such
as emotions—which has itself been associated with various emotional difficulties (Carvalho, Dinis,
Pinto-Gouveia, & Estanqueiro, 2013).

[PAGE 033]

Origins and Basic Themes


These negative self-judgments also appear to impact the course of treatment. Self-stigma, a
shame-related experience in which individuals apply negative judgments to themselves related to
internalized negative group stereotypes (Luoma, Kulesza, Hayes, Kohlenberg, & Latimer, 2014),
has been associated with higher levels of inpatient treatment utilization in individuals experiencing
severe mental illness (Riisch, et al., 2009), lower levels of treatment adherence in patients diagnosed with schizophrenia (Fung, Tsang, & Corrigan, 2008), poorer medication adherence (Sirey et
al., 2001), and longer length of stay in residential treatment for addiction (Luoma, Kulesza, Hayes,
Kohlenberg, & Latimer, 2014). These findings are particularly relevant, as the self-stigma experienced by the individuals in these studies was anchored to identification with group stereotypes
about mental illness or addiction. This demonstrates the power of shame to magnify and exacerbate problems of mental health in clients who may criticize, shame, and stigmatize themselves upon
observing their own psychological struggles. A fundamental goal of CFT is helping clients shift the
perspective they take toward their challenging thoughts and emotions from condemnation and
judgment to compassionate understanding and commitment to helpful action. In this way, selfattacking and avoidance can give way to warmth and responsibility-taking.
Let’s consider an example of how shame can get in the way of working with challenging emotions. We can imagine a father who observes himself yelling at his children (perhaps prompted by
his children’s fear-filled faces) and experiences shame: acute emotional pain prompted by the
thought, I’m a terrible father. That's a painful thought, and one that can set him up for more difficulty.
First, from a CFT perspective, harsh self-criticism or shameful attributions are themselves powerful threat triggers. They keep us stuck in feeling threatened, which organizes the mind (we'll talk
about this in future chapters) in ways that aren't conducive to making positive changes like improving one’s parenting. Rather than focusing his efforts on learning more effective ways to cope so that
he doesn’t yell at his children anymore, this father is focused on his own inadequacy.
The emotional pain that accompanies shame can also foster avoidance—that is, the feelings
that come up following shameful thoughts like I’m a terrible father can be so painful that the father
might quickly move to avoid by distracting himself, rationalizing his behavior, blaming his children
for his reaction, or doing just about anything else to escape the experience. CFT places a strong
emphasis on helping clients overcome such avoidance by shifting from a shaming perspective to a
compassionate perspective that helps them approach and work with their challenges.
It’s also important that we don't shame or stigmatize the experience of shame and self-criticism—
we
don’t want our clients to feel ashamed of feeling ashamed. It makes a lot of sense that they may have
learned to cope in this way. Most of us don’t set out to create problems for ourselves through selfattacking. However, we live in a culture filled with messages presenting us with idealized images of
how people are supposed to look, feel, and perform—images we can easily internalize, and to
which we have no hope of measuring up. These damning comparisons can be magnified by our
ability to perceive our own internal experiences versus those of others. We have almost unlimited
access to our own struggles—difficult emotions, struggles with tasks or motivation, or thoughts and
behaviors that don’t match our values. At the same time, we have very limited access to the internal
experiences of other people—we mostly see what they choose to show us, and like us, they want


I5

[PAGE 034]

CFT Made Simple


to appear competent, intelligent, and attractive. We all tend to put on the “game faces.” Seeing this
turmoil and struggle inside of themselves, and seemingly surrounded by people who look like they
have it all together, it’s easy for clients to feel shamed and isolated, and to conclude, there's something
wrong with me. And this is before we even consider the many specific factors that can contribute to
experiences of shame in our clients, including histories of trauma or bullying, harsh rearing environments, learning history, and potentially belonging to stigmatized groups. Given all of this, it
makes a ton of sense that our clients may have learned to shame and attack themselves.
CFT's perspective on shame and self-criticism doesnt mean there isn’t room for helpful selfevaluation. There certainly is—sometimes our clients are doing things that are problematic, and
they need to do things differently! It’s just that such self-evaluation works a good deal better when
it’s presented in a warm manner that doesn’t overwhelm the threat response. For example, compassionate self-correction involves noticing when one is doing something harmful or unhelpful, allowing oneself to feel guilty about it, and turning the focus toward doing better in the future. Instead
of Um a terrible father, compassionate correction would look more like this: It makes sense that I would yell
because of my own experience, but that’s not the sort offather I want to be. It’s time I committed to interacting with my kids
in ways that model the things I'd like them to learn. What might help me do that?


Compassion: The Strength to Move Toward the Pain
While shame can lead people to shut down and turn away from their struggles and suffering,
we need ways to help clients move toward their pain, and work with it in helpful ways. In CFT, this
is accomplished through the cultivation of mindfulness and particularly compassion. One question
that may come up is Why compassion? There are lots of helpful virtues out there. Why are we choosing to make compassion the central focus of our therapy?
In CFT, we've spent a good deal of time working to define, operationalize, and apply compassion in working with our clients. A generally accepted definition of compassion reads something
like this: sensitivity to suffering combined with the motivation to help alleviate (and prevent) it
(Gilbert, 2010). This definition includes two separate but important components: sensitivity and
motivation. CFT emphasizes compassion so greatly because we think that this is a particularly workable orientation to have in the face of pain, difficulty, and suffering.
There’s a lot contained within this simple definition. First, it provides us with an approach orientation toward suffering—both in terms of being sensitive to its arising and in the emphasis on moving
toward the suffering to help. This is very different from the avoidance that can drive so many of our
clients’ difficulties. Compassion also contains warmth—suffering is approached with the motivation to help. This warm motivation and affective tone can help us (and those we help) to feel safe in
confronting difficulties, helping us shift from a threat-focused perspective to a mental state that is
open, reflective, and flexible.
If we look even more deeply within the definition of compassion, we find that it contains other
helpful capacities as well. If we’re to maintain this warm, approach orientation toward suffering we
have to be able to tolerate it, so CFT, like dialectical behavior therapy (DBT, Linehan, 1993), places


16

[PAGE 035]

Origins and Basic Themes


an emphasis on distress tolerance and emotion regulation. If compassionate action is to truly be
helpful, it must be skillful, and so CFT works to help clients cultivate capacities like empathy, mentalization, and perspective taking.
Finally, many clients, particularly those coming into therapy with lots of shame and selfcriticism, may have a very negative experience of themselves. In CFT, we try to provide clients
with a unifying framework for the various aspects of compassion we're helping them cultivate—
which we call the compassionate self. The compassionate self is an adaptive version of the self that manifests the various aspects of compassion we work to cultivate in the therapy. In the beginning, this
takes the form of imaginal perspective-taking exercises that are similar to method acting: the client
imagines being at her very best—her most kind, compassionate, wise, and confident—considering
what it would be like if she fully possessed these strengths. She then imagines how this compassionate version of herself would feel, pay attention, reason, be motivated, and behave.
As the therapy progresses, the compassionate self becomes a perspective that the client learns
to shift into again and again, considering how she would understand and work with her difficulties
from this compassionate perspective. All the while, she is working to cultivate compassionate
strengths and establish them as habits, with the goal that over time, the space between the client’s
idea of me and the compassionate self gradually diminishes, as these capacities become more a natural
part of her everyday life. In this way, CFT shares ground with ACT and the positive psychology
movement. The focus of the therapy isn’t simply on the alleviation of symptoms, but on the purposeful development of strengths—adaptive ways of living that are workable and which reflect the
clients most positive aspirations and values.


Building Blocks of Compassion: Shifting from
Judgment to Understanding
As we've discussed, highly self-critical and shame-prone clients attack themselves upon observing many aspects of their experience—their feelings and thoughts, their reactions, and their relationship difficulties. While compassion for oneself and others is a primary goal of CFT, we initially
spend less time talking with clients about compassion, and more time setting the stage for it to
arise. We do this by helping them understand the factors that lead to their challenging emotions,
motives, and behaviors. Rather than try to convince our clients why they should have compassion for
themselves and others, the idea is that when they really understand the challenges presented by
having a human life, compassion will make sense to them, and will be likely to arise without the need
for convincing. Of course, we will also talk about what compassion is, what it isn’t, and why it is
helpful—but we want to set the stage for this by creating a context of understanding.
In CFT, we think it’s important to recognize that many of our struggles can be rooted in
things we didn’t get to choose or design. This is part of a larger shift we want to help our clients
make—one in which they move from a threat-based perspective of blaming and shaming to a
compassionate stance of understanding and figuring out what would be helpful. If we look closely


17

[PAGE 036]

CFT Made Simple


at the human story, we find many unchosen factors that shape our experience and the sort of
people we will become.


THE CHALLENGES OF OUR EVOLVED BRAINS

In CFT, human emotions and other cognitive functions are understood within the context of
evolution. We group emotions into three types, according to evolutionary function: emotions and
motives that center on identifying and responding to threats, those that are focused on pursuing
and being rewarded for attaining goals, and emotional experiences of safeness, contentedness, and
peace that are commonly linked with feeling connected with others. Emotions, motives, and behaviors that are initially perplexing can make a lot more sense when we consider them in terms of their
evolutionary function and the survival value they granted our ancestors. One quick example is the
tendency to crave and be comforted by sweet, salty, fatty foods. Lots of people struggle with emotional eating, and how many of us have wished that we could crave broccoli the way we crave pizza
or sweets? But in the environment our ancestors faced—one in which calories and nutrients were
relatively scarce—sugar, salt, and fats granted survival value, making it more likely that those who
readily consumed them when available would live to pass their genes along to future generations.
From this evolutionary perspective, these cravings (and so many of the emotions we may find ourselves struggling with) make complete sense, even as they're nowa terrible fit with our current
environment—one in which cheap, salty, sweet, fatty foods are to be found all around us.
The ways our brains and minds have evolved can create difficulties for us. From the tricky
interplay of old-brain emotions and new-brain capacities for symbolic thought to the ease with
which we automatically learn connections between different things, there is much about how our
minds work that we didn’t choose or design, but which can be quite difficult to manage. This
awareness can help create a context for self-compassion by depathologizing emotions and experiences which in isolation may feel like something that is wrong with me, but which in reality are part and
parcel of what it means to be human in this day and age.


THE SOCIAL SHAPING OF THE SELF

As we've discussed, having a human life means we'll experience powerful emotions and motivations that can sometimes be difficult to manage, particularly when we're faced with trauma or other
life challenges. Early social experiences powerfully shape the ability to help ourselves feel safe and
regulate our emotions, along with many other aspects of who we are. For example, early and
ongoing attachment experiences powerfully impact our ability to feel safe in connection with
others (versus feeling threatened), to expect support and nurturing from others (versus expecting
harm or neglect), and to relate to ourselves as lovable and worthy of care (versus unlovable and
isolated) (Wallin, 2007).
These environments, many of which we don’t get to choose or design, interact powerfully with
the way our brains learn, sometimes to devastating effect. Through processes like respondent/
classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and social learning, as well as processes articulated


18

[PAGE 037]

Origins and Basic Themes


through more modern elaborations of learning theory, such as relational frame theory (Hayes,
Barnes-Holmes, & Roche, 2001; Tórneke, 2010), our environments can teach us to fear the very
interpersonal connections that should help us feel safe, and can systematically shape behaviors that
will cripple us later in life.
In CFT, we want to help people begin to understand that much of what they feel and even how
they
ve learned to respond was not of their choice or design—that these things are not their fault.
This “not your fault” piece doesn’t mean that we're letting anyone off of the hook or absolving
people of their responsibility for their own behavior. It’s about being honest with ourselves about
which factors we control in our lives, and which ones we don’t. In fact, it’s precisely because of all
these factors we can't control that we need to understand our minds and learn to work with the
things we can affect. Our clients may not have chosen to have brains that were shaped by learning
experiences to produce crippling fear and anxiety when faced with certain situations, but we can
help them cultivate the ability to work effectively with these situations and affects, and to validate
and support themselves in doing so.
There’s a powerful scene in the movie Good Will Hunting in which Robin Williams, playing a psychologist, holds up his client’s (Will, played by Matt Damon) file, thick with documentation of
years of childhood abuse that Will had experienced. The dialogue went something like this: “I don't
know much, Will, but I know this.” He holds up the file. “You know all this shit? It’s not your fault.
It’s not your fault.”
In the scene, he warmly repeats this phrase, again and again. Will is initially resistant to this idea,
and fights back a bit, just like we and our clients might find ourselves doing. It’s not always easy to
admit to ourselves that there’s a lot about our lives (and the way our minds work) that is not under
our control. And like Will, if our clients’ lives have been filled with trauma, struggle, and suffering,
this realization can be as heartbreaking as it is enlightening. But if we can help our clients honestly
recognize the things in their lives that aren't their fault—the experiences they didn't choose to have,
the powerful emotions that arise unbidden, the spontaneous thoughts that may go against their
values, the habits they've tried unsuccessfully to change—and help them stop attacking and blaming
themselves for these experiences, it can create a context that makes change possible.
In CFT, we want to help our clients make realizations like those described above. However,
going into long-winded explanations generally isn't helpful, and unlike the example from Good Will
Hunting, we don't typically back our clients into a corner and say, “It's not your fault” over and over
again. As we'll discuss, CFT aims to be a process of guided discovery, making extensive use of
Socratic dialogue and experiential exercises such as thought experiments, perspective-taking, and
Chair work to help clients develop an understanding of their experiences and how to work with them.


The Importance of Learning to Feel Safe
As I’ve mentioned, CFT is heavily influenced by research in affective neuroscience. There is a
wealth of scientific literature documenting the existence of evolved emotion-regulation systems that
humans share with our ancestors, and the ways these basic emotions and motives play out in our


19

[PAGE 038]

CFT Made Simple


brains and minds (Panksepp & Biven, 2012). This isn’t just part of the theory underlying CFI— it’s
brought directly into the therapy session. Clients learn about different emotion-regulation systems
and how basic motives and emotions can organize our minds and bodies through shaping patterns
of attention, reasoning, physical responding, and so on, with a specific focus on learning to work
with these systems to help balance emotions and cultivate the states of mind our clients want to
have. This learning helps lay the groundwork for self-compassion, as clients’ understanding about
the “how and why” of their challenging emotional experiences allows them to make sense of them.
In chapter 5, well explore these basic emotion-regulation systems in detail, but it’s worth
noting at the outset that a big part of CFT involves helping clients find a balance between emotions
that are focused on threats, those that are focused on the pursuit of goals, and those that are linked
with feelings of safeness and peace. These emotions shape our mental experience in varied and
powerful ways. For example, threat emotions such as the anxiety, anger, or fear that dominate so
many of our clients’ experiences are associated with a narrowing of attention, decreased cognitive
flexibility, and tendencies to engage in strategies like rumination that fuel rather than soothe the
state of feeling threatened (Gilbert, 2009a). Alternatively, when we feel safe, the mind is organized
in entirely different ways—the scope of our attention and thinking opens, and we tend to become
calm, peaceful, reflective, and prosocial (and, CFT would argue, better able to work with difficult
emotions; Gilbert, 2009a). Unfortunately, many of our clients live in a world that can be almost
entirely defined by experiences of threat. So a major therapeutic goal of CFT is helping our clients
experience feelings of safeness and the mental shifts that come with them.
This can be a challenging therapeutic task. Humans evolved to feel safe primarily in contexts
of affiliation—in connection with others (Gilbert, 2009a). Early social relationships and experiences of nurturing connections with others help shape both cognitive templates (Bowlby, 1982,
Wallin, 2007) and the underlying neurological architecture (Siegel, 2012; Cozolino, 2010) that can
help us to feel safe and successfully regulate our emotions (or not). Individuals who have experienced abuse, neglect, or other forms of insecure attachment environments (as exemplified in DBT’s
invalidating environments, Linehan, 1993) may have implicitly learned to associate interpersonal relationships with threat or disappointment rather than with soothing and safeness. This implicit association can present a primary challenge for therapists—how do we help our clients learn to feel safe
when experience has taught them that the things that are supposed to help them feel safe (close
relationships) don’t work?
In CFT, we want to infuse safeness into both the content and the process of the therapy. We'll
spend a fair bit of time exploring this idea in later chapters. One of the reasons we've placed compassion—a warm, sensitive, and helpful approach to working with suffering—at the center of CFT
is that we want to help clients develop habits of relating to themselves and others in ways that can
help foster felt experiences of safeness, as well as assist them to develop the underlying neurological
systems that will support mental experiences of safeness in the future.
On the content level, our clients will learn numerous strategies for relating compassionately to
their challenges and bringing about experiences of feeling safe. On the process level, the therapeutic relationship and therapy environment in CFT is designed to help create feelings of safeness and


20

[PAGE 039]

Origins and Basic Themes


emotional balance in the client, as the therapist engages with the client in a compassionately collaborative, warm, nonshaming, and encouraging manner. We'll explore how this works when we
look at the roles occupied by the CFT therapist, in chapter 3.
In this chapter, we've explored a number of themes that are core to the practice of CFT. Let's
consider a case example of how these themes might be interwoven in the course of a therapy
session:


Therapist: Jenny, we've spent some time talking about the fears you have that you'll do
something embarrassing in front of others, and how these fears affect your social
life. It sounds like you're feeling pretty ashamed about this. Have | got that right?

Jenny: That's right. I'm just such an idiot. I’m so scared that I'll do something stupid
that I don’t do anything. My friends invite me out, but I always bail at the last
minute. I’m such a terrible friend. It’s amazing I have any friends at all.

Therapist: So you make plans to go out and then cancel at the last minute?

Jenny: Yeah. | make plans thinking it'll be fun. But then I sit around thinking about
how if I go out, Pll dress the wrong way, or say something stupid that will
offend everyone. | get so scared that | can’t bear the thought of going out,
and so I cancel and just stay in. I’m just terrified and weak. Other people
aren't afraid of this stuff. They just go out and have fun.

Therapist. Jenny, let me ask a question. When this fear of doing something embarrassing
or offensive comes up for you, are you choosing to feel afraid? Are you deciding to
feel that way?

Jenny: I'm not sure I understand what you mean.

Therapist: Well, let's imagine you have the thought, [Il do something embarrassing and everyone will
think I’m an idiot. After that thought, are you thinking, I think I'd better get really afraid
of that happening, or does the fear just arise in you?

Jenny: I get terrified at things like that, but it’s not like I want to feel that way. Who
would choose that?

Therapist. Exactly. It sounds like this thought, I'll do something embarrassing, is a very powerful
threat cue for you—when you have thoughts like that, your brain registers: Ob,
here comes a threati—and then comes the fear. Does that make sense?

Jenny: I guess so.

Therapist: So if you're not deciding to feel all this fear that you're feeling so ashamed of, is
the fear your fault?


21

[PAGE 040]

CFT Made Simple


Jenny: | guess not. But I’m the one sitting there thinking all that stuff that makes me
afraid. That’s my fault.

Therapist: (smiling warmly) Is it? So you sit there and decide, Well, I could go out and have a happy
evening with my friends, but instead I think I'd rather sit and think deeply about the inevitable
humiliation I could face if I did that...

Jenny: (laughing a little bit) | think | see what you mean. | guess | don't choose that stuff,
either. But I still do it.

Therapist: As we ve discussed, evolution has shaped our brains to be very sensitive to
things we perceive as threatening us, and when that happens, they can produce
really powerful emotions—to try and protect us. This is what kept our ancestors
alive—they were really good at identifying and responding to threats. | mean, if
your friends were asking you to go out and do something really dangerous, like
swimming in a pond full of crocodiles or shooting heroin, would it make sense
for you to be afraid?

Jenny: It sure would!

Therapist: It sounds like you've somehow learned that being embarrassed in public is
really dangerous, so even being asked to go out triggers thoughts that you could
do something embarrassing, which is terrifying.

Jenny: When I was young—like in sixth grade—my family moved. At my new school,
there was a group of girls who hated me. | still don’t know why. They made fun
of me constantly. They spread rumors about me, called me names, told me over
and over that no one liked me. It went on for weeks. | cried for hours every day,
and started throwing up before school, just thinking about what P'd have to face
when I got there. (Pauses, sobbing.) | couldn't figure out what I’d done wrong. |
didn’t know what was wrong with me, that they hated me so badly.

Therapist: (pausing, then speaking kindly) That sounds terrible, Jenny. I’m so sorry that
happened to you.

Jenny: (tearfully) It was terrible. It was the worst experience of my life.

Therapist: So does it make sense that you would learn that social situations can be very
dangerous? Does it make sense that even now, you might imagine this
rejection could happen again—and that imagining this could be terrifying?

Jenny: (looking up, as facial expression lightens a bit) It does.

Therapist: Is that your fault?

Jenny: No. No, it’s not my fault.


22

[PAGE 041]

Origins and Basic Themes


In the example above, we can see several of the themes we've discussed playing out. We see that
Jenny is crippled by both internal shame (there's something wrong with me) and external shame (others
don't—or won’t—like me), which she relates to her experiences of social rejection that occurred many
years before. This shame, and the fear related to it, results in Jenny avoiding social activities that
would probably be very helpful for her.
In the example, the therapist quickly moves to explore and depathologize Jenny’s emotions and
the thoughts that prompt them, in two ways. First, the therapist helps her recognize the dynamics
around how the emotions arise in her mind (that she isn’t choosing to feel afraid). The evolutionary
model is also referenced, helping anchor Jenny’s understanding of her emotions not to personal
flaws, but to valid reactions of her evolved brain in response to a perceived threat. Second, the
therapist prompts exploration of how Jenny’s fears are valid given her history of social rejection—
how it makes sense that she would have learned to be very afraid of making social mistakes and the
potential for others to quickly turn on her—and in doing this, begins introducing the concept that
our social shaping can very powerfully influence our thoughts and feelings.
While the word “compassion” is never mentioned, we see evidence of it throughout—in terms
of both implicit process and explicit content. It can be found in the kind recognition of how terrible
Jenny's experience was for her, the willingness to look closely and courageously at the fears she's
experiencing, the focus shift from a perspective that judges and labels these experiences to one
that seeks to understand them, and the exploration of how Jenny’s emotional reactions make sense
when we understand them in context. Finally, we see that this unfolding process seems to help
create feelings of both safeness and courage in Jenny, who spontaneously brings to mind and
explores a traumatic socially shaming experience that she might have been inclined to avoid.


SUMMARY
In this chapter, we explored the origins of CFT and some of the core themes that guide the therapy.
These themes—the importance of deshaming and depathologizing the client’s experience, modeling compassion and the courage to approach and work with suffering, prompting shifts from judgment to understanding, and the facilitation of experiences of safeness—are deeply woven into both
the content and process of CFT. In chapter 2, we'll dive more deeply into the topic of compassion,
and how it is brought to life in the therapy session.


23

[PAGE 043]

CHAPTER 2


Introducing Compassion


In CFT, we begin with a definition of compassion that is consistent with both the dictionary and
the Dalai Lama: sensitivity to suffering with an accompanying motivation to alleviate or prevent it. In
the context of CFT, compassion isn’t simply one of any number of values our clients might seek to
pursue—although it certainly can be chosen as a value to guide one’s life pursuits (one which we
would obviously encourage). First and foremost, compassion in CFT is an orientation to suffering—one
that empowers us to approach suffering with the helpful motivation to work with it and alleviate it.
Let’s take a moment to unpack this definition.
In the context of compassion, we can consider sensitivity as referring to the ability to become aware
of suffering, as well as the willingness to be moved by it. If our minds are unbalanced and powerfully
caught up in experiences of threat or drive, we can find ourselves oblivious to suffering. It’s not that
we don’t care, necessarily. It’s that we can become so powerfully focused on perceived threats or
caught up in pursuing our goals that the suffering of others (or even ourselves) just doesn’t show
up on the radar.
Additionally, if our clients are going through the world with mind and body dominated by
experiences of threat, opening themselves to suffering can be overwhelming. In such a situation,
we can understand why they might resort to avoidance strategies in the effort to alleviate intensely
felt distress. On the other hand, if things are balanced, with threat and drive emotions tempered
by the ability to experience safeness and the mindful capacity to observe emotions without pushing
them away, our clients can learn to notice their suffering, and to be warmly moved by it without
becoming overwhelmed. Avoidance can give way to a willing, mindful, compassionate awareness:
I'm really burting right now. This argument with my spouse bas really activated my fears of being abandoned. This is really

[PAGE 044]

CFT Made Simple


hard for me. In considering this possibility, we see that a primary aspect of compassion we'll be
helping our clients develop is emotional courage—the willingness to approach and connect with very
difficult feelings, in the service of helping themselves work with these experiences.
The second component of compassion involves the kind motivation to help alleviate and
prevent suffering. While it may seem obvious that when presented with suffering, we'd want to
help alleviate it, this isn’t always the case, particularly for clients with extensive histories of shame
and self-criticism. For such clients, observations of their struggles and pain may serve as antecedents not for helping but for self-attacking, as they interpret these experiences as more evidence that
there is something wrong with me—that they are bad, flawed, or unworthy. Other clients may become
fused with such experiences—so caught up in rumination and cycles of threat-based thinking and
emotion that they are unable to disengage from the experience and consider what they might be
able to do about their pain.
Here again, we see the importance of helping clients relate to their experience in nonshaming
ways, to mindfully observe when threat responses begin to carry them away, and to connect with
feelings of safeness. When this happens, it paves the way for compassionate reasoning to emerge,
as ruminative thoughts like I can't take this give way to compassionate questions, such as What would
be helpful as I work with this difficult experience? Additionally, If we're to help our clients maintain this
helpful motivation to approach and work with suffering, we also need to help them develop confidence that they can engage in helpful action—confidence rooted in a repertoire of useful skills for
working with the pain of life. We need to give them tools, strategies, and practices that work.


COMPASSIONATE ATTRIBUTES
Now that we've explored a working definition of compassion, let's spend a bit more time exploring
how compassion is operationalized in CFT. This operationalization is depicted graphically in the
Circle of Compassion in figure 9.1, below. In this figure, compassion is depicted as a collection of attributes, which are cultivated via the training of various compassionate skills, all of which occurs within
a therapeutic context defined by warmth.
Compassion in CFT involves the cultivation of various attributes that facilitate a skillful,
approach-based orientation toward pain, struggle, and suffering. Woven throughout these attributes is a focus on helping clients develop compassionate courage—so that they can approach and
work with the really difficult things, particularly the challenging emotions they may be inclined to
avoid. Let’s briefly explore these attributes.


26

[PAGE 045]

Introducing Compassion


Warmth Warmth


ATTRIBUTES
Sensitivity Sympathy

Care for Distress
well-being Compassion tolerance


Nonjudgment


Warmth Warmth


Figure 9.1: The Circle of Compassion—Compassionate Attributes and Skills. (From Gilbert,
The Compassionate Mind [2009], reprinted with permission from Little, Brown Book Group.)


Sensitivity
As we've mentioned previously, sensitivity is a core component of our definition of compassion.
In this context, sensitivity refers to helping clients open their awareness to experiences of pain,
suffering, struggle, and difficulty. This openness may stand in stark contrast to the avoidance that
may characterize their habitual coping methods. Sensitivity involves noticing these experiences, so
that they show up on the radar. Rather than avoiding the difficult things in their lives, we help
clients learn to actively and purposefully attend to them, which allows the possibility of being moved
by them.


Sympathy
The sensitivity of compassion isn’t a cold awareness that things aren't as we d prefer them. It is
infused with warmth—containing a felt connection to the being that suffers, whether that being is
us or someone else. Sympathy involves feeling a bit of heartbreak for the being that is suffering—we
are moved by their suffering. This sympathy is important, and it stands in stark contrast to the


27

[PAGE 046]

CFT Made Simple


self-criticism and shame that our clients often bring to therapy. Sympathy involves a softening of
self-to-self and self-to-other relating. When clients can stop self-attacking and allow themselves to
be moved by their own suffering (or that of others), it helps them be motivated to face and work
with this suffering, even knowing that doing so won't be easy. With compassion, we are moved, and we
want to belp—which brings us to the next attribute.


Compassionate Motivation
Compassion involves a sincere motivation to help prevent or alleviate suffering. With compassion, we accept and engage willingly with suffering, but we don't wallow in it. In helping clients
develop compassionate motivation, were helping them develop the motivation and courage to
approach suffering with a specific intent—to understand the suffering and the causes and conditions that lead to it, so they can engage in helpful activity to help alleviate or prevent it. We're
trying to help clients strengthen and learn to shift into a caregiving social mentality (we'll discuss
social mentalities a bit later), so that rather than being consumed by feelings of threat, their attention, thinking, motivation, and behavior are focused on helping themselves and others. This motivation can give rise to the courage to face difficulties head-on. This caring motivation isn't
something were manufacturing from scratch—we're working to awaken our clients’ natural capacity
for caregiving and nurturance that evolved with our mammalian ancestors, enabling them to face
tremendous hardship and danger to ensure the survival of their young.


Distress Tolerance
As we see in other therapy models, such as dialectical behavior therapy (Linehan, 1993), CFT
incorporates distress tolerance as a capacity to be cultivated. In order to work directly and actively
with suffering and the factors that lead to it, both clients and therapists need to be able to tolerate
the discomfort that comes with doing so. Distress tolerance in CFT involves both the willingness
to endure discomfort and the cultivation of the ability to self-soothe—to help ourselves feel safe
and to make life a bit easier when there is pain that must be endured as we approach and work with
suffering.


Nonjudgment
As we'll see, compassion in CFT also involves helping clients develop mindful awareness. In
addition to the sensitivity—the noticng— described above, compassion involves the ability to relate
to one’s experience in accepting, nonjudgmental ways. In cultivating compassion, clients learn to
replace the judging, labeling, and self-blame that may accompany difficult experiences with a compassionate awareness that seeks to understand these experiences. This leads us to the final compassionate attribute: empathy.


28

[PAGE 047]

Introducing Compassion


Empathy
Whereas sympathy involves being moved by suffering, empathy involves making efforts to
understand the suffering as it exists from the perspective of the being that suffers. We want to help
clients look deeply at the range of emotions arising within themselves and others. What am I actually
feeling? How does it make sense that I might be feeling this way? Having suspended judgment, compassion seeks
to understand the emotional landscape that is being traversed—in therapy, and in life.
Taken together, these compassionate attributes form a powerful orientation toward suffering,
which unfolds from awareness to action. With compassion, we notice suffering, we are moved by it, and we
want to help. In order to do this, we must work to tolerate distress, and to nonjudgmentally and empathically understand the causes and conditions that contribute to the suffering and difficulty. Armed with this motivation and
understanding, clients and therapists are well equipped to draw upon a wide variety of powerful
technologies to address psychological suffering—which is why CFT can potentially be a helpful
adjunct for those whose therapeutic work is rooted primarily in other modalities.


COMPASSIONATE MIND TRAINING
In helping clients cultivate the compassionate attributes described above, CFT focuses on assisting
them in developing a number of compassionate skills. Let’s take a look at the skill-training domains
we
ll be targeting in helping our clients cultivate the compassionate attributes described above.


Compassionate Thinking and Reasoning
Compassionate thought work in CFT is twofold. First, it involves helping clients relate to
thoughts mindfully—nonjudgmentally noticing and accepting their thoughts as mental activity
without getting caught up in clinging to them or pushing them away. Second, it involves the purposeful cultivation of compassionate ways of thinking, reasoning, and understanding—ways of
thinking that are validating, soothing, encouraging, and skillfully focused on working with suffering. In CFT, compassionate ways of thinking are defined by helpfulness. These ways of thinking will
be represented in multiple areas of the layered approach we're taking in this book. First, we help
clients develop compassionate understanding of their minds, emotions, and how things came to be
the way they are in their lives. A bit later on, we focus on helping clients specifically cultivate compassionate ways of thinking.


Attention and Sensory Focusing
A primary goal in CFT involves helping clients to work with their attention in skillful ways.
First, we
ll help clients develop compassionate awareness through the cultivation of mindfulness,
introduced in chapter 7. Mindfulness occupies a central role in CFT, both in increasing client


29

[PAGE 048]

CFT Made Simple


awareness of how thoughts and emotions arise and play out in their minds, and in helping them
relate to and work with these mental activities in accepting, nonjudgmental ways.
CFT therapists also utilize specific sensory-focusing exercises in training clients to focus their
attention in ways that can help them soften the inertia of threat emotions, calm the body, and
prepare the way for compassionate states of mind. One of the most common of these exercises is
soothing rhythm breathing, introduced in chapter 4.


Imagery
CFT utilizes imagery extensively, both in helping clients work with difficult affective states and
in developing and applying compassion in their lives. The latter is best exemplified by the
Compassionate Self practice, introduced in chapter 9. This practice is an imagery-based methodacting practice aimed at helping clients cultivate a compassionate, adaptive version of the self that
provides an organizational framework for the development of a repertoire of compassionate
strengths. We'll also use imagery exercises to help clients learn to self-soothe and create feelings of
safeness in themselves.


Feeling and Emotion
One factor that perhaps distinguishes CFT from other cognitive behavioral approaches is the
high premium we place on working with affect. Like other therapies, much therapeutic work in
CFT is anchored around helping clients work with difficult emotions. However, CFT also involves
a very intentional focus on the purposeful cultivation of compassionate feelings—warmth, kindness,
courage, affiliation (to self and others), and safeness. Both sides of this work cross many of the
layers of therapy mentioned earlier—the therapeutic relationship as a basis for the development of
relational safeness, compassionate understanding and mindful awareness of our affects and how they
play out in us, and the cultivation of compassionate skills for emotional soothing and for working with
difficult emotions and experiences via chair work, exposure exercises, and imagery.


Behavior
The second component of compassion—the motivation to help address and prevent suffering—is incomplete without compassionate action. In CFT, there is a strong focus on helping clients
develop a repertoire of compassionate behaviors. Behavioral work in CFT is focused both on
helping clients understand and work skillfully with sources of suffering and on building lives that
are filled with meaning, fulfillment, and good relationships. In this work, CFT therapists draw upon
behavioral theories of learning to understand the historical roots and conditions that maintain
client difficulties, and to help clients relate to these challenges in compassionate ways—as learned
responses and coping strategies that were shaped by social forces they didn't get to choose or control.


30

[PAGE 049]

Introducing Compassion


Additionally, CFT therapists make use of a wide range of empirically supported behavioral
interventions—including behavior activation, exposure work, and social skills training—depending
upon the needs of the client.
In CFT, all of these strategies are couched within an organizing framework of compassionate
motivation and understanding. The idea is that we're warming up the techniques, with the goal of
softening their threatening aspects and potentially increasing client motivation and utilization. We
want clients to experience these behaviors and strategies not as something I have to do (that I'd really rather
not do) but as compassionately motivated efforts to care for themselves and develop strengths and
competencies in the service of having good lives.


SUMMARY
In this chapter, we've introduced a working definition of compassion, and have explored how CFT
operationalizes compassion in terms of attributes we help clients cultivate and specific skills we'll
be working to develop in therapy. As we saw in the introduction, CFT Made Simple takes an approach
defined by layers of treatment: the therapeutic relationship, the development of compassionate
understanding, the cultivation of mindful awareness, and the specific development and application
of compassion. Each of these layers is centered around laying the groundwork for clients to manifest compassion in their lives: creating a therapeutic environment defined by relational safeness; facilitating our clients’ understanding of the unchosen biological and social forces that have shaped their
experience in ways that were not their fault; cultivating accepting, nonjudgmental awareness of their experiences; and purposefully working to develop a repertoire of compassionate strengths. In the next
chapter, we'll explore the first of these layers: the therapeutic relationship in CFT.


31

[PAGE 051]

CHAPTER 3


Compassionate Relating:
Roles of the Therapist in CFT


It is well established that one of the most important predictors of therapy outcome is the relationship between the therapist and the client (Martin, Garske, & Davis, 2000). The process of therapy
can bea scary and difficult one for many clients, as they confront, explore, and work with the parts
of their lives that are most troubling, and the things they like least about themselves. A good therapeutic relationship can help clients have the courage to explore and work with difficult emotions
and traumatic memories, support the self-acceptance and confidence needed to confront themselves when their behaviors don’t fit with who they want to be, and provide them with a valuable
template of how to have and maintain good relationships with other people, even when the going
gets tough (Kohlenberg & Tsai, 1991; Tsai et al., 2009; Holman, Kanter, Kohlenberg, & Tsai, 2016).
Many of our clients will never have had such a trusting, safe relationship with anyone, and may
even have learned to feel unsafe in connection with others. Additionally, there are a number of
therapeutic tasks in CFT that require the therapist to serve a number of different but related roles
within the context of the therapeutic relationship. In this chapter, we'll explore the various roles of
the therapist in CFT, and how the CFT therapist can embody them.


DIFFERENT ROLES FOR DIFFERENT TASKS

In a typical course of CFT, there are a number of processes that the therapist seeks to facilitate.
The overall process of CFT is one of guided discovery, in which clients learn about how and why
their emotions work the way they do, and how to relate to and work compassionately with these

[PAGE 052]

CFT Made Simple


experiences. Compassion and mindfulness are both taught and modeled, within the context of a
safe therapeutic relationship that allows the client to explore and work with scary emotions and life
situations. In this way, the process and content of CFT are consistent and serve to deepen and
reinforce one another. In CFT, therapists function as teachers of the evolutionary model, as facilitators of a process of guided discovery, as a secure base for exploration, and as models of a compassionate self. Let’s explore these roles.


Teacher of the CFT Model
As they go through CFT, our clients will do a lot of learning. One thing that distinguishes CFT
from other therapy approaches is its firm rooting in the evolutionary model. As we'll see in chapters 4 and 5, an initial goal of the therapy involves helping clients understand their basic motives
and emotions within the context of evolution. Looking through the lens of evolution, clients can
make a lot more sense of confusing emotions and motives. Rather than seeing them as personal
flaws, clients can see how these emotions had great survival value to our ancestors, allowing them
to pass their genes on to us. They also learn about the evolutionary functions served by different
emotions, and relatedly, how these emotions play out in terms of our attention, thinking and reasoning, mental imagery, bodily experience, motivation, and behavior. Clients also learn about the
tricky ways our “old-brain” emotions and motivations can interact with “new-brain” capacities such
as mental imagery, symbolic thought, and rumination, as well as how these dynamics are shaped by
the social forces in our lives. These realizations set the stage for compassion for the self and others
in CFT, as clients develop a growing awareness that many of the factors which powerfully shape
our mental experience and development are not of our choosing or design (Gilbert, 2009a; 2010;
2014).
In helping our clients understand themselves and their minds better, we'll also touch on other
things, which can include exploration of the client’s learning history, attachment history, and other
factors and experiences which can contribute to the social shaping of the self. At each stage, there
will likely be some teaching involved, as we work to help our clients develop greater insight into the
causes and conditions that have contributed to who they are, and how their minds work. We'll also
be teaching our clients about compassion—
what it is, what it isn't, and how we can apply it in
working with challenging emotions and life situations.
So particularly in the beginning, CFT can feel a bit content-heavy in comparison to other
therapy models, with the CFT therapist serving as the teacher, helping clients to make the realizations described above. As you might imagine, if done unskillfully, this teaching could come off as
quite invalidating to our clients. Imagine anxiously making the courageous step to come into
therapy, finally ready to share the most difficult aspects of your life with a therapist, only to find
yourself receiving a lecture about evolution! So it’s important that we find ways to do this teaching
that not only help clients learn about their minds, but also validate their experience, convey compassion, and help to establish and strengthen the therapeutic relationship. Let’s explore a few ways
of doing this.


34

[PAGE 053]

Compassionate Relating: Roles of the Therapist in CFT


RELATING THE MODEL TO THE CLIENTS LIVED EXPERIENCE

As is seen in other models such as functional analytic psychotherapy (FAP), perhaps the best
way to teach the CFT model is via an interactive process in which were helping clients relate it to
lived experience of their emotions, motivations, and social history (Kohlenberg & Tsai, 1991; Tsai
et al., 2009, Holman et al., 2016). This can involve conducting what we call an evolutionary functional analysis (Gilbert, 2014), helping clients to consider the evolutionary origins of their emotions
in relation to how these emotions play out in their current lives. In this way, teaching clients the
evolutionary model can be woven into the most foundational elements of the therapy, such as
getting a thorough description of the client’s presenting problem. We'll discuss this in more detail
later, but to give one example, clients are guided to explore how the dynamics of the emotions they
struggle with (such as fear or anger) make sense when considered in an evolutionary context. For
example, threat emotions narrow one’s attention and reasoning to the source of a perceived threat.
This narrowing can be frustrating for us when the threat is a social interaction we had days earlier
that we can’t stop ruminating about, but we can see how such narrowing would have survival value
to our ancestors who were faced with physical threats that needed to be immediately attended to
if they were to survive to pass along their genes.
This process can be very powerful. Consistent with the research on therapist credibility, I’ve
found that when the information I’m providing clients clearly reflects their experience of how emotions play out in their own minds (and deepens their understanding of why), my credibility as a
therapist goes up rapidly, which increases my therapeutic influence (Hoyt, 1996). Clients are much
more likely to walk with us along difficult emotional roads when what we're saying fits with their
lived experience.
When it comes to teaching our clients about compassion, while CFT includes numerous
imagery and perspective-taking practices, we can also use present-moment affective work in
therapy. If we pay close attention, we'll sometimes observe our clients being moved in the present over
suffering that they or others have experienced in the past. If we choose to look through the lens of
compassion, we can see these emotions—sadness, grief, even anger—as wonderful examples of the
first component of compassion, which involves being moved by suffering, and can point this out to
the client.

Therapist: You became emotional when describing how difficult it was for you growing
up—how terrible it was to be bullied at school, and to face your father’s rages
at home.

Josh: Yeah. It was awful. | just wanted to be a kid, you know. | just wanted to play and
not be scared all of the time. To not have to worry about who’s gonna kick the
shit out of me. (Makes pensive expression and shakes bead slowly back and forth.)

Therapist: It's moving, isn't it, to imagine that childhood version of you...that little boy who
only wanted to play, have friends, and be safe. It’s heartbreaking to recognize how
terrible that was for him—how terrible it was for that younger version of you.


35

[PAGE 054]

CFT Made Simple


Josh: (going quiet) | never thought about it like that. I guess it was terrible. No kid
should have to go through that. (Shakes head, becomes slightly teary.)

Therapist: | guess | find myself wondering if there might be a whole lot of hurt and sadness
behind this anger you've been struggling with. Sadness about what that younger
version of you went through.

Josh: | guess it is sad, you know. Why couldn't I have had a dad who took care of me,
and friends who played with me rather than bullies who beat me up? Every kid
should have better than that.

Therapist. Do you hear that, Josh? What you just said? That is compassion. That’s what it is.
It’s opening our hearts to the suffering of that little boy—to your suffering—and
wishing that we could do something to help him. This anger, pain, and sadness
that you feel—how much of that is rooted in knowing just how hard it was for
that boy, and not wanting to ever feel vulnerable like that again?

Josh: Lots of it.

Therapist: So what if we could experience that pain and heartbreak—maybe even the
anger—as a compassionate sensitivity to that pain you went through? Instead of
attacking yourself for having those feelings, what if we could use them as a prompt
to help us really commit ourselves to helping you work with this suffering—to
help you feel safe and work on becoming the sort of man you want to be?

Josh: (Makes considering expression and nods.) That sounds good.

Helping clients see the links between their present emotional challenges and their previously
experienced suffering can reinforce their understanding of what compassion is, and it can help
depathologize their emotions—softening shame or negative reactions they may have in relation to
these feelings. Clients can come to understand previously avoided emotions as reactions that are
not only natural, but potentially useful prompts for the second part of compassion—helpful reasoning and action.


PROVIDING SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS

One way to ease the “teaching load” is to provide the client with materials they can read, listen
to, or view outside of the session. Examples of patient handouts, guided audio practices, and other
resources for clinicians can be found on the New Harbinger website for this book: http://www
.newharbinger.com/33094. The international Compassionate Mind Foundation (http://www
.compassionatemind.co.uk) website also includes instructions for joining the CFI e-mail list,
through which numerous CFT clinicians will readily share resources they've developed. Many
CFT therapists begin using materials developed by others, and then adapt their own to fit the


36

[PAGE 055]

Compassionate Relating: Roles of the Therapist in CFT


needs of their clients—I’d recommend you consider doing the same, and then share what you've
developed on the CFT mailing list, to contribute the growing set of resources we have to help our
clients. Finally, the Compassionate Mind series of self-help books tailor the CFT model to specific
client problems such as anxiety, social confidence, trauma, anger, and eating disorders, and can be
readily used alongside individual psychotherapy. Such resources can help clients deepen their
understanding of the model between sessions.
Ultimately, we need to keep in mind that the “teaching” in therapy is done via a process of
guided discovery, which is a nice segue to the next role the therapist takes on in CFT—-that of
facilitator.


Facilitator of Guided Discovery
The overall process of CFT is one of guided discovery, in which clients learn to relate to themselves, their mental experiences, and other people from a perspective of compassion. As we explored
in chapter 2, the development of compassion in CFT is a multifaceted process. The therapist acts
as the facilitator of this process, working to create opportunities for experiential learning that will
help clients develop capacities such as compassionate understanding and reasoning, empathy, mentalization, distress tolerance, and wisdom (Gilbert, 2009a; 2010). In this role as facilitator, the
therapist operates from a perspective of both wisdom and inquisitiveness—she has an understanding of the overall process that will be facilitated, but works collaboratively with her clients to discover the specific dynamics that play out in their lives. This role is emphasized in the following
types of verbal interactions and interventions used in the therapy.


SOCRATIC DIALOGUE

As with a number of other therapy models, CFT makes extensive use of Socratic dialogue to
help clients explore their experience. Such interactions involve questions and reflective restatements designed to prompt clients to look deeply into the feelings, motives, and behaviors of themselves and others, as well as the causes and conditions that serve to create and maintain those
experiences. There are myriad uses for Socratic dialogue, including increasing clients’ awareness of
their own thoughts and emotions, teaching the evolutionary model, facilitating mentalization,
doing functional analysis of behavior, and facilitating shifts to a compassionate perspective—as we
saw in the case example of Jenny in chapter 1. Here are a few common examples of Socratic dialogue that | find myself using a good bit in my own practice of CFT:

e Given what we know about your history, how does it make sense that you might feel/
think/act in that way?

o (After noticing nonverbal behavior signaling an emotional shift): What just happened there? What
feelings came up for you just then?


37

[PAGE 056]

CFT Made Simple


e If you were to... (name behavior the client has been avoiding), what would be the threat in that?
What would you be afraid might happen if you did that?

e What might help you feel safe as you work to address this challenge at work?

e If someone you really cared about and wanted to help were struggling with... (name a
situation similar to what the client is facing), what would this kind, wise, confident version of you
want her to understand? How might you comfort or encourage her?

The idea behind Socratic dialogue is to facilitate the client’s exploration of his experience (and
that of others) in an active manner, so that realizations are being made from the client’s side, rather
than interpretations being provided by the therapist.


EXPERIENTIAL EXERCISES

Much of the latter half of the book will be spent presenting techniques employed by CFT
therapists, many of which are centered around creating opportunities for experiential learning and
the development of compassionate capacities in the client. Examples of such strategies include
mindfulness practices, guided imagery work, perspective-taking exercises, chair work, and thought
and behavioral experiments. We'll be exploring these in depth as we go on, but the role of therapistas-facilitator is consistent throughout: setting the stage for the exercise by offering preparatory
instruction, guiding the client through the experience, assisting in identifying and working with
obstacles that may arise, and prompting client exploration of the experience afterward.
Considering mindfulness training, for example, the therapist begins by giving the client basic
instructions on the practice, as well as specific instructions designed to circumvent common obstacles (we'll explore these in chapter 7). He then guides the client through the mindfulness practice,
offering more extensive description and prompts initially, then phasing these out as the client
becomes more familiar with the practice. Following the exercise, the therapist and client have a
discussion in which they explore the client’s experience of the exercise—what they observed and
learned—as well as any obstacles that may have come up during the practice.


EXPLORING INTERPERSONAL DYNAMICS

As in other therapy models, it isn’t unusual for CFT therapists to shift the discussion to focus
on patterns of interaction playing out within the therapeutic relationship. Often, clients manifest
repetitive relational patterns in therapy that mirror their outside relationships (Teyber & McClure,
2011). Rather than reacting to client resistance, capitulation, or passivity, we want to consider what it
means. Shifting the discussion to what is happening between us in therapy can bring awareness to these
dynamics, and set the stage for considering how best to work with problematic relational patterns
of which the client may not previously have been aware. This can be done in a collaborative, nonshaming way: “I’m noticing that we seem to be falling into a pattern where I’m making lots of


38

[PAGE 057]

Compassionate Relating: Roles of the Therapist in CFT


suggestions that don't seem to be helpful to you—I feel like I'm getting ‘shot down’ a lot. Could
you share your experience so we can figure out how best to go forward?” or “I’m noticing
seems to be happening in our relationship. Have you ever noticed patterns like this playing out in
other relationships?”


WORKING COLLABORATIVELY WITH OBSTACLES

You
ll note that in the mindfulness example given above, much attention was given to potential
obstacles, both in preparation for the practice and in the discussion afterward. This is important,
as obstacles and roadblocks will frequently arise in therapy—frequently enough that entire books
have been written to help therapists work through them (e.g. Leahy, 2006; Harris, 2013)—-so we
need to be prepared to work with them. Sometimes obstacles involve vague understandings or
misconceptions on the part of the client regarding what is to be done. Sometimes it’s a motivational
block. At other times, there are pragmatic factors in the client's life that get in the way (such as not
remembering to practice). We can never fully anticipate what anyone’s experience of a given practice is going to be, but we can be assured that it will often go far awry of what we may hope for
when introducing a practice or homework exercise.
In CFT, we always want the therapeutic relationship to be a collaborative one, in which the
client and therapist work together to discover ways to address challenges in the client’s life and to
facilitate compassionate growth. This is particularly true when it comes to working with obstacles.
When challenges arise in therapy, it can be easy to fall into roles in which therapist and client both
feel a bit threatened and become rigid—the therapist on one side, trying to get the client to do
something, and the client on the other side, resisting. If allowed to play out, this dynamic can easily
lead to ruptures in the therapeutic relationship.
In CFT, we consider things in terms of evolved emotion-regulation systems and also consider
social mentalities—evolved motivational orientations that organize our interactions with others
(Gilbert, 2014; 2010). In the language of CFT) if a client is operating out of the threat system
(feeling threatened, anxious, or angry in relation to the therapist or therapy) and relating to the
therapist via a defensive social mentality (in other words, her interactions with the therapist are
organized around defending herself or her position), it can be easy to get stuck in therapy. We want
the therapist and client to be on the same side, collaboratively working together to explore and
address the obstacles that will inevitably come up in the therapy.
We start by assuming that there are valid reasons behind clients’ reactions, emotions, and
behaviors, and so when obstacles come up, we try to model compassionate reasoning. Instead of
judging and labeling the client as resistant (which they very well may be, for very valid reasons), we
seek to understand the resistance, using the same process of guided discovery that permeates the rest
of the therapy—and engaging in some mentalization as we work to understand the experience
from the client’s side. How does it make sense that this client is responding in this way? What would be helpful as we
seek to address this obstacle? This brings us to the next role of the therapist, that of a secure base for
exploration.


39

[PAGE 058]

CFT Made Simple


Secure Base
As I've mentioned, a basic goal in CFT is learning to work with evolved emotions and motivational systems. As the evolved roots of emotional safeness lie primarily in our connections with
others (particularly in nurturing relationships with caregivers), John Bowlby's attachment theory is
core to the therapy (Gilbert, 2010). Bowlby viewed the attachment bebavioral system as being designed
by evolution to facilitate survival and reproductive success by aiding organisms in responding to
perceived threats (Bowlby, 1982/1969, Wallin, 2007, Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). Attachment
theory informs many aspects of CFT, beginning with the nature of the therapeutic relationship
itself.
In attachment theory, a secure base operates as an interpersonal context that fuels exploration
(Wallin, 2007, Ainsworth, 1963). Such secure bases, in the form of secure attachment figures offering characteristics such as proximity, accessibility, and availability, provide individuals with a nurturing place to return to when things become overwhelming. Having such a secure base facilitates
exploration of the novel, the unknown, and the threatening, because the individual knows that
should he need assistance or comfort, it is available to him. A particularly important piece here is
the individual's felt sense of security: the perception that the caregiver is emotionally responsive and
will be there when needed (Bowlby, 1973; Sroufe & Waters, 1977; Wallin, 2007).
Attachment theory posits that over time, individuals develop attachment-based internal working
models
— internal representations of attachment relationships that impact how they will experience
threats and respond to them in the future (Wallin, 2007). These can be played out in terms of
attachment styles, which are relatively enduring but can vary across different relationships (Wallin,
2007, Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). These attachment styles have implications not only for how
individuals respond to threats, but also how they experience other people (as available and helpful
or as unavailable) and themselves (as worthy of kindness and caregiving or as unworthy and flawed).
Many of our psychotherapy clients will present with insecure attachment histories. They may
have learned that others are unavailable when needed, or that they are unpredictable, or that they
are likely to respond to the client's communications of distress with escalation rather than comfort.
Some clients will have been harmed or abused by those who should have cared for them, and have
learned to associate connection and affiliation with threat rather than safeness.
Increasingly, were learning the importance of the therapist functioning as a secure base for
clients to explore and work with difficult experiences (Wallin, 2007, Knox, 2010). This function is
particularly important in CFT. A primary goal in CFT is to assist clients in getting the safeness
emotion-regulation system online and working for them—to help themselves access feelings of
safeness, even in the face of threatening experiences and emotions. Human beings evolved to feel
safe in the context of affiliation, such as that offered through warm, secure attachment connections
(Gilbert, 2009a, 2010, 2014). In addition to promoting exploration, secure bases also facilitate confidence and self-development (Feeney & Thrush, 2010). Consistent with CFT’s emphasis on assisting clients in developing compassionate characteristics, Mario Mikulincer, Philip Shaver, and their
colleagues have conducted a series of studies linking the experience of attachment security to


40

[PAGE 059]

Compassionate Relating: Roles of the Therapist in CFT


increases in compassion, empathy, and altruistic behavior (Mikulincer et al., 2001; Mikulincer &
Shaver, 2005; Gillath, Shaver, & Mikulincer, 2005).
In serving as a secure base for clients, the CFT therapist seeks to embody certain qualities
within the therapy session. We want the overall context of the therapy to be one of warmth, in
which the client feels accepted, heard, supported, and encouraged as she contacts and explores
difficult emotional material. Mikulincer & Shaver (2007) characterize the role of therapist as secure
base in this way:

Therapists should provide safety, comfort, and unconditional positive regard, and help the client manage the distress
associated with exploring and articulating painful memories, thoughts, and feelings. They should also affirm the
client’s ability to handle distress and problematic life situations, not interfering with exploration by offering inap-
propriate interpretations, and admiring and applauding the client’s efforts and achievements in therapy. In other
words, like a good parent, a good therapist [assures] the client that the therapist can be relied upon for safety and
support, while the client becomes increasingly capable of dealing with distress autonomously. (p. 410-411)

To create this overall context requires that the therapist be reliable, attentive, and empathic—
able to understand the emotional perspective of the client (Bowlby, 1988).
From a CFT perspective, which deliberately targets the development of self-compassion as a
treatment goal, the ability of the therapist to take on the role of a secure base and to foster attachment security in the patient is particularly important. Difficulties experiencing self-compassion
have been linked with insecure attachment histories and styles (Pepping, Davis, O’ Donovan, & Pal,
2014, Gilbert, McEwan, Catarino, Baiao, & Palmeira, 2013). Many of our clients may present with
difficulties accepting compassion from others and directing it to themselves—difficulties that have
been referred to as fears of compassion (Gilbert, McEwan, Matos, & Rivas, 2011). A growing body
of literature documents the relationship between such fears of compassion and experiences of
depression, anxiety, and stress (Gilbert et al., 2013), with research indicating that creating attachment security experiences for others can lead to increases in their self-compassion (Pepping et al.,
2014). So in relation to the goal of increasing our clients’ ability to engage courageously with difficult life experiences and cultivate compassion for themselves and others, the therapist’s ability to
serve as a secure base is important. We can take this even further with the next role served by the
therapist in CFT: a model of the compassionate self.


Models of the Compassionate Self
CFT emphasizes helping clients develop compassionate qualities that will enable them to have
happy, meaningful lives. As we explored in chapter 2, in CFT, compassion is operationalized in the
form of attributes to be cultivated through specific practices, which will be presented in the latter
chapters of this book (Gilbert, 2010). CFT also seeks to assist clients in developing other, related
compassionate capacities, such as mindfulness and emotional courage, which we see as necessary
for the skillful application of compassion. Overall, the goal is to assist clients in cultivating an


Al

[PAGE 060]

CFT Made Simple


adaptive, resilient, compassionate version of themselves, which serves as a framework for the integration of all of these capacities. In CFT, we call this the compassionate self, and when we're at our best,
CFT therapists serve as a living embodiment and model of this compassionate self.
If that sounds like a tall order, I'm not trying to suggest that as therapists we have to be perfect,
compassionate, enlightened beings. In fact, if we were to succeed in creating that impression, our
clients probably wouldn't be able to relate to us very well at all. Psychologist Kristin Neff (2011,
2003) includes common humanity as a core component of self-compassion; we'd like our clients to
experience us both as competent helpers and as real human beings who have sometimes struggled
with some of the very things that trouble them. This common humanity is also reflected in our own
ability to grasp our clients’ experience; we can understand and connect with their suffering in part
because we've experienced aspects of it in our own lives—sadness, fear, anger, uncertainty, insecurity, and struggle. So the point isn’t to be perfect models of compassion. Rather, we want to practice
what we teach—to model and cultivate in ourselves the very strengths that we're seeking to help our
clients develop.
Such an approach has a number of potential advantages. First, it provides clients with a living
example of the compassionate characteristics they're trying to develop in therapy, and what such
characteristics actually look like in the context of working with suffering. We're not working toward a
compassion that is vague and aspirational—we have to put it into practice in the real world, developing these strengths by applying them to working with real challenges and emotions. Second,
because they're the recipients of our compassion, clients get to have the experience of receiving
compassion within the context of a safe therapeutic environment, helping them gradually learn to
feel safe in the context of a relationship with another person who genuinely cares about them. This
can be both comforting and challenging for those clients with insecure attachment styles, who may
have great difficulty feeling safe in connection with others.
Even for people who are generally able to feel safe in relationship to others, therapy work often
involves overcoming tendencies to avoid difficult emotions and situations and learning to instead
approach and work with them. In this way, compassion involves the development of emotional
courage—the willingness to engage directly with difficult experiences. As therapists, we can both
model this courage and kindly support our clients in developing it for themselves. The courage of
compassion—the confident willingness to engage with and explore the hurts and the scary stuff—
needs to be held within a relational context of warmth and genuineness. Warmth is a particularly
important quality for us to model so that clients feel socially safe in exploring the things that scare
them (Gilbert, 2010), and so that they can learn to relate warmly to themselves when they observe
themselves struggling. Of course, the degree and manner in which this warmth is expressed will
vary considerably based on individual client characteristics, attachment styles, and ability to tolerate connection with others.
As therapists, we’re sensitive to the fact that we’re asking our clients to explore very uncomfortable territory, and we keep moving forward, knowing that we're doing so for very good reasons.
This process exemplifies the meaning of compassion itself—sensitivity to suffering combined with
the willingness to approach it and do what is necessary to address it. In this way, compassion


42

[PAGE 061]

Compassionate Relating: Roles of the Therapist in CFT


represents the union of strengths: kindness and perseverance; warmth and resolve. One thing I took
away from my early experiences with dialectical behavior therapy (Linehan, 1993) were the dialectics surrounding the therapeutic relationship—the ability of the therapist to be both warm and
confrontational, both a genuine, real human being and a knowledgeable authority of sorts; both reverent and playful. To that last piece, I’ve found that compassion works much better when it contains
lightheartedness.
In conducting CFT in a wide variety of settings (including with angry men in prison—not
exactly people we might think of as keen on compassion work), I have consistently received feedback from clients that tells me that the experience of receiving compassion from me and other therapists was an important part of the work, opening them up to having compassion for themselves.
When we care about others and believe in them, after a while they can begin to care about and
believe in themselves. When they know we won't judge and attack them, they can take more risks
and be more honest with us—and with themselves. Finally, serving as models of compassion in this
way creates a resonance and consistency in the therapy—the process of the therapy reinforces the
content, and vice versa.
So Pd like to suggest that if we want to help our clients cultivate compassion in their lives, part
of our preparation should involve working to purposefully cultivate these qualities in ourselves.
While the empirical literature on therapist use of compassion meditation is in its infancy, there is
research linking such meditation with increased empathic accuracy (Mascaro, Rilling, Negi, &
Raison, 2013). | also think CFT therapists specifically will benefit from cultivating compassion
because it gives us an inside view of how the practices work, as well as a sense of the obstacles and
challenges that come up, and it enhances our ability to model compassionate presence with our
clients.
So how do we actually do this? Probably the most important piece is to practice committedly
engaging in the various compassion practices that we intend to utilize with our clients—many of
which are featured in the remainder of this book. Doing this, we'll see how challenging it is to
create space for the practices in our lives. We'll be faced with resistance that we'll have to learn to
work with. And we'll see the benefits of cultivating compassion firsthand, giving us a deep understanding of just why the process is worth it. As guides for further exploring CFT practices from the
inside out, I'd recommend Mindful Compassion (Gilbert & Choden, 2013) and The Compassionate Mind
(Gilbert, 2009a). There are also other resources available that provide clear, direct instruction for
the cultivation of compassion (Kolts & Chodron, 2013) and mindful self-compassion (Neff, 2011;
Germer, 2009).
For those who'd like a head start for their compassion practice, here’s a brief imagery practice
that we can use to begin cultivating various compassionate qualities in our daily lives—consider it
a preview of the Compassionate Self practice we'll learn about later. We'll get into the nuances of
imagery practice in chapter 11, but for now, just keep in mind that we're trying to create a mental
experience—it's not about constructing vivid visual images, so much as felt experiences in the
mind.


43

[PAGE 062]

CFT Made Simple


CONNECTING WITH COMPASSIONATE QUALITIES
To begin, let's sit quietly, and allow our breathing to take on a slow, soothing rhythm. Let's spend thirty
seconds to a minute breathing in this way, focusing our minds on the sensation of slowing...slowing down
the body, slowing down the mind. When you're ready, bring to mind a compassionate quality you'd like to
develop. Perhaps it’s the kind motivation to be helpful. Perhaps it's the confidence and courage to stay and
work with difficult situations, even when things get tough—the knowing that whatever arises, you can find a
way to work with it. Perhaps it's the ability to tolerate distress. There are many other compassionate qualities
you might choose to cultivate, like patience, kindness, warmth, wisdom, or perseverance.
Choose one of these qualities, and bring it to mind. Imagine what it would be like to be filled with this
quality. As you prepare to go about the rest of your day, imagine how you might think, feel, and behave as
you embody this compassionate quality. Bring to mind a specific task you might do. How would this quality
impact how you understand and go about this activity? Imagine yourself in the activity—thinking, feeling, and
acting from a compassionate place of kindness, confidence, wisdom, patience, or gratitude. Spend five to ten
minutes, or as long as you like, in this way. As you finish the practice, try to keep this quality in mind as you go
about your day, and see if you can bring it into the actual moments that present themselves in your life.


The above practice is similar to the intention-setting exercise we did earlier, except that were
anchoring our intention to a specific quality we want to cultivate. Later, in the Compassionate Self
exercise, we
ll broaden our scope to contain multiple compassionate qualities, but the goal is the
same. We want to help ourselves and our clients activate and establish mental patterns associated
with compassionate ways of feeling, thinking, and behaving. With a bit of practice, this exercise can
be done in just a few moments. You might even consider doing it first thing in the morning, between
waking and getting out of bed—what we in CFT circles call “compassion under the duvet” (Gilbert,
2009a).


Putting the Roles into Play
In this chapter, I’ve presented four roles embodied by the CFT therapist: teacher, facilitator,
secure base, and model of the compassionate self. While it may sound like a lot, I’m betting that you
already have many of the qualities involved in these roles. Many of them are common to most
modern therapeutic approaches—things like genuineness, reliability, accessibility, empathy,
warmth, and unconditional positive regard. The process of guided discovery in CFT makes extensive use of the skills provided in therapist training programs, including empathic understanding,
Socratic dialogue, validation, and reflection of feelings. Taking on the roles of secure base and
compassionate model aren’t so much about learning a new way to be a therapist as they are about
bringing a bit more intentionality and awareness to the things we already do. For example, basic
therapeutic responses like noting a shift in client nonverbal behavior that signifies an affective shift
(“Could you say something about what just happened there for you?”) or reflecting back the


44

[PAGE 063]

Compassionate Relating: Roles of the Therapist in CFT


client’s feeling ("So it sounds like you're feeling really anxious about this”) demonstrate attunement
and connection, imply caring, model confident willingness to explore emotions, and warmly prompt
exploration.
As we explore CFT together, you'll learn many things that will relate to the experiences your
clients tell you about, and to the experiences of your own life. As we go I'll be offering examples
and suggestions that will help us deepen our use of these roles and bring them to life in the therapy
room. For now, perhaps consider what we've explored so far, and how you might bring what you've
learned into your work with current clients, or your clinical training, or your daily life.
It’s also worth noting that although I’ve discussed them separately, these roles overlap, deepen,
and support one another. While we're teaching the CFT model—introducing many of the concepts we
ll explore in the next chapter—we’ll be doing so via a process of guided discovery. As we
use Socratic dialogue to prompt clients to explore difficult experiences and to consider their challenging emotions through the lens of evolution, we'll do so warmly and compassionately—serving
as a secure base while modeling the kind willingness to approach and work with the things that can
make us most uncomfortable. | often find that the process of therapy is like a dance that unifies
these roles: we move forward to confront and work with really difficult material, we step back to
self-soothe and shift into a compassionate perspective; we move forward again to work compassionately with the scary or uncomfortable stuff...
Keeping in mind the therapeutic roles we've discussed, let's revisit the case of Jenny, who we
met in chapter 1.

Therapist: Jenny, in our last session we spent some time discussing your anxiety around social
situations, and it sounded like you connected these fears to some experiences in
your childhood. Those experiences seemed important, and during that session we
talked about revisiting them today. How would you like to proceed?

Jenny: (Facial expression shifts noticeably, looks down.)

Therapist: (Leans slightly forward; speaks with a gentle, curious tone of voice.) What just happened for you
there, Jenny? What are you feeling right now?

Jenny: (slightly tearful) It’s just that...when you said that, | could imagine being back in
that room in sixth grade, with those girls glaring at me. Pointing at me and talking
about me. It feels terrible.

Therapist: So the image of being back in that room, it brings up some powerful feelings in you
right now. Could you talk about that?

Jenny: (crying) | guess so. I feel so sad. I just wanted them to like me. | just wanted to fit in.

Therapist: You just wanted to be liked and accepted, and instead you were rejected.

Jenny: (still crying) Yes. It was so hard.


45

[PAGE 064]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: (Remains silent, leans in, with a kind, attentive facial expression.)

Jenny: (After a minute or so, crying softens and breathing starts to stabilize.)

Therapist: Jenny?

Jenny: Yes?

Therapist: I wanted to make an observation. Do you remember when we talked about
those two parts of compassion—about being moved by suffering, and wanting
to help?

Jenny: Yes.


Therapist: | wanted to point out that the sadness you felt just now...that’s the sadness of
compassion. When you brought to mind that sixth-grade version of yourself,
sitting there, being ridiculed when all she wanted was to be accepted—sadness
came up in you. You were moved by her suffering. You could see how terrible
that was for her, and it made you sad. Does that make sense?

Jenny: Yes. It was terrible for her—for me. It makes me so sad to think about it, and
scared that it could happen again.

Therapist: So you feel sad for that sixth-grade self, and it feels very threatening that you
could be rejected like that again? That does sound scary. Does it make sense to
you that remembering this would bring up such strong feelings?

Jenny: Yes, | guess it does. That experience was so awful. Of course it would bring up
strong feelings in me.

Therapist: Pm wondering if we might be able to have compassion for both of those versions
of you—the sixth-grade version of you sitting in that classroom, and the adult
version of you sitting here, feeling sad about what your childhood self had to
experience, and afraid that it could happen again. Could we try to understand
both of those perspectives, and see if we could find a way to work with that fear
and sadness?

Jenny: I think Pd like that.

In the brief example above, we see aspects of all the various roles described earlier. The therapist serves as a secure base by demonstrating availability and attunement with Jenny's experience,
kindly supporting her as she comes face-to-face with a difficult memory and feels the emotions
associated with it. Compassion is modeled throughout, in both verbal and nonverbal expressions of
warmth and support, as well as in modeling emotional courage around exploring a difficult memory
and related emotions. In doing this, Socratic questioning was repeatedly used to facilitate the


46

[PAGE 065]

Compassionate Relating: Roles of the Therapist in CFT


process of exploring the memory, identifying the emotions, and introducing the shift to a compassionate perspective. Finally, an opportunity was used to teach an aspect of the CFT model—in this
case, the definition of compassion—in a way that related it to the client's present emotional
experience.


THERAPIST USE OF SELF-DISCLOSURE
In considering the roles we've discussed above, we should visit the topic of therapist self-disclosure.
The appropriate use of self-disclosure can help clients understand the therapist as a real human
being. It can also be experienced by clients as validating and depathologizing, emphasizing the
common humanity emphasized by Neff (2003) as a core component of self-compassion. On the
other hand, if used unskillfully, it can distract from the therapeutic work, shift the focus from the
client to the therapist, muddy the boundaries of the therapeutic relationship, and even shift the
client into the role of the caregiver. As | mentioned earlier, the CFT therapist is both a real, genuine
human being and a knowledgeable guide. We need to be relatable, and at the same time perceived
as knowledgeable enough, wise enough, and kind enough to serve as a secure attachment figure
who can respond confidently and assertively to our clients’ distress.
There are no hard-and-fast rules about when and how often one should use self-disclosure in
CFT. and it’s safe to say that CFT therapists (like other types of therapists) vary considerably from
one another in this regard. | sometimes use self-disclosure in my own practice of CFT, but I do so
fairly sparingly. In considering your own potential use of self-disclosure, I'd encourage you to apply
the following guidelines. These can be useful in considering other potential therapy practices that
you might be wondering about as well.

e Imagine that at any point, a colleague, supervisor, or trainee could walk into the therapy
room, magically stop time—freezing the client in place—and ask, “What is it you are
doing with this client, and how does it relate to your conceptualization of his case and
the direction of therapy?” (Or less dramatically, imagine a supervisor reviewing a video
of the session, and pausing and asking the same question.) Can you answer that
question?


e Relatedly, consider your motivation for the disclosure. If it’s based more in affect—in
other words, you just feel like you want to tell the client these details about yourself—
refer back to the point above before continuing. Our own affective responses arent
irrelevant or necessarily faulty, but a feeling of urgency around disclosure or another
intervention could signal that this behavior is driven by our own threat or drive
responses (we'll explore this more in chapter 5), rather than what will best serve the
therapy process.

e Consider whether you would feel comfortable talking about this self-disclosure with
your supervisor or in peer-supervision with your colleagues. If the answer is Absolutely,


47

[PAGE 066]

CFT Made Simple


because it relates to the therapy in this way. . that’s a pretty good indicator. If the answer is I’m
not sure. . then Pd recommend consulting before using the self-disclosure. And if the answer
is a feeling of discomfort accompanied by some variant of rationalization like Well, they
really wouldn't understand the context...it may mean that you're working to convince yourself
to do something in therapy that is rooted more in your own needs than in those of the
client and the therapy.

e When in doubt, discuss things with a colleague beforehand. Colleagues can often give
us valuable perspectives that dramatically expand our understanding and expose our
own blind spots. The process of peer-supervision and asking for help or advice can also
help us deepen our own compassionate qualities, like courage, distress tolerance, and
humility.


SUMMARY
The first layer of compassion in a course of CFT is the therapeutic relationship. In this chapter, we
explored the various roles embodied by the CFT therapist, and touched on how they can be integrated into the session. Cultivating these roles is a gradual process that develops over time. Let's
lightly keep these roles in mind as we explore the foundational pieces of CFT therapy in the next
few chapters. In the next chapter, we'll begin exploring the second layer of compassion in CFT:
compassionate understanding.


48

[PAGE 067]

CHAPTER 4


Compassionate Understanding:
How Evolution Has Shaped

Our Brains


As I've mentioned, shame and self-criticism underlie a wide range of mental health problems
(Gilbert & Irons, 2005; Gilbert, 2014). A primary goal in CFT is to help clients shift the relationship
they have with their internal experiences from a perspective of judgment and condemnation to one
of understanding and compassion. A core theme in this work is to help clients recognize that many
aspects of their experience are not their fault—things that they neither chose nor designed—while
helping them take responsibility for working directly and actively to improve their lives. This shift to
compassion begins with helping clients understand their emotions and motives in relation to how
their brains and minds have evolved, and how evolution has presented human beings with some
interesting problems. So in CFT, compassion begins with understanding the mind.


OLD BRAINS AND NEW BRAINS
In the 1990s, Paul Maclean introduced the concept of the triune brain (Maclean, 1990), which
described the human brain in terms of three parts, reflecting different stages of brain evolution.
The triune brain included a reptilian brain, which is responsible for basic bodily functions as well
as aggressive and reproductive drives; a paleo-mammalian brain—the limbic system, having to do

[PAGE 068]

CFT Made Simple


with memory, emotion, and learning, and the neo-mammalian brain (the cerebral cortex), which
does the heavy lifting in terms of things like self-awareness, symbolic thought, problem solving,
and other higher-order cognitive processes. While the reality of how the brain works isn’t quite
so straightforward (Cozolino, 2010), Maclean’s work highlights some of the challenges presented
by how evolution has shaped our brains, and gives us a nice way to explore these dynamics with
our clients.
In CFT, we discuss this concept with clients using the language of “old brain” and “new brain”
(Gilbert 2010). In therapy, it can sometimes be useful to use the term “emotional brain” synonymously with “old brain” when we're specifically talking about the dynamics of emotion. Because
different parts of the brain evolved at different times in our evolutionary history and served different purposes for our ancestors, the ways our old brains, new brains, and bodies interact can be
tricky and can create problems for us. Understanding this can be very freeing for our clients, as it
helps clarify why their emotions can feel so out of control, and why it’s not their fault.
Let's look at some ways to explore this idea with clients. When were introducing it, we want
to provide information, but not go on with lengthy monologues. Here's an example of how we
might initially approach the concept with Josh:

Therapist: Josh, we've been discussing your anger, which you've struggled with for some
time. In learning to work with emotions like these, it can be useful to explore
where they come from, and how they work in our brains and minds. How
about we chat about that for a bit?

Josh: All right.

Therapist. If we look through the lens of evolution, we see that the human brain is actually
very tricky. It’s kind of like we have an old brain, which takes care of all the stuff
that kept our ancient ancestors alive—basic emotions and motivations that
helped them protect themselves from threats and do the things needed for
survival—and a new brain, responsible for things like problem solving, mental
imagery, self-awareness, and deep thinking—about what sort of person we
want to be, what it all means, that sort of thing. Does that make sense?

Josh: Yeah, | think so.

Therapist: Let's think about this in terms of a situation you've discussed. You mentioned
that you sometimes become angry at work. Could you talk a bit about that?

Josh: It’s mostly when my coworkers question me, or don't do something they said
they were going to do. | get really pissed off then.

Therapist: So your coworkers question something you've asked them to do, and your old,
emotional brain registers that as a threat, and here comes the anger. Does it
come up pretty quickly?


50

[PAGE 069]

Compassionate Understanding: How Evolution Has Shaped Our Brains


Josh: Oh yeah. | get angry sometimes even before they ask a question. If they make a
face, or look at me like they disagree with what I’m saying, | start getting angry.
I just want to set them straight, like “Can’t you ever just shut up and do what
youre asked to do?”

Therapist: From an evolutionary perspective, our old, emotional brains are designed to
help us identify and respond to threats—just like they did for our ancestors,
who lived in a world with lots of real physical threats. You know—lions, tigers,
bears, and the like. Anger is a threat emotion that prepares us to fight. It sounds
like your emotional brain has learned that your coworkers questioning you or
not doing what they
ve agreed to do are potential threats, and your brain
responds like they're tigers out to get you.

Josh: (With a look of consideration.) 1 guess so. | mean, it is threatening.

Therapist: Let’s explore that. Let’s explore what’s going on in your new brain while this
is happening. When your coworkers are questioning you or fail to do what
youve asked of them, what thoughts are going through your mind? What are
you thinking?

Josh: (Pauses, thinking.) I’m thinking that they're challenging me—like they don't
respect me or trust me. If they respected me, they'd just do what I ask, right?
And then I’m thinking that things aren't going to get done, or aren't going to
get done right, which will then come back to me. My boss is going to let me
have it, even though | did everything | was supposed to do.

Therapist: (Nods.) Is there any mental imagery—like pictures or movies playing out in your
mind—that goes along with those thoughts?

Josh: (Thinks
for a moment.) Yes. It’s like | can see it happening in my mind. | can
picture them rolling their eyes, talking about me behind my back, and blowing
me off. I can just see my boss coming to me, asking me what the problem
is—blaming me for stuff not getting done. It’s maddening, you know?

Therapist: (Nods and speaks sympathetically.) That does sound maddening. So in addition to
that old-brain anger, the new brain is piling on a lot of other stuff—thoughts
of being mocked and blown off, and images of the consequences—your
boss coming down on you. There’s a lot of stuff going on when that anger
comes up.


Josh: Yeah, | guess there is.


5|

[PAGE 070]

CFT Made Simple


The Old Brain: Powerful, But Not Very Wise
One thing you'll frequently hear CFT therapists say when exploring the idea of the old brain
and the new brain with clients is that our “old, emotional brains are very powerful, but they aren't
very clever or wise.” Many of us may have experience explaining the basic cognitive behavioral
model to our clients and using Socratic dialogue to explore how different patterns of thinking can
lead to different types of emotion and behavior (and vice versa). In CFT, we want to understand
and explore these dynamics in relation to the evolved brain.
Our old brains evolved to motivate our ancestors to do what was necessary to survive, and they
did this via the evolution of basic emotion systems (fear, anger, desire, lust, and so on; Panksepp &
Biven, 2012; Panksepp, 1998) and archetypal motives (caregiving, competitive, sexual), many of
which are socially oriented (Gilbert, 2010; 2014). When triggered by an external or internal stimulus, working through the action of various neurotransmitter and hormonal systems, these emotions
and motives can very powerfully orient and shape our attention, thinking and reasoning, mental
imagery, and motivation (Panksepp & Biven, 2012; Gilbert, 2010). We'll discuss this process further
in chapter 5, but the idea is that these old-brain emotions and motives can organize our minds and
bodies in ways that make it easy for us to feel trapped inside challenging affective experiences. For
example, when Josh is feeling anger related to his coworkers’ behavior, he experiences a narrowing
of attention onto the perceived threat (their questioning him, things not getting done, the idea of
being humiliated and reprimanded), threat-related perseverations in the form of thoughts and
imagery, and the motivation to set his coworkers straight. Of course, our old, emotional brains are
also associated with patterns of bodily experience as well, patterns which play a large role in shaping
how the emotion is felt.
While the old, emotional brain is powerful in how it can organize our minds, it’s not very good
at distinguishing thoughts and fantasies from actual stimuli coming in from the external world. Our
emotions occur largely as a result of implicit (nonconscious) processing systems that are triggered by
various inputs—information from the outside environment; from our own thoughts, memories,
and imagery; and from our bodily experience (Gilbert, 2010). As a result, our emotional brains and
underlying biological systems can respond powerfully to thoughts and imagery, almost as if they
were real. This is why we engage in things like sexual fantasies—sexual imagery stimulates parts of
the brain and endocrine system that produce sexual feelings, with corresponding activity in the body
to produce sexual responses. Changing emotion is all about working with and changing implicit inputs
to the emotional brain.
The good news is that we can choose to focus our thoughts and mental imagery in ways that
help produce the sorts of affective experiences we want to have. We'll be exploring this dynamic a
great deal in the second half of this book. The challenging news is that interactions between old brain,
new brain, and body can create an emotional inertia, in which conditioned emotional activation in
the limbic system triggers new-brain thoughts, imagery, and memories (as well as bodily responses)
that then feed back to old-brain structures like the amygdala to fuel the very emotional response
that created them. Of course, it can work the other way around, beginning with a memory, thought


52

[PAGE 071]

Compassionate Understanding: How Evolution Has Shaped Our Brains


(be doesn't respect me), mental image, or bodily sensation that the old brain registers as a threat, leading
to related emotional experiences, with the process continuing. This is fertile ground for exploration
with clients, as they begin to understand how different emotions and motives are associated with
specific patterns of attention, thinking, imagery, motivation, and bodily experience, and then learn
skillful ways to work with these experiences and the emotions and motives that underlie them.
This is a simplified version of how things play out in the brain, but it’s based in affective neuroscience research (e.g. Panksepp & Biven, 2012). Learning about these brain and body interactions
can also have a number of positive effects for our clients, all of which fit with our focus on
compassion:


e Shifting from judging and avoiding their challenging emotions to curiously examining
and understanding how they play out in the mind.

+ Recognizing that the way their emotions work isn’t their fault, but occurs because of
how our brains evolved and the ways different parts of our brains and bodies interface
with one another.

e Giving clues as to how they can begin to compassionately work with their emotions—
through creating new, helpful inputs to their old, emotional brains.

Let’ consider how we might introduce this concept:

Therapist. Jenny, P'd like to chat a bit more about this old-brain/new-brain piece, because
I think it might help us understand your anxiety a bit better. To start, I'd like
to use an analogy. Do you have any pets?

Jenny: Yes, I love pets. | have a dog named Penelope.

Therapist: Penelope—what a wonderful name! We have a dog named Sadie. Do you have
a fenced-in yard for Penelope?

Jenny: Yes, I've got a fenced backyard.

Therapist. We don't—the area behind our house is wooded, so we've decided to leave
it open, to enjoy the view of the woods.

Jenny: Nice.

Therapist: It is nice, but it sometimes presents challenges. We let Sadie outside
sometimes, and she'll hang out in our backyard. But because we don't have a
fence, sometimes another dog will wander through—you know, sniff around,
pee ona few rocks, that sort of thing.

Jenny: (Nods.)


53

[PAGE 072]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: When another dog wanders in, Sadie can get pretty defensive.

Jenny: She’s defending her territory.

Therapist: Exactly! So she'll sort of size up the other dog. If she thinks she can take it,
she'll make a threat display—stand tall, with the hackles on the back of her
neck standing up, growling a bit. On the other hand, if the dog looks big and
scary, she might make a submissive gesture instead—maybe cowing down, as
if to say, “No need to have any trouble here.” (Makes bowing-down gesture.)

Jenny: (Laughs.) Yeah, I’ve seen Penelope do the same thing at the dog park.

Therapist: (Smiles.) So let’s imagine that this happens to Penelope or Sadie. Things get a
bit tense, but after a little while, the other dog gets bored and wanders off to
pee on someone else's yard. Five minutes later, how is Penelope?

Jenny: She’s fine. Right back to normal.

Therapist: Sadie, too. While she was initially upset because this dog invaded her territory,
five minutes later she’s coming to get scratched, begging for a treat. (Moves head
back and forth a bit, smiling.)

Jenny: Exactly. (Smiles.)

Therapist: So now let's imagine that this same thing happens to you or me. We're at
home, and a stranger walks into the house, wanders around looking at things,
maybe grabs something out of the fridge, pees on the corner of the couch...

Jenny: (Laugbs.)

Therapist: Sorry...took the dog analogy a bit too far! If this were to happen, we might
respond like Sadie or Penelope. We'd likely feel somewhat threatened, and
probably want to protect our territory. If the situation seemed manageable,
we might get assertive—"
Hey, this is my house. I'd like you to leave at once.”

Jenny: Yeah. (Nods.)

Therapist: On the other hand, if the intruder seemed very dangerous—say, he was
holding a gun, we might make a submissive display. (Holds bands up in an open
gesture.) “It’s okay. Take whatever you want...there’s no need for anyone to get
hurt...” We'd respond in ways that aren't terribly different from how Sadie or
Penelope might.

Jenny: (Continues to nod along.)


54

[PAGE 073]

Compassionate Understanding: How Evolution Has Shaped Our Brains


Therapist: So here’s the question. Let’s imagine that after a while, the intruder gets bored
and leaves. How would you or I be doing five minutes later? Five hours later?
Five days later?

Jenny: (good-naturedly) 'd be freaking out!

Therapist: (smiling) 1 probably would, too. Why would we be freaking out? What would
be going on in our minds? What thoughts or images might play out for us?

Jenny: Pd be thinking about what could have happened. That he could have really
hurt me. Pd be worried that he might come back, thinking about what he
might do the next time.

Therapist: What images might be coming up in your mind?

Jenny: Pd probably be picturing it happening again and again.

Therapist: And those thoughts and fantasies might fuel your fear, keeping you afraid?

Jenny: They sure would.

Therapist: Exactly! That’s the difference between you or me and Penelope or Sadie. It
has to do with the tricky way our old and new brains communicate with each
other. The dogs have those old-brain threat reactions, but when the threat is
gone, they'll tend to calm down fairly quickly. We, on the other hand...

Jenny: We keep it going.

Therapist: Our thoughts and mental images feed back to our emotional brains, and fuel
the fear that caused them—like pouring gasoline on a fire. So our emotions
can focus our attention and trigger thoughts and images in our minds—
thoughts and images that can then come back and fuel the very emotions that
triggered them. Does that make sense?

Jenny: (nodding) Like how those thoughts I have in the classroom about people
laughing at me fuel my fear.

Therapist: Just like that. It’s important to realize that this isn't our fault. You and | didn't
choose to have brains that work in such tricky ways; it’s just how they work—
what we were born with. But if we're going to work with emotions like fear and
anxiety, it can help to know how these brains work.

Jenny: Mmm-hmm.

Therapist: One last thing. Thinking scary thoughts can fuel feelings of being scared. One
of the scariest thoughts we can have is, There's something wrong with me. (Pauses.)


55

[PAGE 074]

CFT Made Simple


Jenny: (Pauses and looks down.) | have that thought all the time.

Therapist: (Pauses, then continues with a kind tone of voice.) And how does it feel when that thought
comes up?


Jenny: Terrible.

Therapist: (Nodding.) It does feel terrible. That's why in CFT we focus on developing
compassion and kindness for ourselves and others—we want to find ways of
thinking and acting that help us feel safe, rather than threatened.

Jenny: That would be really nice.

Therapist. Well, let's work on that, then.

The example above demonstrates how a CFT therapist might introduce old-brain/new-brain
dynamics with a client. The use of the dog analogy is meant to reinforce the evolutionary model,
initially demonstrating the evolved aspects of our emotional responses and behaviors that are
similar to other mammals, and then exploring differences (the tricky old-brain/new-brain dynamics) that set us up for unique problems. You'll note that there was a good bit of therapist talking
there, as the analogy was explained. While it’s hard to convey in print, I’ve tried to give a sense of
how the therapist would monitor the client’s nonverbal behavior and use questions, pacing, body
language, tone of voice, and attempts at humor to maintain engagement and create an interactive
experience, even when the focus is on explanation. Whenever possible, we want to link such discussions to the client’s experience early and often—even within the analogy (which is why the
therapist asked Jenny about her own dog). We also see the therapist doing some mirroring of the
client’s affective experience—using humor when she is smiling and nodding along, and then reverently slowing things down when the discussion bridges to the Jenny’s own experience of selfcriticism and things get a bit heavy.
In doing this, we want to keep our focus on the process we're trying to explore with the client.
Some clients might argue that the threat-driven thoughts that accompany fear of the intruder are
completely valid, and could trigger behaviors (installing an alarm system, for example) that could
help us avoid victimization in the future. They'd be right about this. We're not trying to convey
that the ability of our thoughts and imagery to fuel and be fueled by our emotional brains is bad.
It's neither good nor bad—it’s just the way things work. The point is that this dynamic can be
tricky for us, and can sometimes fuel threat responses that aren’t terribly helpful. This sort of interchange can be useful in modeling compassionate reasoning—helping clients shift from judging and
labeling (thoughts and emotions as either right or wrong, good or bad) to a perspective that instead
is focused on understanding (thoughts and emotions as mental experiences, and the sometimes tricky
dynamics between them). Finally, you'll note that as the vignette concludes, the therapist links the
example back to a larger theme in the therapy—how Jenny’s self-criticism functions to keep her
threat response activated, and how compassion can help with this.


56

[PAGE 075]

Compassionate Understanding: How Evolution Has Shaped Our Brains


Emotional Inertia
As the above vignette demonstrates, we can explore how interactions among old-brain emotions, new-brain thoughts and imagery, and bodily sensations can work to maintain the energy of
an emotion. For example, if a threat is registered in either the new or old brain (via a thought such
as She doesn’t like me or a previously conditioned threat trigger—like smelling the cologne that was
worn bya rapist), it can trigger emotions of fear or anger, which themselves can give rise to thoughts
and imagery associated with the emotion, as well as bodily sensations of arousal and tension (racing
heart, shakiness, tensed jaw, tight shoulders, and so on). Once this cascade of experience occurs,
each element of the system (new brain, old brain, bodily experience) can serve to trigger the
others, fueling the ongoing emotional response. New-brain images and thoughts, bodily experiences, and the environments we are in (themselves shaped by emotion-driven behaviors) can all
serve as ongoing inputs to the old, emotional brain—for good or ill.
This exploration can be useful to clients, as we can frame much of the work we do in therapy
(and homework) as working with various inputs to the emotional brain. We work to develop compassionate ways of thinking and compassionate imagery to help ourselves feel safe rather than
threatened, and to find helpful ways of working with situations rather than threat-based rumination. We work to develop ways of behaving that are effective in getting our needs met. And we
work with the body to help ourselves find balance rather than panic.
In facilitating this discussion, | sometimes find it useful to draw it out on a piece of paper or
whiteboard. | start by drawing a rudimentary brain. Then I'll mark a red area in the middle of the
brain, about where the limbic area is, to represent the old, emotional brain. I'll then draw a box
around the front fourth of the brain to represent the new-brain thinking centers. While discussing
things, I'll draw arrows from the emotional brain to the new-brain “thinking box,” and then back,
to demonstrate the cyclical nature of how old and new brain can interact to fuel an ongoing emotional response. We can also draw similar arrows going down to and back from the body, to demonstrate how bodily responses can be a part of the cycle that maintains an emotion.


SOOTHING RHYTHM BREATHING
As I mentioned above, our emotions occur largely as a result of implicit processing systems which
respond to a wide range of inputs—information coming in from the outside world through our
senses, information coming down from the newer parts of the brain that produce thoughts and
imagery, and information coming up from the body. Increasingly, we're discovering that working
with that input from the body can play a powerful role in helping to balance emotions. So one of
the very first interventions we introduce in CFT is specifically targeted at the body. In CFT, we call
this soothing rhythm breathing (SRB), and it involves purposefully slowing down the breath.
In SRB, we guide clients to slow down the pace of their breathing and focus their attention on
the sensation of slowing. It’s important to note that this is different from mindful breathing, which


57

[PAGE 076]

CFT Made Simple


we
Il introduce later, in chapter 7. With mindful breathing, we focus attention on the normal process
of breathing as an anchor for the attention, and bring our attention back to the breath again and
again. In SRB, the focus is on creating a sense of slowing—slowing down the body, and slowing
down the mind. This slowing can help clients soften the intensity of threat emotions by activating
the parasympathetic nervous system, and hence begin to shift away from the new-brain/old-brain/
body inertia that drives these emotions. Let's consider how we might introduce SRB to a client:


SOOTHING RHYTHM BREATHING
Now, I'd like to introduce a practice called soothing rhythm breathing. This practice involves slowing down our
bodies and minds by working with the breath. Specifically, we're going to be slowing down the breath, and focusing
our minds on the sensations of slowing.


Let's start by sitting in an upright posture, with both feet flat on the floor, and perhaps folding the hands
in the lap. The head is held in an upright, dignified but relaxed posture, As you gain experience with the

practice, you'll be able to use it in all sorts of situations and body postures, but we'll start like this, with a
nice, comfortable, upright posture.


If you like, allow your eyes to close, and bring your attention to the sensation of your breath entering and
leaving your body. Just notice this sensation of breathing. (Pause ten to twenty seconds.)


Now we're going to slow down the breath. Allow your rate of breathing to slow, taking four to five seconds
on the in-breath, pausing for a moment, and then taking four to five seconds on the out-breath. Breathing

in deeply—|—2—3—4. (Pause for a moment.) Then slowly breathing out—|—2—3—4.


Let's take a couple of minutes to breathe in this way. As we do, let's focus our attention on the sense of
slowing—slowing down the body, slowing down the mind. If this rate of breathing is too slow, see if you can

find a rate that is comfortable and soothing for you. The idea is to breathe in a way that is slowing and
soothing.


(Wait two minutes, or however long you choose to do the practice. The timing should be based on
making it a successful learning experience for the client—not an aversive one in which he loses himself
in thoughts about how much he hates it! So if it’s clear that the client is resistant, we can start with
thirty seconds.)


When you're ready, allow your breath to return to its normal rate, and gently allow your eyes to open.
(Wait until client's eyes are open.) Let's explore what that was like.


Once the SRB exercise is over, we'll take a few minutes to explore the client’s experience of the
practice. As with all relaxation exercises, the effects of SRB increase with practice, so we shouldn't
expect clients to have immediate dramatic effects. We can explain that slowing down our breathing


58

[PAGE 077]

Compassionate Understanding: How Evolution Has Shaped Our Brains


in this way doesn’t make threat emotions go away, but can soften them, and create some space for
other things to happen (like mindful observation of our thoughts and emotions, and shifting into
compassionate ways of thinking). | usually assign SRB as homework after the first session—often
having clients practice it for thirty seconds at a time, two or three times per day. We'll need to
problem-solve with clients around how they will remind themselves to do it, as the biggest obstacle
is often forgetting to practice. Setting phone alarms can serve as a prompt for SRB practice, as can
planning regular times to do it (for example, at specific times of day, or—if the person is a television watcher—during the first commercial of every program). SRB also provides us with a nice way
to introduce the idea that therapy will involve regular home practice, and to shape homework
participation—almost anyone can find thirty seconds to practice a couple of times per day. This
gives us the opportunity the create a nice routine in which we explore, at the beginning of each
session, how the home practice went. We can then give them positive reinforcement for practicing,
work collaboratively with them to overcome obstacles that may have arisen, and then help to
develop a new home practice plan as the session winds down.
Some clients may hate focusing on the breath or body, due to trauma conditioning or other
factors. If this is the case, we don’t want to turn the exercise into an exposure trial (which we may
very well want to explore later)—the purpose here is to help them focus their attention in a soothing
way. For these folks, we can choose one of the many excellent progressive muscle relaxation practices that have been developed, or even work with them to find something they could focus their
attention on that would be soothing. (One group of Paul Gilbert’s decided to hold tennis balls and
focus on their texture.) The point is to come up with ways for clients to focus their attention in
soothing ways that don’t take extraordinary amounts of time or effort.


SUMMARY
In this chapter, we explored ways to help clients consider the manner in which their brains evolved
and how this can create challenges for them. The goal is to begin facilitating a shift away from
judging and attacking themselves (and others) for their emotions and reactions, replacing these
habits with a curiosity-driven understanding of how and why their brains (and minds) work the way
they do. In the next chapter, we'll deepen this discussion to explore three evolved emotionregulation systems, and how evolution shaped these systems to organize our minds and bodies in
very different ways.


59

[PAGE 079]

CHAPTER 5


Compassionate Understanding:
Three Types of Emotion


As we've discussed, in CFT, the groundwork for self-compassion is laid in helping clients understand their challenges in relation to the ways that our brains and minds work. In chapter 4, we
explored how tricky dynamics between old brain, new brain, and body can serve to perpetuate
emotional responses even when the external events that triggered them are long gone. In this
chapter, we'll introduce a model of emotions that will allow us to quickly increase clients’ understanding of why and how their emotions work the way they do, and how this makes sense in the
context of evolution.
Modern research in affective neuroscience has identified a number of basic emotion systems
that have evolved in humans and other animals (e.g. Panksepp & Biven, 2012; LeDoux, 1998). CFT
has drawn upon this research to articulate a model of emotions that helps clients understand their
feelings and related experiences as the result of human evolution. In this way, instead of seeing
emotions such as fear, anxiety, or anger as something that is wrong with me, clients can instead see them
as part of what helped my ancestors survive. By considering emotions and motives in terms of their survival
value to our ancestors, clients can begin to see that how these experiences operate within us makes
perfect sense. This process—helping clients consider their emotions, motives, and challenges
through the lens of evolution—is sometimes referred to as evolutionary functional analysis (Gilbert,
2014).

[PAGE 080]

CFT Made Simple


THE THREE-CIRCLES MODEL OF EMOTION
In CFT, emotions are grouped into three emotion-regulation systems, related to their evolved
functions, as shown in figure 4.1. First, we have emotions like fear, anger, and anxiety that function
to help us identify and respond to threats (the threat-protection system, or “threat system” for
short). Second, the drive-and-resource-acquisition system (“drive system”) emotions motivate us
to pursue goals and resources, and reward us for attaining them. Finally, the safeness-soothingcontentment system (“safeness system”) emotions help us feel safe, peaceful, and calm when we're
neither defending against threats nor pursuing goals. Let’s briefly consider these systems
individually.


Three Types of Emotion Regulation System


Driven, excited, vital Content, safe, connected


Incentive/resource focused Non-wanting/
Affiliation-focused
Wanting, pursuing,
achieving, consuming Safeness-kindness

Activating Soothing


Threat-focused

Protection and
safety-seeking

Activating/inhibiting


Anger, anxiety, disgust


Figure 4.1: Three Types of Emotion-Regulation System. (From Gilbert, The Compassionate Mind [2009],
reprinted with permission from Little, Brown Book Group.)


62

[PAGE 081]

Compassionate Understanding: Three Types of Emotion


The Threat System
The threat system involves emotions that orient us toward perceived threats, assisting us in
identifying and responding to things that may harm us. This system includes many emotions that
our clients may struggle with, including anger, fear, anxiety, and disgust. The threat system picks
up on threats very rapidly, and activates powerful bursts of feelings that alert us, orient us toward
perceived threats, and motivate us to action—fight, flight, or freezing/submission (Gilbert, 2010).
Research has shown that we're biased toward processing threat-related information, with negative information capturing our attention and memory more powerfully than does positive information (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Finkenaurer, & Vohs, 2001). Threat emotions organize us in powerful
ways, narrowing our attention, thinking, mental imagery, and motivation onto the source of threat
in “sticky” ways—we can struggle to disengage from these emotions, even when we want to. From
an evolutionary perspective, it makes sense that these emotions would be equipped to push other,
more positive experiences out of the way—our ancestors faced a harsh world filled with very real
dangers. These ancestors were able to survive and pass their genes along to us partially because
they possessed these threat emotions, resulting in our having brains designed to prioritize threatprocessing through the action of structures such as the amygdala and hypothalamic—pituitary axis
(LeDoux, 1998). These emotions were shaped by evolution to play out powerfully within us, and
they operate on a “better safe than sorry” basis. Threat-based learning can occur very efficiently,
with many of our clients experiencing significant distress stemming from a single threatening
incident.
As we discussed in the previous chapter, new-brain abilities of fantasy, meaning-making, and
rumination allow us to keep this system running even in the absence of any genuine external threat.
Through new-brain activity that allows humans to form mental connections that go well beyond
our original learning experiences, fear stemming from a powerful initial experience can come to
impact many areas of our clients’ lives. In this way, new advances in our understanding of learning,
such as relational frame theory (Hayes, Barnes-Holmes, & Roche, 2001; Tórneke, 2010), have harrowing implications for how experiences of threat can be magnified and multiplied in our minds.
(We'll explore this more in chapter 6.) When it’s balanced with the two other systems, the threat
system helps alert us to potential threats and obstacles we need to deal with, to keep our lives
moving in desired directions. However, it’s easy for this system to take up more than its share of
mental energy, so we need to help clients learn to find balance when they've spent lots of time
living in states of threat.


The Drive System
In addition to defending themselves from threat, our ancestors also needed to acquire the
things needed to survive and prosper—things like food, shelter, comfort, mates, and social position. This is the job of the drive-and-resource-acquisition system (or “drive system,” for short),
which is associated with feelings like excitement, lust, and ambition. Through the activity of


63

[PAGE 082]

CFT Made Simple


chemicals like dopamine, this system alerts us to opportunities for pursuing goals and resources,
helps focus and maintain our attention on pursuing them, and is associated with experiences of
pleasure when goals are attained (Gilbert, 2009a; 2010). Like the threat system, this system can be
very activating and motivating, and can powerfully focus our attention on what we are pursuing—
which can be tricky when the blind pursuit of our goals can be harmful to others or ourselves. We
can also develop powerful cravings for the intermittent rushes of pleasure that come when goals are
attained—likely one reason things like videogames can be so addictive. However, when it’s balanced with the two other systems, the drive system helps keep us activated in the pursuit of important life goals.


The Safeness System
In Western cultures at least, our clients will likely be familiar with emotional experiences associated with the previous two systems. Experiences of threat and drive are powerfully motivating, a
fact used liberally by advertisers and political groups to activate people around their products and
platforms. These emotions are important, but they can also be linked with problems when the
systems are out of balance—mapping nicely on to the sources of suffering described in Buddhist
psychology: attachment (going after what I want) and aversion (moving away from what I don't
want).
Unlike these systems (which activate us), the safeness system is associated with feelings of
being safe, calm, peaceful, and content. These emotions help balance us out when there are no
threats to defend against and no goals that must be pursued. Safeness emotions are experienced
positively, but are very different from the activating experiences of the drive system (Gilbert,
2009a; 2010).
As you may suspect after our discussion of the roles of the therapist in chapter 2, the safeness
system is typically linked with experiences of affection, acceptance, kindness, and affiliation. Such
interactions soothe us, and can help us feel safe and calm. Through the action of chemicals like
oxytocin and the endorphins, these interactions can reduce stress, affect pain thresholds, impact
immune and digestive functioning, and reduce threat activation in the amygdala (Gilbert, 2010;
Depue & Morrone-Strupinsky, 2005). In contrast to a mind that is narrowly focused on threats or
goals, when we feel safe, we can experience relaxed, reflective attention and we tend to be exploratory, prosocial, and altruistic (Gilbert, 2009a, 2010). Fueled by warm connections with others, the
safeness system helps balance out the other two systems, helping us approach life in an open, kind,
and reflective fashion.
The linkage of the safeness system to social connectedness presents therapists with both challenges and opportunities. Unfortunately, many of our clients will present with maladaptive attachment histories or interpersonal trauma, from which they will have learned to feel unsafe in connection
to others. Closeness then becomes associated not with safeness, but with threat. This presents us
with a primary challenge—what to do when our clients’ experience has taught them to fear the
very connections that should help them feel safe (evolutionarily speaking). As we'll see, the linkage


64

[PAGE 083]

Compassionate Understanding: Three Types of Emotion


between safeness and social connection makes the therapy room a perfect laboratory to do exactly
this work. Done skillfully, therapy can be utilized to help clients “get the safeness system online”
and help them face sources of threat in their lives, and in their minds.


ORGANIZING OUR EXPERIENCE
If you spend much time in CFT circles, you'll quite commonly hear therapists talk about how different emotions and motives “organize the mind.” It can be very useful to introduce this concept
to clients while we're helping them understand the three-circles model. The diagram in figure 4.2
illustrates what we mean by this.


Attention


; Thinkin
Emotional 8
and
Experience
Reasoning


Imagery
and Fantasy Motivation


Behavior


Figure 4.2: How the Threat System Organizes the Mind. (From Kolts, The Compassionate Mind
Approach to Managing Your Anger [2012], reprinted with permission from Little, Brown Book Group.)


The idea is that different emotions (such as anger, excitement, safeness) and related motives
(such as aggressive, competitive, connection) are associated with distinctly different patterns of
attention, felt emotion, thinking and reasoning, mental imagery, motivation, and behavior. This


65

[PAGE 084]

CFT Made Simple


diagram can be used to guide Socratic dialogue with our clients to help them learn about how these
emotions play out in them and to relate that organization to the evolutionary origins of the emotion.
Let's consider a case example:

Therapist: Jenny, now that we've introduced the three circles, Pd like to talk a bit about
how these emotions play out in us. In CFT, we talk about how different emotions
can “organize the mind” in different ways, as I’ve demonstrated in this “spider
diagram” here (points at diagram)—although that's kind of a silly name because it
only has six legs.

Jenny: (Nods.)

Therapist: In addition to the feelings we get with different emotions, we also experience
differences in how we pay attention, think about things, and imagine things in
our minds when these emotions come up. (Points at “attention,” “thinking and reasoning,”
and “imagery and fantasy” circles on diagram, sequentially.) They also affect what we want
to do (points at “motivation”) and what we actually do (points at “bebavior”). So with
any emotion we feel, there's actually quite a lot going on—which is why it can be
so easy to feel trapped in a feeling. Does that make sense?

Jenny: (Nods.) It’s kind of like what we talked about last time—that different thoughts
can fuel different feelings, which bring up more thoughts.

Therapist: (Smiles.) Exactly! Now were going to explore how your threat system and
safeness system organize your mind in very different ways. First, let's consider a
time when you've felt very threatened. You’ve brought up a couple of situations
like that—fears about going on a social outing with friends, and being afraid
that you'd be called on in class. Want to focus on one of those situations?

Jenny: How about going out with friends?

Therapist: Sounds good. Could you briefly describe a situation that brings up feelings of
threat in you?

Jenny: Sure—one happened just the other day. Some girls from my floor stopped by
to ask me to go out with them this Friday night, like to eat and go to the bars,
that sort of thing.

Therapist: Perfect. Now let's work our way around the spider diagram. What emotion
should we put in the middle, here?

Jenny: Definitely fear or extreme anxiety.

Therapist: (Writes "fearlanxiety" in the center of the circle.) Okay, so let's start with this “felt emotion”
circle. To start, it can be helpful to consider how emotions feel in the body.


66

[PAGE 085]

Compassionate Understanding: Three Types of Emotion


Jenny: When they asked, my heart started pounding, and | had troubling concentrating.
It’s like the world was closing in on me. I just sort of nodded and said I'd let them
know. After they left, I calmed down a bit, but I was really tense and scared.
Even now, it’s hard to think about it.

Therapist: Let's talk about that— what you think about it. What thoughts come up when
youre feeling anxious about going out?

Jenny: Like I want to do it, but also that I really don’t want to do it. | think that it would
be fun, for any normal person, but that | would screw it up. | think of all the
millions of things that could go wrong. | even have thoughts that they don’t
really want me along—that they're just inviting me so they can watch me squirm
or to have someone to make fun of.

Therapist: It sounds like those thoughts may have some pretty powerful images along with
them. When youre feeling anxious, what are you imagining?

Jenny: That Pll do something stupid— wear the wrong thing, say the wrong thing,
whatever—and they'll regret bringing me. That they'll talk about me later,
making fun of me, or even decide they don’t want me around and leave me at
the bar. (Appears anxious.)

Therapist: That sounds terrifying. When youre in this space, what do you want or plan
to do? What do you usually do?

Jenny: I just want to stop worrying about it, to stop feeling this way. So I usually back
out...tell them that | remembered that | have a big exam the next week or
something.

Therapist: So this whole thing (gestures toward spider diagram) is organized around how terrible
this could turn out, motivating you to escape the situation—which is what you
would normally do?

Jenny: (Pauses a bit, with sad look on her face.) Yes.

Therapist: We can also notice that even remembering this threatening event organizes things
in specific ways right now—feeling anxious and tense, focused on the threat.
It's almost like these experiences combine to create an anxious version of
you—completely focused on the fear and anxiety. Does that sound right?

Jenny: It’s absolutely right. | spend a lot of time feeling like that.

Therapist: So “Anxious Jenny” has been hanging arounda lot lately.

Jenny: She sure has.


67

[PAGE 086]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist. Let's thank Anxious Jenny for sharing her perspective with us, and see if we
can get to know what “Safe Jenny” is like.

Jenny: I'd like that. I don’t know if there is a Safe Jenny, though.

Therapist: Well, Um here to help you find her.

In helping clients observe how they are organized very differently by varying emotions, it can
sometimes be useful to refer to these as “different versions of the self,” noting that our bodily experience, attention, reasoning, imagery, motivation, and behaviors can all be very different depending
on the emotion or motive that we're experiencing. It can seem like we're different people when
were caught up in these different emotions. Using terms like “Anxious Jenny” can help clients
recognize that as powerful as these experiences are, this is only one version of the self, and that we
can develop other, adaptive aspects of the self (paving the way for the idea of the compassionate
self). This language can also help set the stage for distinguishing “Anxious Jenny” from the current,
experiencing self—the self that is observing and aware of the emotion (rather than caught upin it),
which ACT therapists refer to as “self-as-context.”
Now that Jenny has explored how her anxiety organizes things, let's consider how the therapist
might continue to then introduce the safeness system. When making such transitions, it’s good to
do a little soothing rhythm breathing, to slow down the breath, get the parasympathetic nervous
system going, and help us shift into a compassionate state of mind.

Therapist. Jenny, now that we've explored how the threat system organizes the mind, |
think it would be good to look at how the mind is organized very differently
when we feel safe. We want to get to know what Safe Jenny feels like. How
does that sound?

Jenny: Sounds like it’s worth a try.

Therapist: Let's start by doing a minute or so of soothing rhythm breathing. Breathing in
this way can help us balance things out after we've been working with threat
emotions. Let’s take a few moments to slow down the breath.

Jenny: (Closes her eyes; slows ber breathing.)

Therapist. Slowing down the body...slowing down the mind. (Waits one minute.)

Therapist: Opening your eyes, returning to the room. (Waits a few moments until Jenny's eyes
are open and she’s orienting.) How was that?

Jenny: Better.

Therapist: Good. It’s good to learn that we can move into the perspective of an emotion
like anxiety, and look closely at how it’s organizing our minds, and then we can
choose to shift back out of it. Soothing rhythm breathing can really help with


68

[PAGE 087]

Compassionate Understanding: Three Types of Emotion


that. Don’t worry if some of that anxiety sticks around—you
ve spent a long
time learning to be anxious. Anxious Jenny has been going to the gym for
quite some time.


Jenny: (Smiles.) She sure has!

Therapist: I’m here to help with that. Now let’s explore how feelings of safeness organize the
mind and body. Have you had times when you felt completely safe and at ease—
maybe when spending time with someone you felt really comfortable with?

Jenny: (Thinks for twenty seconds or so.) Yes. I did have one friend in high school. Her name
was Sophie. We had so much in common—she was even anxious, too. (Brightens,
speech takes on a comfortable pace.) We used to do all sorts of things together. We'd
spend hours talking on the phone, or sitting at a coffee shop talking. We'd go
down to the beach sometimes, or just hang out wherever was convenient. |
really miss those times.

Therapist: That sounds wonderful. Do you see Sophie anymore?

Jenny: Sometimes on holidays. We graduated, and she went to one college, and I went
to another. We kept in touch really well for the first few months, and then
gradually talked to each other less and less. Life gets busy, you know?

Therapist: It sure does. For now, Pd like to focus on a time you were with Sophie, and felt
completely safe and comfortable. Can you recall a time like that?

Jenny: Yeah. There was this one time we picked up mochas at our favorite coffee shop
and went down to the beach in the evening. We climbed up the lifeguard tower
to watch the sunset. We just sat there, wrapped in blankets, talking for hours.
It was wonderful.

Therapist: That does sound wonderful. As you remember that time, imagining being back
there, how did you feel?

Jenny: Really relaxed, like I didn’t have a care in the world—just enjoying the coffee
and the sunset over the ocean, and talking.

Therapist: So it sounds like your attention was wide open—enjoying the coffee, the
beautiful sunset, maybe the sights, sounds, and smells of the sea?

Jenny: Yes, it was so beautiful there. | love the ocean.

Therapist: I do, too. You mentioned that you and Sophie spent a lot of time talking.
What did you talk about?


69

[PAGE 088]

CFT Made Simple


Jenny: We talked about all kinds of things: where we wanted to go to college, and what
we wanted to major in. What sort of careers we wanted to have. Boys we liked.
Movies and music. All kinds of things.

Therapist: Notice how it feels as you describe this. This is a perfect example of how the
safeness system organizes the mind. | can just imagine you there, feeling
completely comfortable. Attention open to notice all the wonderful sensations
that surrounded you. Thinking open and flexible, able to think about the sort
of lives you two would like to have, able to let your thoughts go wherever they
took you...

Jenny: It was so nice.

Therapist: It is nice. Notice how the imagery—the pictures in your mind—work when
youre feeling safe. Even now, bringing up that memory feels soothing, doesn’t it?

Jenny: It feels great. | miss those times.

Therapist: Pd miss them, too. Then, | imagine your mental imagery was flexible and open
like your thoughts—imagining what your future would be like, what you'd like
to do...

Jenny: Yeah. The future seemed more interesting then, like | was excited about going
to college, even though it was also a little scary.

Therapist: So feeling safe there with Sophie, you were able to even be somewhat excited
about something that you also found a bit scary.

Jenny: Yeah. Now it’s mostly just scary.

Therapist: (soothingly) Yeah. (Pauses for a few moments.) But would you say that in thinking about
that time, you were able to connect with a little bit of what Safe Jenny was like?

Jenny: (thoughtfully) | was.

Therapist: So let's review what we've learned about how different emotions organize the
mind. Notice that when we considered the threatening situation—friends asking
you to go out—your attention, thinking, mental imagery, and motivation were
all very narrow and focused on the perceived threat. All of that was focused very
narrowly on fears of being embarrassed or humiliated.

Jenny: (Nods consideringly.) Mmm-hmm.

Therapist: And then when we brought up that memory with Sophie, all that changed.
You remembered feeling safe, comfortable, and connected.


70

[PAGE 089]

Compassionate Understanding: Three Types of Emotion


Jenny: (Smiles thoughtfully, nods gently.)

Therapist. Feeling safe, your attention opened wide to the things you appreciated about
your surroundings, to your future, the things you wanted for your life... Your
thoughts and mental imagery were flexible and open as well, as you imagined
the sort of life you'd like to have. You chatted about all sorts of things. Your
motivation was no longer captured by feeling like you needed to protect
yourself, and you could imagine doing all sorts of things...even feeling excited
about doing something that was also a little scary, like going to college. Notice
how different your mind was organized from when you felt threatened? Notice
what Safe Jenny was like?

Jenny: It was a lot more open and free. I wish I felt like that more often.

Therapist. How about we work on that?

Jenny: Sounds good.

In the vignettes above, the therapist guides Jenny through an exploration of how these different emotions organize her mind. This is done in two ways—exploring how her mind was organized
within the situations she is recalling, and exploring the affective reactions she experiences in the
present, due to bringing up these memories. While we're primarily focused on highlighting the
former (exploring how attention, thinking, imagery, motivation, and so forth are organized during
different affective states of threat and safeness), highlighting the way these memories shape current
emotions helps pave the way for future imagery work, and for understanding memory as a powerful
stimulus to the emotional brain.
The therapist prompts Jenny to bring up memories associated with threat and safeness, and
guides her in exploring different ways these emotions organize her experience. Reflections of
feeling and validating statements are peppered throughout, to deepen the affective experience and
reinforce the connection between client and therapist. When Jenny begins to shift offtrack (for
example, when she becomes wistful about missing “those times,” expresses regret over the loss of
relationship with Sophie, or comments that now things are “just scary”), the therapist compassionately validates her experience and then quickly brings her back to the focus of the exploration. The
therapist also attempts to create safeness within the therapeutic relationship, making statements
that communicate warmth, confidence, and support: “That’s what I’m here to help you work on.”
“How about we work on that?” We revisit “Anxious Jenny,” this time accompanied by “Safe Jenny,”
reflecting the idea that powerful emotions and motives can organize us as different versions of the
self—versions that we can understand and value, and that we can selectively choose to strengthen.
This sets the stage for compassionate-self work, as we work to develop and strengthen a perspective that is compassionate, kind, wise, and strong.


7

[PAGE 090]

CFT Made Simple


WHAT ABOUT SADNESS?

You may have noticed that in talking about the three emotion-regulation systems, we haven't really
discussed sadness. Sadness is an interesting emotion that is challenging to categorize using the
three systems, because it doesn't easily fit. While sadness can be seen as threat-related in that it
often is linked with experiences of loss or disappointment, its physiological and psychological
profile is very different from other threat emotions, which involve heightened arousal, tension, and
a narrowing of thinking and attention. In contrast, sadness typically involves lower levels of arousal,
and sometimes involves more open thinking and attention—for example, reminiscing and reflecting on life’s meaning. Sadness also can serve to elicit caregiving responses from others, perhaps
serving a safeness-eliciting function, and it usually involves a deactivation of drive pursuits.
While research is needed to further explore the ways that sadness organizes us, | think rather
than trying to simplify things by forcing it into the threat circle, we're perhaps best served by considering sadness in terms of patterns of activation, and in relation to the contextual factors (such as
loss) that trigger it. From this perspective, we can perhaps see normal sadness as a state involving
low-to-moderate levels of perceived threat (loss but no active danger), low drive, and moderate
safeness (we feel safe enough to really connect with the experience of loss and what it means to us).
This can also help us in guiding treatment interventions for clients experiencing the deep experiences of sadness linked with major depression, which might involve much higher threat activation
(as depression often involves significant anxiety—for example, with losses that threaten one’s
entire way of life) combined with very low drive and low-to-moderate safeness. In such a case, we'd
want to help clients increase feelings of safeness to balance out the threat activation, but also get
the drive system moving as well—as attested to by research showing the beneficial effects of
behavior activation therapy with depression. For example, behavior activation around increasing
positive social experiences might help to serve both of these purposes.


MOTIVES AND SOCIAL MENTALITIES

In addition to the emotions associated with the three circles, CFT also emphasizes that we can be
powerfully organized around evolved motives. We can see motives as being the motivational and
behavioral extensions of the three circle emotions—for example, motives to connect, pursue goals,
attack, assert social dominance, defend oneself, mate, and play. These motives can manifest interpersonally in what Paul Gilbert has called social mentalities (Gilbert, 2009a; 2010; 2014). We can consider social mentalities to be organizing frameworks that structure our social interactions around
certain motives. It can be quite useful to explore with clients how different social mentalities can
organize their experience in entirely different ways. For example, we can use the spider diagram
presented earlier to compare and contrast how defensive, competitive, caregiving, and sexual social
mentalities are associated with very different patterns of paying attention, thinking, mental imagery,
felt experience, motivation, and behavior. Such awareness (and the consideration of what sorts of


72

[PAGE 091]

Compassionate Understanding: Three Types of Emotion


social mentalities would be helpful) can be of great use in helping clients understand and work with
relationship difficulties.


SUMMARY
In this chapter, we introduced the three-circles model of emotion. This model serves a number of
purposes in CFT. It helps decrease shame in our clients’ relationship with their emotions, as their
understanding of these emotions shifts from something that is wrong with me to the realization that we all
have these feelings because they helped our ancestors survive. Through this lens, they can see
many of their unwanted emotions as their evolved brains’ efforts to keep them safe when threats
are perceived. Rather than condemn these efforts, a compassionate approach seeks to validate,
soothe, and find more helpful ways of working with these experiences.
The model also helps pave the way for compassion as a way to work with suffering. We can help
clients recognize self-attacking as serving to continually reactivate the threat system, and compassion as a way to get the safeness system working for them as they take responsibility for working
with difficult feelings and life challenges. Finally, this model can serve as a sort of shortcut for
developing mindful awareness of emotions. We might suggest to clients that when they are strugeling, they could bring to mind the three circles and consider where they are in each—perhaps by
quickly rating their threat, drive, and safeness on a 1-to-10 scale. As one of my graduate students
(who was also a cheerleading coach) suggested, “When in doubt, circle out!” If our clients do this
and observe that they are stuck in the threat system, it can be a prompt to slow down with some
soothing rhythm breathing and then work with the emotion and situation using the compassionate
strategies I'll be introducing later in the book.


73

[PAGE 093]

CHAPTER 6


Compassionate Understanding:
The Social Shaping of the Self


As we've discussed, compassion for self and others in CFT begins with the realization that many of
our clients’ challenges have to do with factors they neither choose nor design. We explored the first
piece of this in the past two chapters—the recognition that we have tricky brains shaped by evolution to produce emotions that can be very difficult to manage. However, there is a second realization as well. From the moment of our birth, our evolved genetic potentials (genotypes) interact
with and are shaped by another set of factors we don’t get to choose or design—our early social
environments.

As infants, we find ourselves entirely dependent upon caregivers who may or may not be
equipped to nurture us and help us learn to manage these powerful emotions. We now know that
different people are born with very different temperaments—more or less likely to experience
emotions such as anxiety and irritability. These temperaments interact with our early social environments over time to shape the people that we will become.
A growing body of research shows that these early environments powerfully impact our developing brains, in particular those areas associated with emotion regulation and the processing of
social information (Siegel, 2012; Cozolino, 2010). As we grow into childhood, adolescence, and
early adulthood, we have growing influence over the contexts we inhabit, but are still shaped by
social forces that can serve to model and reinforce habits that can cripple us later in life. Recognizing
the ways in which we are shaped by social forces can support our clients’ development of selfcompassion, as they realize that the aspects of themselves they feel most ashamed of did not
develop by accident, and are not caused by some inherent flaw they possess.

[PAGE 094]

CFT Made Simple


DIFFERENT VERSIONS OF THE SELF

If you attend very many CFT workshops, youre likely to hear a story like the following:

I was born into an educated, middle-class family with loving parents who were able to take care of me and provide
me with the things I needed to survive and thrive—food, shelter, clothing, nurturing, and access to fun activities.
They supported and encouraged my education, and taught me the skills I'd need to survive—how to study, manage
my finances, and countless other things. But let’s imagine that instead, I was born to a single, drug-addicted mother
in an impoverished inner-city slum. Let's imagine that I often went bungry and alone, with no one to care for me
when I needed help, abused by those who could have helped me. Let's imagine that I had to learn to steal to feed
myself, fight to protect myself, and sell drugs or commit other crimes to earn the money needed to live. Would the
current version of me—the university professor, psychologist, and author—even be possible> Would it be likely?

We all have basic needs, and we learn to produce behaviors that allow our needs to be met
within the contexts in which we find ourselves—contexts we often don’t get to choose, but to
which we have to adapt if we want to survive. The idea here is that we all represent only one version
of what we could have become—a version that is defined by the unique pattern of interactions
occurring between our life experiences and our genetic makeup. We, and all of our clients, were
powerfully shaped by our early attachment relationships, as well as early and ongoing learning
experiences. Considering these social forces can be a powerful step in helping our clients develop
compassion for themselves and others. It can also help them take responsibility for working with
their current social and physical environments, as they develop a growing awareness of how these
environments can impact the course of their lives.


THE SOCIAL SHAPING OF THE SELF

In therapy, it can be useful to help clients explore the ways their current experience is related to
the social contexts of their lives. Let’s briefly touch on a few of these here, and how we might bring
them into the therapy room. We have limited space, so I'll be moving through these topics fairly
quickly, but there are lots of other resources available for those who wish to dig deeper.


Attachment History and Attachment Style
In the previous chapter, we explored how humans evolved to feel safe primarily in the context
of connection with others who accept us and care about us (Gilbert, 2009a; 2010). John Bowlby
and attachment researchers who followed him described how our early social environments can
shape our most basic understandings of other people, and of ourselves in relation to others. In this
way, early attachment histories give rise to relatively enduring attachment styles that shape how we
will experience our relationships with others, and our ability to feel safe in the world.


76

[PAGE 095]

Compassionate Understanding: The Social Shaping of the Self


Different authors have used different methods for categorizing and labeling attachment styles.
For our purposes, I’m going to discuss attachment in terms of three processes that can impact
emotion regulation: attachment security, attachment anxiety, and attachment avoidance. Attachment security
tends to result from interactions with nurturing caregivers who are responsive to our needs. Secure
individuals learn that help is available if they need it, and develop a repertoire of effective emotionregulation strategies they can draw upon (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). From a CFT perspective,
secure attachment relationships prime the safeness system, laying down and strengthening the
neural networks that facilitate individuals’ capacity for soothing themselves as they work effectively
with threat-based emotions. Able to self-soothe, secure individuals can remain open to their
emotions—acknowledging, feeling, and expressing them in adaptive ways (Mikulincer & Shaver,
2007). These individuals also learn to value themselves—their history of being cared for having
taught them that they are worthy of caring and kindness.
Attachment anxiety tends to result from rearing environments that were unreliable and inconsistently responsive to the child’s distress. Attachment anxiety is associated with desiring connection but being unable to trust that it will be there when needed, or fearing that it can disappear
unpredictably. Hence, such individuals may find themselves unable to feel soothed even when
social nurturing or connection is present. Clients with high levels of attachment anxiety may experience threat emotions in exaggerated, very intense ways—perhaps implicitly shaped by caregivers
who provided nurturing only when the child displayed extreme levels of distress (Mikulincer &
Shaver, 2007). Struggling to self-soothe or regulate their emotions, these individuals may seem to
live in the threat system, ruminating on perceived threats, and hypersensitive to signs of social
threat. They tend to be interested in others, but have difficulty managing relationships, and may be
terrified of rejection.
In contrast, individuals high in attachment avoidance employ lots of strategies to inhibit, suppress, or avoid their emotional experiences. Often raised by unavailable or unresponsive caregivers,
avoidant individuals can tend toward interpersonal distance and “going it alone,” and may see
support-seeking as risky, uncomfortable, or futile. Unable to soothe themselves through feelings of
connection and support, these individuals turn instead to avoidance strategies—distancing,
denying, and minimizing their emotions. These strategies can get in the way of effective coping, as
clients avoid rather than engaging in problem solving, seeking support, or reappraising their situation in more helpful ways (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). Like anxious individuals, from the CFT
perspective, avoidant folk are seen to have underdeveloped safeness systems to draw upon in
soothing themselves and working with their emotions, instead relying upon threat-based avoidance
strategies (called safety strategies), which often have crippling long-term consequences.
Our clients don't get to choose whether they feel safe in relationships with others, whether
they feel confident in dealing with emotions, and whether they experience themselves as connected, vulnerable, or isolated. If these were choices, of course we’d all choose to feel safe, confident, and connected. We can’t change the past, but we can help our clients begin to understand
how they came to be this way, and that these experiences are not their fault:


77

[PAGE 096]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: Jenny, in our last session we talked a bit about how we come to feel either
threatened or safe, and how these experiences organize the mind—how we pay
attention, experience emotions, think, and so on...

Jenny: Yes, | remember.

Therapist: Excellent. In CFT, we also consider how people learn to feel either safe or
threatened—anda lot of times, this relates to our history of relationships with
other people. We've talked about this before a bit—how you learned to feel
unsafe in social situations after that terrible experience you had with the other
girls in middle school.

Jenny: That’s right. That was awful. It made me terrified of being around other people.

Therapist: It made it hard for you to risk trusting others, and scared of having relationships?

Jenny: It’s almost impossible.

Therapist: When that happened—when you moved to the new school, and the other girls
were so mean to you—did you talk with anyone about it?

Jenny: I tried to talk with my mother, but she didn’t really help. | mean, she tried, but |
don’t think she understood. She told me that girls were just like that sometimes,
and that I shouldn’t make such a big deal out of it.

Therapist: So she wasn’t really able to help you?

Jenny: Well, she wasn't doing too well herself. She and my father had just divorced, and
their marriage had been bad for a while. It was really ugly. He had cheated on
her, and she’d been doing a lot of drinking. It was bad enough that we moved
after the divorce.

Therapist: So her life was enough of a mess that she had a hard time being there for you?

Jenny: Yes. | mean, she tried. She really did. It’s like she could tell that she wasn’t really
doing a good job as a parent. She even said that sometimes, and she'd try to
make up for it. She’d buy me stuff—expensive jeans, that sort of thing. But most
of the time... (Shakes her head and sighs.)

Therapist: Most of the time?

Jenny: Most of the time she just didn’t have it together. When Dad was there, she
seemed unhappy, and after we moved, she just... (Pauses.) She was never mean to
me. She just seemed caught up with her own stuff most of the time.

Therapist: How about your dad?


78

[PAGE 097]

Compassionate Understanding: The Social Shaping of the Self


Jenny: He was kind of your absent father. He mostly seemed to be away a lot—working
a lot, or whatever he was doing.

Therapist: Did you have much of a relationship with him when he was around? Do you
remember doing things with him?

Jenny: I loved spending time with him, but he just wasn’t there much. And after the
divorce, he said he wanted to have a relationship with me, but he never really
followed through. He’d call and schedule a time to pick me up for the weekend,
but half the time he wouldn't show. After a while he just sort of stopped calling.
| guess he was more interested in his new family. (Looks down, a bit tearful.)

Therapist: (Waits in silence.)

Jenny: (Sigbs.) | guess | had some crappy parents, huh?

Therapist: It does sound like they had a lot of their own stuff going on, which got in the
way of being there for you. Remember how we talked about the safeness system,
and how we tend to feel safe through our connections with others who care
about us? As we think about all of this, does it make sense that you might have a
hard time feeling safe in relationships—have a hard time trusting that others will
be there when you need them?

Jenny: It does make sense.

Therapist: Instead of learning that you could rely on others for help when you needed it
you learned that sometimes they'd be there, and...

Jenny: And a lot of the time they wouldn't.

Therapist: Jenny, given this learning, do you think it’s your fault that you feel unsafe in
relationships? Is it your fault that you have trouble trusting others to be there
when you need them, or is that something your life has taught you? Is that
your fault?

Jenny: No, it’s not my fault.

Therapist: (Pauses for a bit.) Could you say that again?

Jenny: (crying) It’s not my fault.

As the vignette above demonstrates, in CFT, the focus isn’t upon categorizing people in terms
of attachment style, but on helping our clients understand their emotions, motivations, and behaviors in nonshaming, compassionate ways. There are lots of ways clients can learn to feel unsafe, or
develop habits that don't fit with the lives they’d like to have. Let's explore a few more.


79

[PAGE 098]

CFT Made Simple


Learning Theory and Behavior Therapy
Learning theory and behavior therapy have been successfully applied to the understanding and
treatment of a wide variety of emotional and behavioral problems. CFT is quite compatible with
these approaches, and optimally, a CFT therapist will have received training in basic behavioral
principles and how they apply to understanding and treating psychological problems. Although
behaviorists and behaviorism aren’t always thought of as warm and compassionate, if we look
closely, we see that behavioral understandings inherently undermine shame and self-attacking at
their core. They help us, and our clients, clearly understand how their problems were learned, and
how these challenges make complete sense when we consider the contexts in which they occur.
Recognizing these challenges as learned rather than as something that is inberently wrong with me can help
our clients have compassion for themselves (It’s not my fault that I have these struggles), and can give us
direction as we compassionately work to address them. There are many excellent resources on
learning theory and behavior therapy, so | won't go into detail here, but I did want to briefly
mention some methods of learning and ways we can bring such understandings into CFT.


OPERANT CONDITIONING AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS
OF BEHAVIOR

A functional analysis of behavior can be very useful as we help clients answer the question, Why
do I do this stuff? Conducting a functional analysis involves figuring out the factors that control the
occurrence of a given behavior—what factors set the stage for the behavior to occur, and what
consequences follow it. This process is often communicated using the acronym A-B-C, which
stands for antecedent, behavior, and consequence. When doing a functional analysis, we start by selecting
a specific behavior. This could be something observable that the client does, or private behavior
such as thinking (for example, self-attacking or rumination).
Once we've figured out the behavior we're interested in, we look for antecedents to the
behavior—factors that precede it and signal its likely occurrence. Antecedents can be external
factors (stimuli) that signal the presence of a punisher or reward, triggering the occurrence of related
behaviors (called discriminative stimuli, because they allow us to detect or discriminate the presence of
threats and rewards). Antecedents can also be internal experiences that aren't related to the availability of things the individual does or doesn’t like, but instead involve motivational states that “set
the stage” for certain behaviors to occur, impacting whether or not a behavior is likely to have
pleasing or displeasing consequences. Hunger is a good example. We can see how this works:
Regardless of the general availability of food, eating is much more rewarding to us when we are
hungry. In this way, antecedents can either let us know that a reward is available (serving a discriminative function) or motivate us to go looking for one (serving a motivational function) (Tórneke,
2010). Key is the understanding that antecedents orient us to the potential that desirable or undesirable consequences will follow our behavior, setting the stage for these behaviors to occur.


80

[PAGE 099]

Compassionate Understanding: The Social Shaping of the Self


Once we've specified the behavior were interested in and the antecedents that precede it, we
can explore the consequences that follow the behavior and impact its likelihood of occurring in the
future. Some consequences are reinforcing, increasing the likelihood that a behavior will be
repeated. This can be either because the consequence is something the individual prefers, such as
receiving a good grade after studying for an exam (positive reinforcement), or because it involves
the termination or removal of an experience that the individual dislikes—like medication getting
rid of a headache (negative reinforcement).
Other consequences, called punishers, decrease the likelihood of behaviors being repeated.
This can occur because the consequence of the behavior is aversive and nonpreferred (called punishment or positive punishbment—where positive refers to the addition of the undesirable consequence), such
as being laughed at after attempting to answer a question. Punishment can also occur when consequences involve the termination or removal of something the individual prefers, as in having friends
pull away and distance themselves from you after you tell an offensive joke. This is sometimes
referred to as negative punishment—where negative refers to the removal of the preferred state or situation—or response cost (as in, the behavior or response has a cost).
Conducting a functional analysis with our clients can assist them in understanding how the
behaviors they engage in—of which they may feel very ashamed and self-critical—actually make
sense when we consider them in context. The prison inmate's aggression makes a whole lot more
sense when we see that he has always lived in dangerous environments, and that being aggressive
meant that others would leave him alone rather than target him for victimization.

Chris: After I almost killed that guy, the others left me alone. | guess they decided it
wasn't worth it—and that was fine by me. They knew | could go off at any time.
They knew that if you fucked with me, you would get hurt, and hurt bad.

Therapist. It sounds like you learned to be violent in the effort to feel safe—that if you were
tough enough, people would leave you alone—and it worked. If we think of it like
this, does it make sense that you would learn to be violent, to keep up that image?

Chris: It sure does. But that’s not who | want to be. That's not the dad | want my son
to have.

Therapist. So that violent version of you served his purpose, but we don’t want to leave him
in charge. How about we work to develop another version of you that fits with
the sort of dad you want to be?

Chris: Sounds good.

Likewise, when we recognize that our client's cutting has provided her with temporary relief
from terrible emotional pain, we can compassionately understand why she may be reluctant to give
this strategy up. Both of these clients may experience intense shame and self-criticism as they
observe themselves struggling to stop performing behaviors that create great problems for them
and don’t fit with who they want to be, but which serve (or served) a very real purpose in their


öl

[PAGE 100]

CFT Made Simple


lives. This shame and self-criticism can paradoxically keep them stuck in the threat system and
potentially prevent them from taking responsibility for changing the behavior, as they work to
avoid shame-related discomfort by blaming others, rationalizing their behavior, or simply shifting
their attention elsewhere. We see these themes occurring again and again, in clients who struggle
with the very behaviors that their lives shaped in them—behaviors they developed in the effort to
meet their needs and keep themselves safe. Helping clients understand how these behaviors make
sense given their histories can help shift the focus away from self-attacking and toward compassionately finding more helpful strategies for pursuing these very admirable goals—keeping themselves safe
and working with their suffering.
In the language of CFT, we find that many of our clients seem to live in the threat system—
with their lives and behaviors centered on efforts to reduce or avoid uncomfortable experiences.
This is what behaviorists sometimes refer to as behavior being “under aversive control” (Skinner,
1953), and which Buddhists refer to when they talk about aversion. In CFT, we help clients learn to
not just reduce experiences of threat and discomfort, but to cultivate and strengthen a compassionate version of the self that is oriented toward helping themselves feel safe (undermining the aversive
control), exploring what will be helpful in addressing their challenges (versus merely trying to
avoid or escape unwanted emotions related to those challenges), and moving toward the way they
want their lives to be (versus away from how they don't want it to be). In this way, we see that CFT
has much in common with approaches like ACT—which heavily emphasizes values work—and
DBT, in emphasizing the development of adaptive skills like distress tolerance and emotionregulation skills.


RESPONDENT CONDITIONING

In addition to learning connections between antecedents, behavior, and consequences, our
brains are also highly efficient at learning connections between different stimuli. Certain stimuli—
events, experiences, things in our environment, even ideas or mental imagery—have the natural
capacity to produce certain responses in us. We can consider this process for each of the three
emotion-regulation systems we discussed in the previous chapter (threat, drive, and safeness).
For example, being in a life-threatening situation such as a car accident can naturally produce
fear. Sexual stimulation can naturally lead to sexual arousal. Warm conversations with dear friends
over dinner can lead to feelings of comfort and safeness. Let’s imagine three different people, one
in each of these situations—a terrifying car wreck, a heated bout of passionate lovemaking, and a
warm dinner with a dear one. Since each of these situations naturally produces a response, we call
them unconditioned (unlearned) stimuli, and the responses that result from them (fear, sexual
arousal, safeness), by virtue of arising naturally in response to the stimuli, are called unconditioned
(unlearned) responses.
Let’s imagine that in each of these situations, the same song is playing on the radio in the background. Our brains are very efficient at linking things together, so for each of these people, this
song can become associated with the situation (car wreck, sex, warm interactions with dear friends).


82

[PAGE 101]

Compassionate Understanding: The Social Shaping of the Self


In the future, these individuals could come to have very different learned reactions to this song,
through its connection with the situations. The individual in the car wreck hears the song and
experiences a rush of fear. The lover hears it and feels a rising of sexual feelings. The friend hears
it and feels a warm arising of safeness and peace. The form (what it is) of this stimulus—the song—is
the same for each of these individuals, but its function (its effect—what it does) is entirely different,
due to its previous pairing with these different situations. In each case, the individual has learned
to have an emotional response to the song, which now functions as a conditioned (learned) stimulus in its ability to provoke conditioned (learned) responses—fear, sexual arousal, or safeness. This
learning process is an example of respondent conditioning (also known as classical conditioning).
It’s worth mentioning that evolution has shaped us so that not all learning is created equal—
some types of learning, sometimes called prepared learning, had much more survival value for our
ancestors, and so we adapted such mental connections much more quickly and efficiently. In the
case of powerful threat emotions like fear or disgust, for example, we can learn such connections in
a single trial—so even after only one car accident, the survivor may experience extreme fear when
he next hears that song. In the case of the sexual situation, it may take a few such spicy encounters
before the song acquires the ability to trigger sexual feelings on its own (particularly if the song is
also heard at other times). We might need an entire summer of barbecues with good friends at the
lake before the song strongly brings up feelings of safeness. In particular, our brains are biased
toward processing threat—which is why it can be easy for clients to learn to feel threatened in
response to a variety of situations and triggers, and more difficult for them to learn to feel safe,
particularly when their early environments didn’t often provide them with experiences of safeness.
Many clients will report overwhelming emotions in response to what seem to be relatively
minor situations, or even occurring “out of the blue,” in which powerful feelings of fear, anger, or
sadness arise in them with no warning or explanation. These experiences can be terrifying, potentially leading clients to fear their own emotions as powerful, unpredictable forces capable of striking at
any time, with the clients feeling “crazy,” vulnerable, and helpless in the face of these feelings. We
can imagine how such experiences might lead clients to find their own emotions threatening, and
strive to avoid them. Such experiences can also prompt self-criticism in our clients, as they observe
there's no reason for me to feel this way. . there must be something wrong with me. The logical new brain often can’t
see or understand what the old, emotional brain is responding to, so it blames the victim.
Here again, we can help our clients explore how they learned these emotional responses, and
how, given these learning experiences, their emotional responses and related motives (for example,
desires to escape or avoid situations that trigger the emotions) make complete sense. There’s nothing
wrong with them—they simply have tricky brains that are working very hard to keep them safe, by
identifying every possible signal they've previously learned to connect with danger—even when
these signals (like our song) aren't at all dangerous. Often, our clients won't even be aware that
they
ve heard the song at all—the feelings just seem to come up on their own. Understanding that
these emotions are echoes—occurring because of previous learning—can help them to make sense
of these experiences, and to understand how very powerful emotions can arise even when the situation seems perfectly safe to our logical new brains.


83

[PAGE 102]

CFT Made Simple


RELATIONAL FRAME THEORY

Historically, even radical behaviorists have occasionally had to admit that their theories had
certain limitations—most notably in explaining the nuances of verbal behavior (Törneke, 2010).
However, the last few decades have been exciting ones for behaviorists, as these limitations have
been addressed with the development of relational frame theory, or RFT (Hayes, Barnes-Holmes,
& Roche, 2001; Tórneke, 2010). RFT can be complicated, and we don't have space to explain it well
here (and I’m not qualified to do so). However, this theory is important enough for understanding
threat system dynamics that I'll attempt a brief explanation to suit our current purposes.
All of the previously described forms of learning—learned connections between behaviors and
consequences and between different stimuli presented at the same time—are observed in animals
as well as humans. However, our ability for symbolic thought allows us to form much more complex
networks of learned relationships, even between things that have never been linked together in our
actual experience. For example, if | teach you that A is like B, and B is like C, you will derive a new
relationship between A and C—concluding that A is like C, and that C is like A. This may seem simple,
but its implications are significant—once derived, you can then project this relationship into the
future and consider what that means for you (if, for example, you identify with something about A,
B, or C). You can also form loads of other derived relationships, if, for example, you've previously
learned that B is like Q, which is like P which is like R. You can then derive relationships linking A
and C with Q, P and R, multiplying across a network of mental connections like a spiderweb—tug
one point, and the whole web shifts. These are things that other animals, lacking our fancy new
brains, just can’t do. It’s hard to get the real significance of these relationships by using an example
that features printed letters, so let’s consider how this learning might play out in one of our clients.
The implications of our ability to mentally derive different relationships can be harrowing for
understanding how we process threat. Suppose Lauren considers herself to be feminine, and that
she has harbored a dream of becoming a successful scientist. She is quite intelligent and is attending school in pursuit of this dream. Let’s imagine that through her exposure to various media and
culture—say, movies, cable news channels, conversations, that sort of thing—she learns to connect
femininity with weakness, helplessness, or incompetence at science. Perhaps punctuated bya particularly powerful learning experience in which she overhears a male authority figure making a
nasty gender-based slur about women in the sciences, we can imagine Lauren deriving a connection between herself (via her own experience of identifying as feminine) and helplessness or scientific incompetence.
Given her goal of becoming a scientist, how would Lauren feel? How might she feel about her
goals and her ability to attain them? We can also imagine how the various aspects of her life that
are linked with femininity—the way she dresses, habitual behaviors, the things she likes—can be
tainted by these derived relationships—their effects (in RFT lingo, their stimulus functions) transformed so that instead of being things she enjoys that help her feel comfortable, these reflections
of her femininity are now triggers for feeling helpless and weak, and thinking that she'll never be a
competent scientist. Even Lauren’s preferences are now signs of weakness.


84

[PAGE 103]

Compassionate Understanding: The Social Shaping of the Self


Let’s imagine that Lauren wants to be a scientist so badly that she begins to reject these aspects
of herself, in the effort to become less feminine and have a chance at pursuing her goal. She
exchanges her dresses for pants, changes her hairstyle and her color palette. And then, one day,
she’s watching a cable news program in which the hosts are viciously attacking a female politician
for appearing masculine—tridiculing her appearance, labeling her assertiveness as “bitchy,” and deriding her sexuality. We can imagine another set of relationships being derived in Lauren’s mind, in
which everything about her that seems in any way masculine is now tainted with negative
implications—her behavior, her clothes, even her ambitions to enter a stereotypically male field.
How is Lauren ever to feel comfortable with her gender identity? How can she feel comfortable
and confident in pursuing her goals? This brilliant young woman’s completely realistic aspirations
can be crushed, all due to culturally based lies being multiplied through a complex network of
derived relationships in her mind.
This is tricky business indeed, and what I’ve described is really just the tip of the iceberg when
it comes to RFT and the nuances of verbal behavior in humans. I’m not suggesting that we give our
clients lessons in relational frame theory. But we can help them recognize that our brains are very
good at linking and translating things in our minds so that given a powerful learning experience,
perceptions of threat can be magnified and multiplied almost exponentially across time, situations,
experiences, and thought. This is not our fault. It is a result of the evolution of our brains, and it’s a
capacity that has allowed us to do amazing things as a species, as we use these abilities to solve
complex problems. Again, the key is to help clients recognize that these experiences and feelings
they struggle so greatly with are learned, that they make sense in the context of their lives and the way
their evolved brains work, and that we can help them work with these struggles in empowering,
compassionate ways.


SOCIAL LEARNING

We can learn not only through direct experience, but through our observations of others. We
can learn to fear by watching others experience punishment (for example, being ridiculed when
they speak up). We can learn behavior through seeing it modeled by others (for example, how our
parents behave when they are experiencing emotions, or how to play a song on the guitar by watching a YouTube video). Often without our awareness, our minds are constantly storing information
about what the world is like, what we are like, our relationships with others and what they mean,
and what we should do as we go through life. Helping clients discover how their lives are shaped
by these learning experiences can pave the way for compassion to arise—compassion for themselves and others.
In session, this exploration isn't done by mechanistically running through someone's learning
history, using lots of technical jargon like some of the terms | introduced above. Rather, it happens
organically, through discussions around topics like what things were like growing up, or what it was like
around the time of the trauma. As our clients are acquainting us with their history—as we're constructing
an understanding of how things came to be this way—-we can compassionately explore (again, using


85

[PAGE 104]

CFT Made Simple


techniques like Socratic dialogue) how they learned to fear certain things, or to react in certain
ways. In this way, we can help them form a compassionate understanding of how it makes sense that
they would be this way. Let’s consider how we might bring some of this into the therapy room:

Therapist: Jenny, we've been exploring some of the situations that bring up anxiety in
you, and what you've learned from them. Does it make sense that after your
experience of being ridiculed by your middle-school peers, you would learn to
be afraid of forming relationships with classmates or of speaking up in class?

Jenny: It does, but... (Pauses and makes a considering facial expression.)

Therapist: Looks like you're not quite sure there...

Jenny: It’s just that, yeah, what happened to me in junior high does help me understand
why I would have problems making friends. But I get really scared of lots of
other situations, too. I’m terrified of dating, and I really need to get a job, but I
cant go on interviews.

Therapist: So there are other situations that don’t seem to really make sense—situations
that cause lots of fear in you, but don’t seem to be related to your past
experiences.


Jenny: Yes—it’s maddening. (Shakes her head a bit side-to-side.)

Therapist: (Nods.) I can see how it would be. Let's see if we can make some sense of it

Jenny: That would be nice.

Therapist: Jenny, do you remember when we talked about how our brains can be very
tricky, and can lead us to struggle with things in ways that animals like
Penelope or Sadie don't have to worry about? The new-brain/old-brain stuff
we chatted about?

Jenny: Yeah.

Therapist: Well, one of the things our brains are very good at is linking things together—
forming connections between different experiences, thoughts, and feelings. Our
brains evolved to do this—to help us quickly make sense of the world, so we could
understand how things work, without having to experience everything firsthand.

Jenny: Mmm-hmm.

Therapist: Well, this can work against us, too. If we experience humiliation in one situation
say, being the new kid at a school and being ridiculed in class, or in the hall—our
brains can figure out that being the center of attention in any situation is


86

[PAGE 105]

Compassionate Understanding: The Social Shaping of the Self


dangerous. We can form this connection between being the center of attention
and being rejected and humiliated. Remember, our threat systems work very
hard to help us identify threats and protect ourselves—better safe than sorry.

Jenny: (Nods.)

Therapist: When we have a really terrible experience, we can project that learning into
the future, imagining that it will always be this way. We can also project that
learning onto lots of different situations—like dating relationships and job
interviews. So one really powerful learning experience in the sixth grade can
result in our threat systems being activated by lots of different situations, fora
long time to come. This is particularly true if we haven’t learned how to help
ourselves feel safe. We can develop a version of ourselves that is really scared
of all sorts of different situations, and that thinks that avoiding them is the only
way to stay safe. Does that make sense?

Jenny: It sure does. That's exactly what it feels like for me—lI'm terrified of all these
situations, even ones I've never been in. | thought | was going crazy!

Therapist: It can feel like that, can't it? But which sounds more likely—that you're just
crazy for no good reason, or that your threat system is using what you've
learned to work really hard to protect you, to make sure youre never hurt like
that again? (Smiles.)

Jenny: (Smiles.) Okay, okay. I think I get it. That makes a lot more sense. (Pauses and looks
down a bit.)

Therapist: (Remains silent.)

Jenny: It still sucks, though.

Therapist: (Waits a moment, then speaks warmly.) It sure does. That's why we're going to send
your safeness system to the gym, and develop a version of you that is confident,
wise, kind, and compassionate—to help that vulnerable part of you feel safe.

Jenny: Pd like that.


WORKING WITH FEARS OF COMPASSION
In this chapter, we've explored various forms of learning that can be problematic for our clients. As
weve discussed, a primary goal of CFT is to help clients learn to access feelings of safeness—
initially through the therapeutic relationship, and in going forward, through learning to direct
compassion to themselves, to receive it from others, and to form and maintain nurturing


87

[PAGE 106]

CFT Made Simple


relationships. Connection is important, as we evolved primarily to feel safe through affiliation with
others—others who accept us, who like us, and who can support us when we need it.
Unfortunately, some clients will have learned to associate interpersonal connection with threat
rather than safeness. Through trauma, abuse, difficult attachment history, or other experiences,
our clients may have learned that to care about others or to allow themselves to be cared about is
dangerous. They may actively resist kindness and compassion, even feeling as if they don’t deserve
it. This presents us with a fundamental question: If the connections that are supposed to help us feel safe (evolutionarily speaking) instead become associated with threat, bow do we ever feel safe? Some of our clients will present
with exactly this conundrum. Even if they consciously want to build connections and feel safe,
powerful implicit learning experiences lead them to feel really threatened as soon as they start to
really connect. You've probably had experiences like this with clients; just as the therapeutic relationship is getting closer and it seems like the client should be feeling safer, they actually become
destabilized and uncomfortable.
I like to talk about this using a metaphor. A store near my home in Spokane, Washington, sells
bags of nice big frozen prawns at a very reasonable price. They're great if youre having a lastminute get-together—just pick up a bag, thaw them out, whip together some horseradish and
catsup to make cocktail sauce, and you've got a nice hors d’oeuvre. But you've got to plan ahead,
as the thawing instructions are very specific: Thaw in the refrigerator overnight. Do not force-thaw under
running water. lt turns out that if we attempt to force-thaw the frozen shrimp by placing them under
running water, it will often create a boundary disturbance—the shrimp will absorb way too much
water, and become mushy and gross.
I think humans are a lot like these prawns. We can't be force-thawed. When were frozen—
when we've learned to feel unsafe in connection with others and to avoid such connection—
attempts at forcing us to thaw too quickly can lead to peril. Many of us have had clients that we
tried to force-thaw, moving too quickly to places the client wasn’t yet ready to go. In such situations, it’s easy to have relationship ruptures that create obstacles in the therapy, or even to have
clients drop out of treatment.
I think the best way for us humans to “thaw” is to place ourselves in an environment that contains the necessary conditions—the causes and conditions that make thawing possible—and then to
give it some time. With clients like this, there’s no one thing we can say that will lead their emotional brains to conclude, Ob, I can go abead and feel safe, now. Our clients may be frustrated by this, too
(and may benefit from hearing the metaphor), as they may consciously know that they’d benefit
from feeling safe in relationships, and may desperately want to do so. They're not choosing to panic
at the first sign of closeness. They may not even recognize what is happening. They've learned that
closeness is dangerous, and their old, emotional brains are trying to protect them. It’s not their fault.
This is why I think the layered approach we're taking is so important. We can think of the consistent, warm-but-not-overwhelming, compassionate presence of the therapist as an external factor
that facilitates “thawing.” These feelings can be thawed from the inside as well, softened as clients
begin to understand how and why they feel unsafe in relationships, that this isn't their fault, and
commit to helping themselves work with this. Mindful awareness can help clients identify when


88

[PAGE 107]

Compassionate Understanding: The Social Shaping of the Self


they begin to feel unsafe in connection with others, and to pause and observe rather than habitually
pull back. Finally, the compassion practices we'll explore later can help clients begin to actively
cultivate feelings of warmth and connection, and to kindly coach and reassure themselves as they
courageously participate in relationships they would have previously avoided. But we need to have
patience and help clients have patience with themselves, recognizing that this thawing is something
that happens over time. It can’t be forced.


SUMMARY
In CFT, one of the foundational layers underlying self-compassion is composed of understanding. As
we ve seen in the past few chapters, clients are helped to understand where their emotions and
motives come from, how they organize the mind and body in powerful ways, and how people are
often shaped by social forces that they neither choose nor design. As we see in the clinical example
above, helping clients understand how their challenges were learned can help shift their understanding of these challenges from something that is wrong with me to my brain working to protect me in situations
that it wasn’t designed to deal with. It can also help undermine fears of their own emotions, as they come
to understand these experiences not as random, uncontrollable jolts of pain from out of nowhere,
but as understandable reactions that make sense given their previous life experience. In the next
chapter, we'll continue the work of helping our clients develop a more helpful relationship with
their thoughts, emotions, and behavior—exploring mindfulness as a method to help clients relate to
these experiences with compassionate awareness.


89

[PAGE 109]

CHAPTER 7


Compassionate Awareness:
Cultivating Mindfulness


In the layered approach we're taking to understanding the process of CFT, we began by first considering the therapeutic relationship, in which compassion is modeled by the therapist, who serves
as a secure base for clients to begin feeling safe so they can approach difficult emotions and experiences. We then spent chapters 4 through 6 developing the next layer—helping clients develop a
compassionate understanding of their emotions in relation to evolution and the developmental factors
that shaped them. This understanding is in the service of helping clients relate compassionately and
nonjudgmentally to their difficulties—many of which they didn’t choose or design, but must cope
with nonetheless. In this chapter, we'll consider the next layer of our approach to CFT: mindful
awareness. It’s important to recognize that all three of these layers will be present from the beginnings of therapy, with the relationship developing from the point of initial contact, and the therapist weaving in the understanding and mindful awareness pieces even during the first few
sessions.

Over the past few decades, mindfulness has become one of the most used and studied practices
in contemporary psychotherapy. It has provided the basis for mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
(Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2001), and has long been featured in other “third wave” cognitive
behavioral approaches, including DBT (Linehan, 1993), ACT (Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999),
and others. A body of evidence supports the use of mindfulness-based interventions for a host of
problems, particularly depression and anxiety (Hofmann, Sawyer, Witt, & Oh, 2010). There are
many existing resources for learning about mindfulness and using it in therapy, so | won't be
attempting an exhaustive introduction to mindfulness here. Rather, Il briefly discuss the concept

[PAGE 110]

CFT Made Simple


of mindfulness and how it fits into CFT, introduce a couple of mindfulness practices commonly
used in CFT, and touch on some tips for effectively engaging clients in mindfulness practices.


MINDFULNESS

Mindfulness involves a particular sort of awareness. Probably the most common definition of mindfulness comes from Jon Kabat-Zinn (1994): paying attention in the present moment, on purpose, nonjudgmentally.
Mindfulness means intentionally directing our present-moment awareness in a way that allows us
to see what is before us, both in our external environment and in our minds, exactly as it is. With
mindful attention, we refrain from judging, criticizing, clinging to, or rejecting our experience.
Rather, we allow ourselves to notice, accept, and curiously explore the contents of our experience—
whether that experience comes to us from the outside world through our senses, or is the product
of our own internal experience, as in thoughts, feelings, motivations, and bodily sensations. With
mindful awareness, we allow ourselves to curiously observe all of these experiences—noticing
them for exactly what they are, neither clinging to them nor pushing them away.
Mindful awareness can be a very useful ability for clients, particularly those who are haunted
by powerful shaming and self-critical thoughts. The problem is not that they have these thoughts—to
a greater or lesser extent, pretty much all of us do from time to time. The problem is that they
ruminate on these thoughts, rehearse them, and believe them. Clients will also sometimes present with
powerful emotions that seem to take them by storm, powerfully organizing their bodily experience, attention, thinking, motivation, and behavior in ways we've discussed in previous chapters.
Such clients can find themselves feeling trapped in the immediacy of such emotional experiences.
The experiences can trigger unwanted feelings and problematic behaviors in the present moment,
but can also lead clients to fear thoughts and emotions themselves—potentially leading to the
development of unhelpful patterns of experiential avoidance as they try to manage these scary and
seemingly uncontrollable mental experiences.
Practicing mindfulness can help address these challenges, and help prepare our clients (and
ourselves) for compassion. Mindfulness involves numerous potential benefits that are relevant to
CFT. Mindfulness training can give clients increased awareness of and control over their attention,
helping them learn to direct their attention in helpful ways. It can help them learn to notice movement in the mind, to more quickly become aware when unhelpful thoughts and feelings arise.
When these thoughts and emotions are noticed, the observing quality of mindful awareness can
help keep clients from becoming stuck and fused with these experiences—instead relating to them
as temporary events playing out in the mind and body. In this way, clients can come to understand
thoughts and emotions as mental and bodily experiences rather than who I am.
Relatedly, the accepting, nonjudgmental quality of mindful awareness can help clients refrain
from reacting to or elaborating upon these experiences in unhelpful ways (such as ruminating, or
criticizing themselves for feeling anger or thinking certain thoughts that don’t fit with the person
they want to be). The ability to mindfully observe one’s difficult thoughts and emotions without


92

[PAGE 111]

Compassionate Awareness: Cultivating Mindfulness


either fusing with them or avoiding them by redirecting the attention can also help our clients
develop distress tolerance, which is of vital importance for compassion. If we’re going to overcome
avoidance and work with suffering, we have to be able to approach it and stay in contact with it
while doing so. Mindfulness gives our clients a way to do that.


Preparing Clients to Work with Attention
As mindfulness is first and foremost a way of working with the attention, it can be useful to
orient clients to this—to help them get to know their attention a bit before introducing formal mindfulness practices. This can be done quickly and easily with an experiential exercise in which we
prompt clients to direct their attention to different targets—internal, external, broad, narrow,
present, past, concrete, conceptual—so that they can see firsthand how their attention works.
Let’s consider an example of how this might be done:

Therapist. Josh, as we discussed in our last session, today we'll be introducing a practice
called mindfulness. Mindfulness involves paying attention in a particular way that
helps us to become more aware of our experiences and helps us keep from
getting caught up in unhelpful thoughts and emotions. How does that sound?

Josh: Sounds like it’s worth a try.

Therapist: Great. Before we dive into mindfulness, though, | think it might be useful to get
to know what we mean by attention. We can think of attention as the “spotlight of
the mind.” That spotlight can be pointed at lots of different things, directing our
awareness in different ways. Are you up for a little exercise?

Josh: All right.

Therapist: Fantastic. ’m going to simply say a series of words—and when you hear the
word, try to direct your attention where the word indicates. So if I say, “Left
elbow,” you'll bring your attention to your left elbow. Got it?

Jenny: (Nods.)

Therapist. Okay, here goes: Right ear. (Waits two or three seconds.) Left foot. (Waits two or three
seconds.) Your tongue. (Waits two or three seconds.) The feeling of your breath. (Waits
two or three seconds.) The buzzing of the lights. (Waits two or three seconds.) Your favorite
color. (Waits two or three seconds.) Tater tots! (Waits two or three seconds.) Justice. (Waits
two or three seconds.) World peace. (Waits two or three seconds.) South America. (Waits two
or three seconds.) What you
d like to have for dinner. (Waits two or three seconds.) And
allowing your face to form a smile, the sensation of smiling.


93

[PAGE 112]

CFT Made Simple


Josh: (Smiles slightly.)

Therapist: What did you notice? Were you able to move your attention where | indicated?

Josh: Yeah. It was kind of interesting.

Therapist: Excellent. Did you notice how effortlessly you could move your attention
around? When you moved your attention from one thing to another, did it
happen quickly or slowly?

Josh: Quickly. Like, immediately.

Therapist: So you were able to very quickly shift your awareness from one thing to another.
You may have also noticed how you were able to move the focus of your
attention from external to internal bodily sensations, to ideas and memories, to
the past and the future. You could also narrow it down to something like your
elbow, and widen it onto broad ideas like justice.

Josh: (Nods.)

Therapist: What do you think? Pretty cool, eh?

Josh: (Smiles and offers a slight, good-natured eye-roll.) Pretty cool. (Pauses.) Actually, it was
kind of cool. | never thought of that before.

Therapist: So that was just an example of how we can direct the spotlight of our
attention in different ways. Let’s continue to explore that by learning our
first mindfulness exercise.


MINDFUL CHECKING-IN

The first formal mindfulness exercise | usually introduce in CFT is called Mindful Checking-In
(Kolts, 2012). Mindful Checking-In involves bringing our attention sequentially to bodily experiences, felt emotions, and thinking, in fairly rapid succession. This exercise isn’t meant to be an
extended meditation, although clients can certainly spend as much time as they like. Rather, the
practice has a few specific purposes:

e To help clients develop the habit of bringing their attention to their bodily experiences,
emotions, and thoughts—to get used to noticing these experiences.

e To help clients begin to relate these experiences as they are—physical sensations, feel-
ings, and words or images in the mind— without judging them.


94

[PAGE 113]

Compassionate Awareness: Cultivating Mindfulness


e To help clients get used to practicing mindfulness exercises (and home-practice gener-
ally) in their daily life outside the session—starting small with something they can
hopefully do with little difficulty.

Let's take a look at how this exercise can be introduced in a therapy session:

Therapist: The first mindfulness exercise we'll do is called Mindful Checking-In. Just like
before, [Il prompt you to bring your attention to certain experiences. This time,
were going to direct attention to body experiences, emotions, and thoughts.
Sound good?

Josh: Sure.

Therapist: In mindfulness, we want to be aware of these different experiences, bringing our
attention to them. This is different from thinking about our experiences. So if your
foot is cold, mindful awareness would involve noticing that it is cold, and maybe
curiously paying attention to what those sensations of coldness feel like—as if
you were going to describe them, or explain what the experience was like to
someone who didn't have feet. That's different from thinking about having cold
feet, which might involves words in our minds like Crap, my feet are cold again. I should
have worn my warm winter socks. Darn it! Get the difference?

Josh: (Chuckles a bit.) I think so.

Therapist: So if you notice yourself thinking instead of observing—and you probably
will—no worries. When you notice that, just try to bring your attention back to
the experience. We'll talk more about the thinking bit and how to handle that
later. I'm also going to turn on my digital recorder here so that we can record the
exercise in an mp3 that we can load onto your phone before we finish today, so
that you can listen to it if you'd like, when practicing at home. Sound good?

Josh: Sounds good. | can just record it on my phone right now.

Therapist: Great. (Waits a few moments while Josh sets up his phone to record.) First, sit up in an
upright, alert posture, with your head up. We don't want to slump. Allow your
breath to take on a comfortable rhythm, and if you feel comfortable doing so,
allowing your eyes to close. If you prefer, feel free to keep your eyes open and
lower your gaze onto the floor about six to eight feet in front of you, allowing
your gaze to soften—to unfocus a bit. If you need to shift about a bit as we go,
or clear your throat, or anything like that, to remain comfortable—don’t worry
about it; just do it.

Josh: (Straightens bis posture and closes bis eyes.)


95

[PAGE 114]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: Let's start by bringing our awareness to the temperature in the room. Try to
notice sensations of warmth or coolness... (Waits fifteen to twenty seconds)...

e Now bringing your attention to external bodily sensations. ..the feeling of your feet on
the floor...legs, buttocks, and back on the chair... the sensation of your hands resting in
your lap. (Wait fifteen to twenty seconds.)

e Now noticing information coming in through your other senses...sounds coming in
through your ears...my voice, the rush of the heating system, the buzz of the lights...
patterns of light on your eyelids... (Wait fifteen to twenty seconds.)

e Now following these sensations into the body, noticing any internal bodily sensations.
Bringing awareness to sensations like hunger or fullness, tension or relaxation, comfort
or soreness. Just noticing these sensations, just as they are. (Wait five to ten seconds.) If any
of these sensations call out for your attention, let it go to them, settling on the sensation
and noticing what it is like... (Wait fifteen to twenty seconds.)

e Now bringing awareness to the sensation of the breath. Noticing how quickly or slowly
the breath enters and leaves your body. Noticing the heart rate... (Wait fifteen to twenty
seconds.)

e Following these sensations of arousal or relaxation, shifting your awareness to any emo-
tions you may be feeling. Interest? Boredom? Anticipation? Curiosity? Just noticing
these feelings as events in the mind. (Wait thirty seconds.)

e Now that we've brought the attention to our feelings, allowing it to shift to another
mental experience...thoughts. Notice any thoughts—any words or images—arising in
your mind. Thoughts like, Is be going to talk in that slow voice the whole time? Just noticing any
thoughts that might be coming through your mind, watching them arise and pass. (Wait
thirty seconds.)

e And if you like, you might bring your attention to the relationship between your
thoughts and emotions. ..perhaps noticing that when you have certain types of thoughts,
certain types of feelings tend to arise as well. Perhaps noticing that when youre feeling
certain emotions, certain thoughts tend to arise. (Pause for thirty seconds.)

e And when youre ready, allowing the breath to take a comfortable rhythm, gently
opening the eyes, and returning the attention to the room...

The first time, this practice will take five to ten minutes to go through, but we want to let
clients know that it can actually happen much more quickly. This practice isn't designed to be a
long meditation—although it can certainly serve as one if the client wants to spend more time on
any of these aspects of his experience. Rather, it is designed to be an efficient way for the client to
learn to establish the habit of checking in with his body, emotions, and thoughts. The purpose is to


96

[PAGE 115]

Compassionate Awareness: Cultivating Mindfulness


establish the ability (and the tendency) to efficiently notice his bodily experience and what he is
feeling and thinking, mindfully noticing and accepting these experiences exactly as they are—
sensations, thoughts, and feelings. With a little practice, this check-in can be done in thirty seconds
to a minute, as the client efficiently brings his attention to his body, feelings, and thoughts in fairly
rapid succession. Learned in this way, the client won't need thirty minutes on a meditation cushion
to mindfully connect with his experiences—he’ll be able to do it during a television commercial,
or stopped in traffic, or in the line at the supermarket.
When we're giving these instructions, we want to use a generally calm, slightly slowed tone of
voice—but remember, were not trying to put the client to sleep. I find that some natural variation
in vocal tone and speed of speech can help keep clients engaged in the exercise. While the practice
is fairly straightforward, it’s also good to record the exercise so that the client can use it (or listen
to it for a reminder of how to do the practice) at home. | have this exercise and a few others available on my website so that clients can access them that way as well. These days, many clients will
have phone apps that can record the exercises during the session.
There are some variations of the exercise that clients may find useful. Once they've gotten the
basic practice, we can suggest that they check in with their three circles. They can either try to
notice which of the three circles (threat, drive, safeness) is most dominant in their bodies, emotions, and thoughts, or perhaps rate each of the three circles on a 1-to-10 or 1-to-100 scale. Again,
the idea is to get clients in the habit of noticing how threatened, motivated, or safe they are feeling.
We can also suggest that they pause to do this whenever they notice the arising of (or after
noticing they are caught up in) a particular emotion or string of thoughts. We can model this in
session (for example, “It looks like something is happening for you right now. What’s happening
with those three circles? How is that playing out in terms of your bodily experience? What feelings
are showing up? What thoughts are running through your mind?”). In this way, we're introducing
clients to a nonshaming way of talking about and relating to emotional experiences that may previously have been experienced as unpredictable and overwhelming.
We can use these observations as a platform for helping clients explore and become familiar
with how thoughts and emotions play out in their bodies and minds. This can help take the sting
out of such experiences as we look closely and curiously at them not as something to fear, but as
valid aspects of their experience that we seek to understand. We're helping clients learn to approach these
basic human experiences in a curious, manageable, and helpful way—which is a core part of
compassion.


MINDFUL BREATHING

While the Mindful Check-In gives us an easy way to introduce mindfulness to clients that doesn’t
require extensive practice time, there is much to be gained from longer, more meditative mindfulness practices as well. First, there’s a growing body of scientific literature that supports the ability
of such practices to quite literally grow the parts of our brains that are involved with things like


97

[PAGE 116]

CFT Made Simple


emotion regulation and interpersonal relationships. Second, more extended mindfulness sessions
are likely to be more helpful in assisting clients in developing attentional control, the ability to
notice movement in the mind, and the capacity to tolerate distress.


Teaching Mindful Breathing
In essence, mindful breathing is a fairly straightforward practice: were training the client to
settle her attention on the sensation of the breath, and to bring it back to the breath whenever she
notices the attention has strayed. Notice and return—that’s the practice. While different mindfulness
teachers will give the instructions in slightly different ways, there are some basic components that
tend to be present:

Sitting in an upright, comfortable posture.

Eyes closed, or gaze lowered to a spot six to eight feet in front with an unfocused, or
“softened,” gaze, or a gaze focused on the tip of the nose.

Breathing at a natural, comfortable rate.

The attention settled on the breath, wherever it can be found most easily. This can
include the tip of the nose, where it enters and leaves the body, the rise and fall of the
abdomen, the path of the breath through the body, or any place the client finds it com-
fortable to anchor the attention.

When the client notices her attention has wandered—distracted by thoughts, emo-
tions, or sensations—she gently brings it back to the breath. Some teachers prompt the
practitioner to label the distraction: thinking, listening, and so on.

It’s good to set an external timer to remind the meditator that the session is completed.
There are numerous meditation timer applications with soothing gong tones that work
well for this purpose.

Let’s look at an example of how this exercise can be introduced in a session:

Therapist: Jenny, I'm glad you found time to do the Mindful Check-Ins we introduced last
session this week. How did you like them?

Jenny: In the beginning, it was hard to remember to do it. So | started setting the timer
on my phone. That really helped.

Therapist: Good thinking. What did you notice about the practices?

Jenny: One thing I noticed was that it made it easier to get things done.

Therapist: (leaning in a bit, with an interested look) Tell me more about that.


98

[PAGE 117]

Compassionate Awareness: Cultivating Mindfulness


Jenny: Well, a lot of the time when I start to do something, I'll have lots of thoughts
like, Why should I do this? There's no point to it. Or Pll go through all the different ways
that it could go wrong. This week, a few times, I was able to notice those
thoughts, but keep going anyway.

Therapist: So “Anxious Jenny” still had a lot to say, but you were able to let her have her
say and keep going anyway. That’s great.

Jenny: Yeah. | do find myself wondering when someone besides Anxious Jenny will have
something to say.

Therapist: No worries—we
re going to work on developing “Compassionate Jenny” as
well—a version of you that is compassionate, kind, strong, wise, and confident.

Jenny: Pd really like that.

Therapist: Actually, it sounds to me like Compassionate Jenny is already showing up.
That's the version of you that kept you going even after Anxious Jenny shared
her reluctance.

Jenny: Hmmm. (Looks a bit thoughtful.)

Therapist: We're going to be sending Compassionate Jenny to the gym, and one way
to begin doing that is by introducing that second mindfulness practice we
mentioned last session—mindful breathing. How does that sound?

Jenny: Sounds good.

Therapist: Mindful breathing is quite literally sending Compassionate Jenny to the gym—
there are scientific studies showing that practicing mindful breathing over time
can actually grow the parts of the brain that help us with managing our emotions
and relationships with others. To start, let’s sit up in a comfortable, upright
position, head held up but not too high. (Models position.)

Jenny: Like this?

Therapist: Just like that. This exercise will take a bit longer than the check-in, so again, if
you feel the need to shift, clear your throat, swallow, or anything like that—
don't worry about it, just go ahead and do it. You may also find it useful to have
your mouth slightly open, with the tongue touching the roof of the mouth just
behind the teeth.

Jenny: (Shifts a bit.)

Therapist: Now, allowing your eyes to close...


99

[PAGE 118]

CFT Made Simple


Jenny: (Closes eyes.)

Therapist: Breathing in and out through the nose, allowing your breath to take on a
comfortable rhythm—just breathing naturally, not attempting to slow down or
speed up anything. Settling the attention on the breath, wherever you feel it
most easily. That could be the tip of the nose where the breath enters and leaves
the body, the rise and fall of the abdomen, or following the breath in and out of
the body. (Waits thirty seconds.)
As you breathe, you'll sometimes find your attention moving away from the
breath as you become distracted by thoughts, sounds, or other things. This isn’t
a bad thing. It actually helps us learn to notice movement in our minds. When
this happens, whether you've been distracted for a moment or for quite a long
time, just notice the distraction and gently bring your attention back to the
breath, over and over, again and again. This is the practice—settle the attention
on the breath, notice the distraction, gently come back to the breath. Notice,
and return.

Jenny: (Sits quietly, breathing.)

Therapist: (Waits thirty seconds.) Notice the distraction, return to the breath.

Therapist: (Waits one minute.) Notice and return.

Therapist: (Waits one minute, thirty seconds.) And when youre ready, gently opening the eyes,
bringing your attention to the room.

Jenny: (Slowly opens her eyes over the course of thirty seconds or so.) Mmmm.

Therapist: So that was three minutes or so after | stopped giving instructions. What did
you notice?


Jenny: It felt like a really long time. It was relaxing, but also a little frustrating. Overall,
I liked it.

Therapist: So it felt like longer than three minutes?

Jenny: A lot longer. | never just sit quietly like that.

Therapist: It can feel like a lot longer, particularly when our minds are used to being so
busy all the time. It can take a while for them to get used to sitting quietly,
watching the breath. You mentioneda little frustration—did you find yourself
getting distracted?

Jenny: That's when Pd get frustrated. It seemed like I’d be focused on the breath for
just a second and then Id start thinking, over and over again.


100

[PAGE 119]

Compassionate Awareness: Cultivating Mindfulness


Therapist: (Smiles and chuckles a bit.) Yep—that’s just what it’s like! The same thing happened
for me when I was learning. Sometimes it still does.

Jenny: Really?

Therapist: Oh yeah! Sometimes I'll have really sneaky thoughts—I’m sitting there like,
This is a great meditation session. I’m completely focused on my breath. No thoughts at all. I’m
getting really good at this. 'm thinking the whole time!

Jenny: (Smiles and laughs gently.)

Therapist: It’s easy to get frustrated if our drive system sets up sticking to the breath as a
goal. When we get distracted, we think we're failing at our goal. The key is to
remember that one purpose of the practice is learning to notice movement in the mind.
And these distracting thoughts give us the perfect opportunity to do this. If we
never got distracted, we'd never learn to notice what it feels like when thoughts
take us away. So it’s not a problem—does that make sense?

Jenny: That helps.

Therapist. Want to try it again—say, for five minutes this time?

Jenny: Sounds good.

Therapist. Excellent. ll set my timer then, and let's move into an upright posture, close
our eyes, and bring the attention to the breath...

The above example demonstrates one way of presenting mindful breathing to clients. Again,
assuming that mindful breathing will be assigned as homework, it’s good to record the exercise or
to provide the client with links to online mp3 recordings of the practices. Notice that in the vignette
above, the therapist introduces the practice by giving brief instructions on how to hold the body
and speaking briefly to various obstacles that might come up (instructing Jenny to shift if she needs
to, for example).
It’s also important to follow up after the practice, to see how the client experienced it, and to
explore, validate, and address any obstacles that may have come up. Notice also that the therapist
refers to his own practice, and shares his own challenges with the client, using a bit of humor along
the way. Doing so underscores the importance of the practice (it’s important enough that the
therapist practices as well), validates the difficulty, and reduces the likelihood of related selfcriticism (the “expert” therapist sometimes struggles with the same things), and models how to
handle such obstacles with good humor (working to soften the implicit frustration response with a
bit of levity). Also note how the therapist utilizes the language of CFT, referring to “Anxious
Jenny,” “Compassionate Jenny,” and the drive system—helping shape her mastery of the CFT concepts she’s been learning.


101

[PAGE 120]

CFT Made Simple


One last comment: | strongly, strongly advise, if you're going to be using mindful breathing (or
any other mindfulness practice) in therapy, that you will have practiced using the technique yourself (and optimally will have an ongoing practice). It will give you an experience of the practice to
draw upon when explaining it to the client. It will help you observe the obstacles from the inside
out, and what it takes to work with them. Finally, mindful awareness itself produces many practical
benefits that can potentially improve one’s capacity to be an effective CFT therapist. At a practical
level, think about it—mindfulness and compassion aren't just therapy “techniques.” They are
complex capacities and skills that we
re helping clients develop. Would you choose to learn to play
an instrument or a sport from someone who had never played it? While the best practitioners don't
always make the best teachers (and vice versa), teachers should have some mastery of the skills they
are instructing.


OTHER MINDFULNESS PRACTICES
There are numerous other mindfulness practices our clients might find helpful as they work to
bring this purposeful, present-focused, accepting, nonjudgmental awareness into their lives. Almost
any activity or experience can be chosen as a focus of mindfulness. The idea is that we select where
were going to focus our attention, bringing our awareness to this experience and then nonjudgmentally noticing and exploring it. Whenever distractions arise, we notice them, and bring the
attention back to our chosen focus. Typically we'll want to start with sensory experiences like the
breath, physical sensations in the body, or sensory input coming in from outside the body. However,
we can also use mental images or even ideas as the focus of concentration, or we can rest in open
awareness, not anchoring the attention to any specific focus, and simply noticing whatever arises in
our experience without clinging to or pushing away any of it. Here are a few commonly used mindfulness exercises:

e Mindfulness of the Body—bringing nonjudgmental awareness to bodily sensations

e Mindful Eating—eating slowly and noticing all sensory aspects of the food or the
eating


e Mindful Walking— walking slowly, bringing mindful awareness to all the sensations
that come with walking

e Mindful Showering—showering while mindfully focusing on the feeling of water
hitting the skin

e Mindful Task Completion—doing tasks like dishwashing or cleaning and mindfully
noticing all the sensory experiences one has while completing the activity

e Mindful Exercise—mindfully focusing the attention on physical activity (such as yoga)


102

[PAGE 121]

Compassionate Awareness: Cultivating Mindfulness


The idea is to come up with a variety of activities in which clients can apply mindful awareness.
We work collaboratively with them to come up with activities that they are interested in, to keep
motivation for the practice high.
Over time, this sort of mind training can help clients learn to settle the mind, gradually quieting the endless torrent of thoughts as they get better and better at bringing their attention to the
present moment. This can pave the way for lots of good things. As clients learn to endure the initial
discomfort of sitting quietly with a busy mind, they learn to tolerate distress and persevere when
things are difficult, and are reinforced as their efforts begin to pay off. These practices also set the
stage for the development of compassionate wisdom. For centuries, Buddhist practitioners have
used exercises like the mindful-breathing practice described above to prepare the mind for more
involved analytical meditations—learning to stabilize the mind so that they could deeply contemplate things like compassion and the nature of reality. Once our clients have gotten comfortable
with the more focused practices, they may wish to take some meditation time to explore the questions that compassionate reasoning will often bring up: What sort of person do I want to ber What do I want
my life to be about? How do I want to contribute to the lives of others, and to the world?


WORKING WITH OBSTACLES IN
MINDFULNESS TRAINING
When presenting clients with practices we'd like them to follow through with, it’s important to
troubleshoot around obstacles that might arise. There are some common obstacles that can get in
the way when we're teaching mindfulness—particularly mindful breathing. The extent to which we
can plan for and address these obstacles on the front end can increase the likelihood that clients
will be able to establish an ongoing mindfulness practice.


Forgetting
Perhaps the most common obstacle is simply not remembering to practice. 'd recommend
naming this as a likely obstacle when planning the homework to begin with, and working collaboratively with clients to plan good times to do it (for example, when they will be alert, not sleepy), and
ways to prompt themselves (such as setting an alarm): “One common challenge that can come up
when learning mindfulness is simply forgetting to do the practice. What do you think might help
you remember?”


Avoidance and Low Motivation
In my experience, if | try to have clients start out by doing thirty minutes of mindfulness practice per day, they often won't be able do it, and may well not want to do it. That's a long time for


103

[PAGE 122]

CFT Made Simple


someone with no experience of sitting quietly and watching the breath. We need to remember two
things: First, consider how hard it can be to create twenty to thirty minutes of free space in your life
to do something new—even when it's something youre motivated to do and know will be very
good for you. Not so easy? It’s the same for many of our clients. Additionally, many of our clients
(like us) live in overstimulating environments filled with constantly shifting media, electronic gadgetry, text-message conversations, and so on, that may have tuned their neurological systems to
expect high levels of ongoing stimulation. When you've adapted to function in the face of an
ongoing cacophony of flashing screens, beeping phones, and rapid-fire interactions, the relatively
quiet, inactive state of mindfulness meditation can initially feel disorienting, agitating, or downright uncomfortable.
So what to do? First, we can acknowledge these potential obstacles, so that if and when they arise,
our clients understand them as common, completely understandable occurrences and not as something that’s wrong with me. Second, we want to start small. While it depends on the individual client,
I’ve often begun with two to five minutes per day of mindful breathing for the first week—then
increasing by five- or ten-minute increments, paced according to how the client is feeling and how
it’s working. We want to start with a level of practice that can be sustained, and which gives clients
a feeling of success when they're able to complete it. If we start with the bar too high, an initial
failure to follow through can kill the client’s motivation. However, if this happens at any point, we
can problem-solve around obstacles with the client—in nonshaming, nonblaming ways which validate that there will often be obstacles that get in our way. Part of working compassionately with life
challenges is learning to work compassionately with obstacles: “It can initially be really hard to keep
up a mindfulness practice, and there are lots of obstacles that can get in the way. What got in the
way of you being able to follow through with our plan? Let’s see if we can figure out something that
will help make it easier.”


Feeling Like a Failure
If | had a dollar for everyone who has decided to take up mindful breathing and then has given
it up soon after, feeling like they “just can't do it,” I suspect I'd have enough money to fund my
research assistants until | retire. The instruction to “settle your attention on the breath, and gently
bring it back when you notice that it has wandered” seems like a simple one. It is simple. It’s just not
easy. Well-meaning practitioners will often start out very excited to have this tranquil meditation
experience, only to give up in frustration as they observe that their minds are bounding about in
every which way, with almost no time in which their attention is actually focused on the breath.
Even if our fancy new brains know that our attention will wander and that this isn’t a failure, our
old-brain emotional centers will often register frustration as we find ourselves distracted by
thoughts again and again.
To soften this tendency, we can let clients know ahead of time that they will become distracted,
and that this isn’t a bad thing. It’s really not a bad thing. As | mentioned above, one goal of mindfulness is to learn greater control over the attention—and over time, practitioners will be able to keep


104

[PAGE 123]

Compassionate Awareness: Cultivating Mindfulness


their attention on the breath for longer and longer periods of time. However, we can emphasize
that another goal of mindfulness meditation is learning to notice movement in the mind. When
thoughts, emotions, and sensations take us away from the breath, we have the chance to notice this
movement—an opportunity that wouldn't be there if our attention never strayed. So these distractions actually give us valuable opportunities to learn to notice the arising of thoughts and emotions,
to notice when we ve disappeared into them, and to bring our attention back to the breath when
this happens.
One last piece: Clients will sometimes struggle with having thoughts that come up during
meditation that they don't want to let go. This happens for me a lot, as I'll often do my mindfulness
meditation in the morning before settling down to write. Thoughts come up that I'll want to
include in my writing. As you might imagine, attempting to hold these thoughts in mind while
simultaneously returning to the breath is problematic for the practice. But it’s no problem—I keep
a pad of paper and pen in close proximity to my meditation cushion so that | can jot down any
thoughts | want to make sure not to lose. This practice can be useful for clients as well.


SUMMARY
Like relational safeness and understanding the unchosen factors that shape how we develop, mindful
awareness is an important part of the foundation that underlies the development of compassion in
CFT. Mindfulness practices help clients learn to observe their emotions and experiences in accepting, nonjudgmental ways; to notice movement in their minds, and to use their attention to work
with and tolerate difficult emotions. These capacities set the stage for what will be our focus for
much of the rest of the book: the purposeful cultivation of compassionate strengths.


105

[PAGE 125]

CHAPTER 8


Committing to Compassion:
Working with Self-Criticism


Hopefully by now, much of the foundation for self-compassion will have been laid, with self-blame
softening as clients recognize that many of their struggles were caused and shaped by unchosen
factors, and as they get a taste of what it’s like to curiously observe their thoughts and emotions
without judging them. From this point forward, we focus our attention solidly on helping clients
cultivate compassion for themselves and for others, and applying that compassion in working with
their difficulties.
For many clients, the idea of self-compassion can be very foreign—they may be able to connect
with compassion for others, but have little ability or willingness to direct it toward themselves.
Their internal self-critic may be a constant companion, and may have become the primary way they
attempt to motivate themselves in life. Such clients can have great reluctance around disempowering their self-critic and directing compassion toward themselves. Some may fear that if this harsh
but familiar voice is silenced, they will lose the ability to motivate themselves at all—perhaps bringing about the life outcomes they most dread. They may also feel that they deserve this shame and
self-criticism, seeing self-compassion as indulgent or inappropriate.
In the face of such resistance, we may be tempted to convince our clients of the merits of selfcompassion by telling them how it is better than self-criticism. While trying to sell clients on the
virtues of self-compassion might be helpful, in my experience, this can sometimes paradoxically set
them up to defend the self-critic. Instead, we can facilitate exploration on the part of clients, using
Socratic dialogue and thought exercises to help them recognize compassion as a powerful way to
motivate themselves—in a way that doesn’t have the negative side effects of shame and selfcriticism. Rather than argue whether or not they deserve criticism or compassion, we want to assist

[PAGE 126]

CFT Made Simple


them in exploring what would be helpful as they work with their suffering, tackle the difficult aspects
of their lives, and pursue their goals, dreams, and values.


SOCRATIC DIALOGUE
When we have clients who are reluctant to let go of self-criticism, it can be useful to explore their
thinking around the function served by the criticism. We can use a rather standard “CFT move” in
doing this, which involves asking the client a variant of “What would be the risk if you
did ? What are you afraid might happen if you did this?” Let’s consider how we might
use this strategy with someone having an extensive history of self-critical thinking:

Therapist. Jenny, we've been working on developing compassion. A big part of this is
learning to relate warmly to ourselves when we observe ourselves struggling.
This can be a big shift if we're used to criticizing and attacking ourselves.
Some of us say harsh, critical things to ourselves that we’d never imagine
saying to others.

Jenny: I’m like that. For years, I’ve constantly run myself down. It’s so ridiculous.
Everyone else can manage to do the things they need to without freaking out
all of the time. What’s wrong with me?

Therapist: So your internal self-critic speaks up loudly and often, running you down when
youre having a hard time? Has it always been like this?

Jenny: For a long time, it has. It’s like it’s always there. Since I was a kid, anyway.

Therapist: So your self-critic feels very familiar—she’s been around for a very long time.
We're going to work with self-critical thoughts in the way that we've worked
with the anxious ones—by noticing and payinga little less attention to that
self-critical voice, and developing an encouraging, self-compassionate voice.
How does that sound?

Jenny: (Looks a bit skeptical.) | don’t know about that.

Therapist: (gently smiling) You don’t know about that?

Jenny: It just doesn’t seem realistic, you know.

Therapist: It sounds like there's some reluctance there—let’s explore that. Let's imagine
that you were able to stop listening to the voice of that internal self-critic, or that
she were just to give up and go away. Would you be reluctant to give that
self-criticism up?


108

[PAGE 127]

Committing to Compassion: Working with Self-Criticism


Jenny: (Pauses, thinking.) | think I might. | think it would be hard to give it up.

Therapist: What would be the risk if you did give it up? What would you be worried
might happen?

Jenny: Sometimes | think it’s like, if I run myself down first, ’m making it so other
people can’t hurt me. If I say those things to me first, when they say it, it won't
hurt as much.

Therapist: Whereas if you allowed yourself to relax and feel safe and comfortable with
yourself...

Jenny: Then they could hurt me. Like when | was in school. | moved there, looking
forward to meeting people, and they just came at me from out of the blue.
Now, if someone were to say terrible things about me, it would be like, Of course.
What else you got? I already know that.

Therapist: That makes a lot of sense to me. It hurt so much when that happened. You want
to make sure you don’t get blindsided again.

Jenny: Yeah.

Therapist: Are there any other reasons you might be reluctant to stop listening to the
voice of that internal self-critic? Any other things you fear might happen if
you were to stop running yourself down?

Jenny: I’m afraid | wouldn't do anything. It’s really hard, but | manage to go to class
and do the stuff I have to do, because | don't want to be even more pathetic. |
guess I’m afraid that if I didn't have that self-critic, Pd just hide out in my
room and not do anything. It’s like this group project I told you about in my
communications class. When the teacher first split us into groups, I thought
about just sneaking out of the room—like I was going to the bathroom—and
then not come back.

Therapist: And your internal self-critic kept that from happening?

Jenny: Yeah. | just thought, Jenny, stop being so stupid. You're going to look like an idiot if you do this.
Don't be a loser. So | stayed. | hated it, but I stayed.

Therapist: So you use self-criticism as a way to motivate yourself, and youre afraid you
wouldn't do anything if that critical voice were quieted?

Jenny: Yeah. I’m afraid !’d just hole up in my room, and eventually flunk out of school
and have to move back in with my parents, which would be awful.


109

[PAGE 128]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: It seems like we've learned some important things here, Jenny. It sounds like you
feel your self-critic serves two important functions: to protect you from being
blindsided by attacks from other people, and to keep you going, doing the things
you need to do. Does that sound right?

Jenny: It does.

Therapist: So it sounds to me that if we’re going to find a way for you to turn down the
volume on the self-critic, then we need to find other, more helpful ways for you
to feel safe and motivate yourself. Would you be interested in exploring whether
your compassionate self could do those jobs at least as well as the self-critic?

Jenny: Pd be up for trying.

In the above vignette, the therapist uses Socratic dialogue to explore Jenny's resistance around
giving up self-criticism, and in particular, identifying the functions she ascribes to self-criticism that
might lead her to be reluctant to give it up. It is often the case that clients will feel their self-critic
serves important functions in their lives—functions that will need to be met in other, more adaptive ways if clients are to commit themselves to developing more compassionate ways of relating to
themselves. You might consider the ways you use self-criticism in your own life, and what you
might be afraid of losing if you were to give it up. Let’s explore a thought exercise that can help us
try to build motivation around developing new, compassionate ways of relating to the self.


Two Teachers Vignette
While many of us may use self-criticism as an attempt to motivate, protect, or “keep ourselves
in line,” clinging to the self-critic for these purposes is based on a logical fallacy—that self-attacking
is the only way to motivate ourselves, or perhaps the best way. Even if self-shaming and self-attacking
do seem to serve some useful purposes, they do so at a great cost, keeping us stuck in the threat
system (with narrowed attention and thinking, focused on threats) and diminishing our happiness.
We want to help clients discover ways to encourage, motivate, support, and protect themselves
that don’t have these drawbacks. As we've seen, one way to do this is through the development of
self-compassion—the ability to be sensitive, validating, and encouraging in the face of one’s suffering and struggle. In the beginning, we may need to help clients develop motivation to make this
shift from self-criticism to self-compassion. One of my favorite methods for doing this is the “Two
Teachers” vignette, an experiential exercise commonly used by CFT therapists (Gilbert, 2009a):

Therapist: Josh, we've been talking about how you see your self-critic as working to protect
and motivate you, and I’ve suggested that we might be able to find other ways to
do those things. Related to that, Id like to do a brief imaginal exercise and then
ask you some questions. Would that be all right?


110

[PAGE 129]

Committing to Compassion: Working with Self-Criticism


Josh: I guess.

Therapist: | want you to imagine a child that you care very much about— maybe it’s your
child, maybe someone else’s—but you care very deeply about him. This child
is learning a very difficult task, maybe learning to do algebra for the first time,
learning a musical instrument, or to play a challenging sport. Have you ever
done any of that stuff?

Josh: I play guitar.

Therapist: Then you know that when you first begin playing, it’s really hard—and you have
to practice quite a lot before you get to sounding very good.

Josh: Youve got that right.

Therapist: So I want you to imagine that in learning this task, the child could have one of
two teachers. First, let’s imagine that he has a harsh, critical teacher, who tries to
motivate him by running him down. Imagine how this teacher might interact
with him: “No! ... No! ... Wrong again! ... Cant you get anything right? ...
Not like that, like this! ... No! ... No! ... What's wrong with you? Are you
stupid? ... No!”

Josh: Sounds familiar. My dad used to talk to me like that all the time.

Therapist: It’s no secret where you learned to criticize yourself, is it?

Josh: (Nods pensively.)

Therapist: Now, let's imagine a second teacher this child could have. This teacher is
compassionate, really wanting to help the child learn. He understands that this
is a really difficult task, and that anyone would struggle with it, especially in the
beginning. This teacher is wise, knowing that what he really needs to do is find
ways to encourage this child to keep going—knowing that the key to mastering
this task is for the child to keep working at it, and that he's more likely to do
that if he enjoys the experience. Let's imagine how this teacher might approach
this child: “There you go... There you go... Nice! ... Keep going... Not quite
like that, like this... Yes, that's right... You're doing really well —this is tough
but youre doing a great job keeping at it... There you go!”

Josh: (Relaxes a bit; breathing softens.)

Therapist: So now, a few questions. First, which of those teachers would you want this child
you care so much about to have? Which would you hire to teach him guitar, the
first or second?

[PAGE 130]

CFT Made Simple


Josh: The second.

Therapist. Me, too. Let’s look a bit deeper, though. Even if you didn’t particularly care
about this child, which teacher do you think would do a better job at teaching
him to do this difficult task?

Josh: The second.

Therapist: (Nods.) One last question. When you observe yourself struggling, which teacher
does the voice in your head sound like?

Josh: (Pauses; looks down.) You got me there. It’s the first. Every damn time.

Therapist. (Pauses; leans in a bit in silence.)

Josh: I think I get it.

Therapist: (warmly) Yeah. (Pauses.) So we’ve got some big tasks to tackle together. Which of
those teachers do you think we should hire to help us? It sounds like that critical
teacher has had his chance. Would you be willing to give that compassionate
teacher a try, to see if he might be able to help us out?

Josh: (Nods consideringly.) Yeah. That’d probably be worth a try.

Exercises like the one above allow us to introduce the idea and impact of compassion in a way
that is experiential—operating at both the explicit (thinking about the benefits of compassion) and
implicit (feeling the differential effects of criticism and compassion) levels. If it stays only at the
thinking level, we may find little shift in the client, as these self-critical habits may be very deeply
ingrained. We want the client to feel the difference, to connect with the realization that compassion is a
more powerful way to get his needs met and pursue his goals. In the vignette above, the therapist
works to accomplish this not just by describing the two teachers as critical or compassionate, but
by acting out what they would say from these perspectives (which also provides some modeling—
giving the client a glimpse into what compassion might look like in this situation). We see in the
vignette that Josh reacted nonverbally to these depictions. We also need to allow plenty of time for
the client to process what is happening within him, leaving plenty of space after the vignette to get
to the questions that prompt self-reflection, so that the client has time to connect with certain
realizations. You'll note that the therapist also matched the gender of both teacher and child to that
of the client—setting up the realization that the client plays both of these roles in relation to himself.
Some clients will respond in very different ways from how Josh did—sometimes digging into
the self-criticism, saying things like, “Well, that would work better for the child, but not for me,” or
“Thad the harsh teacher growing up, and I learned to play.” Again, we don't want to come straight
at this resistance, setting ourselves up as a threat cue and positioning the client to defend his selfcritic. Rather, we can explore with Socratic dialogue: “So for you, it feels like the criticism worked,
and youre really reluctant to give up that strategy?” or “It sounds like you're reluctant to relate


[12

[PAGE 131]

Committing to Compassion: Working with Self-Criticism


compassionately to yourself because you feel that you don’t deserve to be treated kindly and compassionately?” We can explore these ideas with the client and see if he might be willing to try an
experiment to see if compassion might work as an alternative to self-criticism.
Like any practice or technique, this practice requires attention to nuance, and won't work
equally well for everyone. Combat veterans whose training involved lots of people who sounded
just like that critical teacher may reply: “Id want my kid to have the first teacher. That first teacher
kept me alive.” Using Socratic dialogue, we could help such clients explore the differences between
the combat environment—an environment filled with physical threats—and civilian life, considering different strategies in terms of how they fit with the demands and concerns present in these
different contexts.


SUMMARY
In this chapter, we considered how we might help clients apply compassion in working with selfcriticism. Identifying the self-criticism, exploring reluctance to give it up, and prompting clients to
consider compassion as an alternative can be important steps in helping them really commit to
developing compassion for themselves. With clients who have well-entrenched shame and selfcritical habits, working with these tendencies requires patience and steadfastness, as they gradually
become better at mindfully noticing the arising of shame and self-criticism, acknowledging these
tendencies, compassionately noting how it makes sense that they would experience them, and purposefully shifting into a more compassionate perspective. In the next chapter, we'll explore what
such a perspective looks like.


113

[PAGE 133]

CHAPTER 9


Cultivating the
Compassionate Self


Compassion work first and foremost involves facilitating a shift in perspective, or social mentality, so
that our clients can approach their difficulties with flexible attention and reasoning, feelings of safeness, and the courageous motivation to approach and work helpfully with suffering. We want to
help clients shift from a threat-based perspective focused on avoiding or getting rid of feelings of
threat or discomfort, and into an orientation centered on developing strengths to help them compassionately engage and work with whatever arises—in their lives, or in their minds. In CFT, we call
this perspective the compassionate self.


THE COMPASSIONATE SELF

In CFT, were less interested in teaching clients compassion techniques, and more focused on
helping them cultivate compassionate lifestyls— ways of being in the world defined by open, courageous hearts, flexible minds, and a repertoire of effective behaviors to draw upon. The compassionate
self provides us with an organizing framework for the compassionate strengths we'll help our clients
develop—a compassionate version of the self that we'll continually be working to deepen and
strengthen (Gilbert, 2009a; 2010). In this way, CFT isn't about getting rid of unwanted experiences. It’s about cultivating this compassionate self that is wise, kind, confident, courageous, and
committed to working with whatever life presents.

[PAGE 134]

CFT Made Simple


A Method-Acting Approach
After reading those inspiring bits above, you may find yourself thinking, Well, this is all well and
good, but it seems awfully pie-in-the-sky. My clients have lots of real problems. Their experience of life isn’t anything like
that. Actually, my life doesn’t seem much like that, either.
As you might imagine, this is very a common experience. For clients whose lives are dominated
by one experience of threat after another, the idea of the compassionate self can seem impossibly
distant—so far from their lived experience as to seem ridiculous. This idea, that I! am nothing like that,
can be a primary obstacle, so we need to find a way to work with it.
We work with this in CFT by taking a method-acting approach to the development of the compassionate self (Gilbert, 2010). Actors quite often have to portray characters that are entirely different from how they experience themselves, with traits and characteristics that are nothing like
their own. How do they manage this? They do it by imagining what it would be like to be this character:
If I were this person, with these characteristics, how would I feel» What would I think> What would I be motivated to do?
Just as different emotions and motives organize our attention, felt emotion, thinking and imagery,
motivation, and behavior in very different ways, we can prompt clients to consider how their minds
would be organized if they possessed a deep wealth of compassionate qualities: compassionate
motivation, wisdom, confidence, commitment, and emotional courage. Rather than getting caught
up in debating whether or not they have these strengths, we assist them in imagining what it would be like
if they did possess them. Using imagery, we can assist clients in exploring how they would feel,
understand, and interpret situations; how they would relate to their own emotions and various
“emotional selves”, and what sorts of things they would be motivated to do from this compassionate
perspective. In this way, we can help them develop these compassionate ways of reasoning, feeling,
and behaving without getting caught up in thinking, I am nothing like this.


The Compassionate Self Practice
Now that we've introduced the Compassionate Self practice, let's explore how we might teach
it to clients. We begin by orienting clients to the method-acting approach, and then prompt them
to imagine what it would be like to have various compassionate qualities. While we can vary the
attributes featured in the exercise depending upon the needs of the client, we'll often anchor the
exercise to qualities of compassionate motivation (committed desire to be kind and helpful),
wisdom and understanding, and emotional courage and confidence. In general, we want to begin
with soothing rhythm breathing, then move to bodily experiences of warmth and strength, and
then lead the client through a process of imagining what it would be like to have various compassionate mental qualities:

Therapist. Jenny, now that we've committed ourselves to inviting that second teacher on
board, Pd like to introduce the Compassionate Self practice. In this exercise,
Pll ask you to imagine what it would be like to have various compassionate


116

[PAGE 135]

Cultivating the Compassionate Self


qualities—like a committed desire to help yourself and others, a deep wisdom
to understand and work with difficulties, and the confidence and courage to
face difficult situations and work with them. Before we begin, do you have
any questions?


Jenny: (looking skeptical) That sounds like a stretch. It doesn’t sound like me at all.

Therapist: That's the beauty of the exercise. We're going to approach this exercise like
were actors playing a movie role that may be completely different from how
we think of ourselves. Instead of thinking about whether or not were actually
like this, we're going to imagine what it would be like if we did have these qualities—what
it would feel like, what we would understand, how we would think. . that sort
of thing. Would you be willing to try that?

Jenny: Okay. Ill give it a try.

Therapist: So we'll start in a familiar way. Let's assume a comfortable, upright position,
and take about thirty seconds to slow down our breathing. (Waits thirty seconds to
one minute.)

Jenny: (Straightens, closes her eyes, and slows her breathing.)

Therapist: Now, allowing the breath to return to a normal, comfortable rate. (Waits three to
five seconds.) Now Um going to ask you to imagine what it would be like to have
different qualities. As I describe the qualities, try to imagine what it would be
like if you had them—what you would feel, think, and experience if you were a
deeply compassionate person who had already succeeded in developing these
qualities. If you struggle at imagining this, you might bring to mind someone
you think has these qualities, and imagine how it might feel to be like that
person. Give me a gentle nod when you're ready to continue.

Jenny: (Nods.)

Therapist: First, imagine that your body feels calm, peaceful, and safe—filled with warmth
and strength. Allow a gentle smile to cross your face. (Waits thirty seconds)...

e Imagine that along with this warmth and strength, you are filled with a kind, committed
motivation to help those who are suffering—yourself and others. Imagine that this kind
wish to help fills you and builds within you, filling you with strength and purpose. Feel
this deep wish to help. (Waits thirty seconds to one minute.)

e Imagine that along with this committed motivation, you are filled with wisdom. Imagine
that you are able to think flexibly, and to see things from different perspectives. Aware
that difficult situations and emotions come and go, you are able to keep from being


117

[PAGE 136]

CFT Made Simple


captured by these experiences, and can draw upon your life experience in working with
them. Knowing that difficult experiences are just a part of life, you are able to keep
from judging them or yourself, and can look deeply—to understand where these feel-
ings and experiences come from, how they make sense, and what would be helpful in
working with them. Imagine being filled with this wisdom. (Waits thirty seconds to one
minute.)

e Imagine that with this kind motivation and wisdom, there arises a deeply felt sense of
confidence. Feel this confidence filling you with courage. You're filled with the willing-
ness to engage with difficult feelings and situations. It’s a feeling of knowing that whatever
arises, I can work with this, too. Feel this confidence and courage building within you, filling
you with strength. (Waits thirty seconds to one minute.)

Jenny: (Sits quietly, with ber eyes closed.)

Therapist: Imagining being filled with these qualities—kind, committed motivation to help,
deep wisdom; confidence; and emotional courage. Notice what it feels like as
these qualities build within you. (Waits thirty seconds to one minute.)

e Focus on the feelings in your body—calm, peaceful, and strong. Imagine how you
would feel, and look, as this kind, wise, confident, compassionate being. (Waits twenty
seconds.)

e Imagine how you would experience the world as this deeply compassionate being—
what you would understand. (Waits a few seconds.) What sort of feelings would you feel?
(Waits a few seconds.) What sorts of thoughts would you think? (Waits a few seconds.) What
would you be motivated to do? What would you do? (Waits one to two minutes.)

Jenny: (Sits quietly, with ber eyes closed.)

Therapist. And when youre ready, allowing your eyes to open, and returning to the room.
See if you can carry a sense of wisdom, kindness, and confidence with you as we
continue. Feel free to stretch a bit if you like.

Jenny: (Slowly opens her eyes and stretches a bit.) Mmmm. | liked that

Therapist: (smiling gently) What did you like about it?

Jenny: It was really peaceful, and it was nice to think about being like that. Just really
comfortable.

Therapist. What was it like to imagine feeling like a deeply compassionate person—kind,
wise, and confident?


118

[PAGE 137]

Cultivating the Compassionate Self


Jenny: It was hard at first, like I couldn't really feel it. But I kept telling myself to just
imagine what it would be like. Toward the end, I could sort of feel it. It felt
different, at least.

Therapist: That’s an important observation. It can be hard to feel it in the beginning—so
sometimes all we can do is to imagine what it might be like if we could feel it. If
we focus on how we would see things from this compassionate perspective, it can
help—imagining the sorts of things we would think or understand if we had
these characteristics.

Jenny: It seemed to get easier as we went along.

Jenny’s observation that it was initially hard to feel like the compassionate self is a common one.
For many of our clients, this compassionate perspective is so different from their experience of
daily life that it may take a while before the feelings show up. The key is to keep shifting into that
compassionate perspective. It may help some clients to recall a time in which they really were compassionate, in which they were motivated to help someone else, did so, and felt good about it. It can
also be difficult to imagine having these characteristics in a vacuum—it can feel vague to imagine
being compassionate, kind, wise, or courageous without having a situation to reference. For this
reason, it’s good to move fairly quickly from imagining having these compassionate characteristics
to imagining how we might use them. Let’s consider a couple of ways we might do this.


Extending Compassion to the Vulnerable Self
One way we can help clients strengthen their sense of the compassionate self while also learning to apply compassion to themselves involves having them bring to mind a situation in which they
were struggling, and prompting them to extend compassion to that struggling version of themselves from the perspective of the current, compassionate self. In guiding such an exercise, the
therapist prompts the client to empathize with, sympathize with, and honor this previous, struggling version of the self—while imagining that she is extending compassion, encouragement, and
understanding to that suffering self. Let’s explore what this might look like:

Therapist: Jenny, now that we've gotten familiar with the compassionate self, I'd like to try
one more exercise. These compassionate qualities can feel a bit vague if we just
imagining baving them—to make it feel real, it can help to imagine applying them
in a particular situation. This is an exercise we can use to bring compassion to a
situation youve been struggling with. How does that sound?

Jenny: Sounds good.

Therapist: Excellent. Hopefully, the exercise will also help you develop some compassion
for yourself when you're struggling with the fear and anxiety we
ve been talking


119

[PAGE 138]

CFT Made Simple


about. First, Id like you to bring to mind a situation you've struggled with
recently—perhaps one in which you were really anxious, afraid, or self-critical.
Could you take a minute to bring up a situation like that and then tell me a bit
about it?

Jenny: (Sits quietly for a few moments.) As I was telling you last week, one of my teachers
announced that we'd be doing a group project in my communications course.
She split us up into groups and told us to meet to work on the project outside of
class. I was just sitting there, terrified. We exchanged phone numbers and we're
supposed to be meeting sometime this week. I’m dreading it—it makes me feel
sick to think about. | don’t know if I can do it.

Therapist: What’s the project like?

Jenny: We're supposed to do a group paper, and then give a presentation to the class.
It’s on effective communication with diverse groups—worth like one-third of
the points for the class. It’s an interesting topic, but I hate group projects.

Therapist: Does it make sense that this project would trigger your anxiety?

Jenny: Yep. It’s all the stuff I’m scared of, wrapped up into one convenient bundle.
I’m dreading our first meeting. Were supposed to split up duties and figure
out who's responsible for what... It’s hard for me to speak up, so I know
they're going to think I’m a slacker.

Therapist: This sounds like a perfect situation for this exercise. Want to give it a shot?

Jenny: Might as well.

Therapist: Okay. Let’s start by assuming a comfortable, upright position, closing the
eyes, and doing thirty seconds or so of soothing rhythm breathing. (Waits thirty
seconds to one minute.)

Jenny: (Closes her eyes and slows ber breathing.)

Therapist: Now, feeling sensations of calm, warmth, and strength filling your body, let’s
bring to mind those qualities of the compassionate self. Allowing a kind smile
to cross your lips, imagining what your body would feel like as this deeply
compassionate person. (Waits fifteen to thirty seconds)...

e Imagine being filled with a deeply felt sense of kindness—a kind, committed desire to
help yourself and all those who are suffering. Feel this kind commitment growing in
you. (Waits thirty seconds.)


120

[PAGE 139]

Cultivating the Compassionate Self


e Imagine that with this kind motivation, you are filled with a deep wisdom and
understanding—able to think flexibly, see things from multiple perspectives, and figure
out what to do. (Waits thirty seconds.)

e Imagine that alongside this wisdom, you experience a powerful feeling of confidence
and courage—a deeply felt sense that whatever happens, I can work with this, too. It’s a sense
of knowing—knowing that you can help. (Waits thirty seconds.)

Jenny: (Sits quietly.)

Therapist: Now bring to mind that situation back in the classroom. You've been split up
into groups. See that vulnerable, anxious version of you sitting there with this
group of people, sharing her phone number. From this kind, wise, compassionate
perspective, imagine looking in on that anxious version of you in that situation.
See how she is feeling. Can you see how hard it is for her?

Jenny: I can. She's terrified. She doesn't know if she's going to be able to do it.

Therapist: From this kind, wise, confident perspective, see ifit's possible for you to be
touched by her suffering, to have compassion for this anxious version of you
who only wants to get a good grade in the course. A long time ago, some
classmates treated her terribly, and she learned to be really scared in situations
like this. Can you understand why she would be so scared? Does it make sense
that she would be terrified?

Jenny: It does. It does make sense that she’d feel this way. She's so scared that she's
going to be embarrassed, or humiliated.

Therapist: It’s not her fault, is it?

Jenny: No. It’s not.

Therapist: Seeing how hard it is for her, is it possible for you to feel some warmth and
compassion for her? To wish that you could somehow help her? How do you
feel for her?

Jenny: I feel bad for her, and | do wish that I could help her. It’s so hard for her.

Therapist: That feeling you're having—being moved by her struggle—that’s
compassion. Feel this compassionate wish to help her. See how courageous
she’s being, this anxious version of you, staying there even though she’s
terrified. (Waits a few seconds.)

Jenny: (Sits quietly with eyes closed.)


121

[PAGE 140]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: Imagine that this strong, compassionate version of you could be there with her.
Imagine youre there with her, and only she can see or hear you. Consider how
you would be there for this struggling version of yourself—how you might help
her to feel safe, how you might encourage her. You know her better than anyone
else, and you know what she would need. How would you help her?

Jenny: I don’t think I'd say anything to her. I'd just sit there with her, maybe holding
her hand. Just trying to help her feel safe. To let her know she’s okay, and that
I’m here for her.

Therapist: Imagine yourself sitting there with her, sending her kindness, understanding, and
support. You understand what she’s going through—you get how hard it is for
her, and how hard she’s working just to be there. She’s so strong, facing these
fears, but she doesnt yet understand that. Allow yourself to feel good about
being able to support her in this moment, and imagine her being filled with the
kindness, support, and encouragement youre sending out to her. Are you able
to imagine that?

Jenny: (Sits quietly with ber eyes closed, slightly tearful but voice clear.) | am.

Therapist: (Waits a bit.) Imagine her being able to receive this understanding and support
from you. How might she feel?

Jenny: (Pauses.) Better. Still scared, but better. Supported. She's got someone on her side.

Therapist: From this compassionate perspective, what would you want her to understand?

Jenny: That she's going to be okay. And that I’m there to help her.

Therapist: (Pauses, smiling.) That's beautiful, Jenny. Let's take a few moments more, imagining
being there with that anxious version of you, extending compassion and support
to her.

When clients are able to connect with it, the experience of imagining oneself extending compassion to a struggling version of the self can be a powerful one. We want to help make the experience a vivid one, having them imagine what they are feeling, doing, and experiencing in this scenario
with as much detail as possible. Clients with deeply entrenched shame and self-criticism may initially struggle with such exercises. We can help them, gently suggesting ways they might support
their struggling selves. For such clients, it may be more useful to have them begin by imagining a
situation in which someone else—someone they care about—is struggling, and imagining extending compassion to that person. Once their self-criticism has been softened a bit through compassionate thinking exercises or other practices, we can have them return to extending compassion to
themselves either through this practice or through compassionate chair work, which we'll introduce a bit later.


122

[PAGE 141]

Cultivating the Compassionate Self


Some clients may find it nearly impossible to imagine having these qualities. Such clients may,
however, be able to bring to mind someone they think does possess these traits, and imagine what it
would be like to feel, think, and act from that person’s perspective. The key is for them to begin
developing the ability to shift into a perspective that is organized by the experience of compassion
rather than threat.


The Compassionate Self in Action
Once the Compassionate Self practice has been introduced, we want to strengthen this compassionate perspective by having clients shift into it as often and in as many different situations as
possible. We can do this in session, both by beginning subsequent sessions witha brief Compassionate
Self exercise and by pausing to shift into this perspective at different points in the session, particularly when it’s clear the client is caught up in the threat system. It’s important to note that in doing
this, we aren't shaping avoidance—we shift our attention away from the threatening material or
situation so that we can slow things down, shift into the perspective of the compassionate self, and
then come back to work with the problematic situation or emotion. We're shaping a process in which
clients learn to mindfully notice when they've been captured by experiences of threat and use this
awareness as a cue to work with their emotions, balance things out a bit, and come back to work
with things from a compassionate perspective. The coming back is crucial—otherwise, were just
helping the client establish patterns of experiential avoidance, which isn’t at all helpful.
We can also collaborate with clients to develop a plan for practicing outside of the session. It’s
important that this practice is initially done when conditions are favorable (not when the client is
completely overwhelmed by threatening emotions or situations). We can even work with clients to
plan specific times when they can shift into the perspective of their compassionate selves—
considering how they would feel, think, pay attention, and be motivated to behave from this perspective. Before walking into a meeting at work or beginning a project, before picking up the kids
from school, as we're getting up in the morning or before going to bed at night—the key is to
identify times to practice shifting into the perspective of the compassionate self. With practice, this
shift in perspective can be accomplished fairly quickly, perhaps by simply bringing to mind words
like kind, wise, courageous, compassionate. We can then have clients apply this new perspective increasingly to challenging situations in their lives—imagining how they might think, feel, pay attention,
and be motivated to act from this compassionate perspective.
In planning such home practice, we want to approach it as we would any outside-of-session
practice: by considering potential obstacles and hedging our bets for success. It can be key to work
collaboratively with clients to plan how to keep motivation high (starting small, initially planning
for situations in which there’s a high likelihood of feeling successful) and to build in reminders so
they don’t forget to practice. We can use behavioral techniques such as activity scheduling (Persons,
Davidson, & Tomkins, 2000) to increase the likelihood that they'll be able to follow through with
the plan.


123

[PAGE 142]

CFT Made Simple


Additionally, we want to communicate that it can initially be difficult to shift into this perspective, and that they may find themselves resisting doing so for various reasons, including just not
feeling like it. We want to emphasize that the point is simply to make the effort—to try to imagine
how you might feel, think, pay attention, and behave in this situation from the perspective of this
kind, wise, courageous, compassionate self. We can even make “not wanting to do the home practice” the situation that is targeted: “How would your kind, wise, confident, compassionate self
understand your resistance to do this practice? What would she encourage you to do?” Home
practice can be aided by the Threat Emotion Monitoring form—a basic cognitive behavioral monitoring form that includes prompts to consider the situation and one’s responses from the perspective of the compassionate self. (This form is included in the appendix at the end of this book, and
is also available online at http://www.newharbinger.com/33094.)


Compassionate Letter-Writing
Particularly with clients who struggle with social anxiety or difficulty concentrating, in-session
practice applying the compassionate self can be challenging. They may find themselves feeling selfconscious or “on the spot,” with threat arousal getting in the way of being able to connect with (or
verbalize) this compassionate perspective. Compassionate letter-writing can help clients learn to
extend compassion to themselves in a context that allows them to avoid the potential performance
demands of an in-session exercise. It also provides as much time as they like to think about and
craft a compassionate message to their vulnerable selves (Gilbert 2009a, 2010).
Additionally, this exercise produces a product—the compassionate letter—that can be read
again and again in those moments when the client needs compassionate support, encouragement,
and coaching. Such a letter can be composed in session, but I find that having clients complete the
letter at home often leads to a more powerful letter, as they can spend several days considering
what to write, can take as much time as they need in writing it, and can even develop multiple
letters to support themselves in different situations. Below, I’ve included a sample set of instructions to send home with clients who will be composing a compassionate letter. (The instructions
are also available for download at http://www.newharbinger.com/33094.)


INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPASSIONATE LETTER-WRITING

This exercise is designed to help us develop the compassionate self. We want to build and
strengthen mental patterns that will help us find the courage to work with difficult experiences, to
accept ourselves, and to build a sense of peace within ourselves that we can share with others.
Learning to think and behave compassionately can sometimes be helped by writing a letter to ourselves. In this exercise, you're going to write about difficulties, but from the perspective of your
compassionate self. You can write a general letter to yourself, or you can tailor the letter to support
yourself around a particularly challenging situation.


124

[PAGE 143]

Cultivating the Compassionate Self


e First, get out a pen and paper. You might even pick out a special journal or notebook.

e Spend a few moments doing soothing rhythm breathing. Allow yourself to slow down
and settle into your experience.

e Now try to shift into the perspective of your compassionate self. Connect with your
compassionate self, imagining yourself at your best—your calmest, your wisest, your
most caring, your most confident and courageous. Feel yourself filled with feelings of
kindness, strength, and confidence. Imagine yourself as this compassionate person who
is wise, understanding, and committed to helping. Imagine your manner, your tone of
voice, and how you feel as this compassionate being.

e When we are in a compassionate frame of mind, even slightly, we try to use our per-
sonal life experiences wisely. We know that life can be hard. We can look deeply into
the perspectives of ourselves and other people involved in difficult situations, and try
to understand how it makes sense that they might feel and act this way. We offer
strength and support, and try to be warm, nonjudgmental, and noncondemning. Take
a few breaths and feel that wise, understanding, confident, compassionate part of you
arise—this is the part of you that will write the letter.

e If thoughts of self-doubt, like Am I doing it right? or I’m not really feeling it arise, note these
thoughts as normal comments our minds make, and observe what you are experiencing
as you write the best that you can. There is no right or wrong.. youre just practicing,
working with your compassionate self. As you write, try to create as much emotional
warmth and understanding as you can.

e As you write your letter, try to allow yourself to understand and accept your distress.
For example, you might start with, I am sad, and I feel distress. My distress is understandable
because. . .

e Note the reasons—realize that your distress makes sense. Then continue... I would like
myself to know that...

e The idea is to communicate understanding, caring, and warmth while helping ourselves
work on the things we need to address.

When you have written your first few compassionate letters, go through them with an open
mind and see whether they actually capture compassion for you. If they do, see if you can spot the
following qualities in your letter:

e It expresses concern, genuine caring, and encouragement.

e It is sensitive to your distress and needs.

e It helps you face your feelings and become more tolerant of them.


125

[PAGE 144]

CFT Made Simple


e It helps you become more understanding of your feelings, difficulties, and dilemmas.

e It is nonjudgmental and noncondemning, helping you to feel safe and accepted.

e A genuine sense of warmth, understanding, and caring fills the letter.

e It helps you think about behavior you may need to adopt in order to get better.

¢ It reminds you why you are making efforts to improve.

Let’s consider an example of a compassionate letter:


Dear Josh,

This has been a rough week and it makes sense that you're having a hard time. You've been trying bard to work
with your anger. It’s easy to feel upset with yourself when you don’t meet your standards. Remember that you
didn’t choose to have a threat system that makes this anger, and it’s not your fault that you get angry. There's
nothing wrong with you—it’s just your old brain trying to protect you. You learned to be angry by watching
your father, and when you were bullied in school. That isn’t your fault, either. But you're taking responsibility for
becoming a better man, and that takes a lot of courage.

I know this feels terrible and sometimes yon want to give up, but you're doing better and I know you can do it.
Although you're scared others will attack you like your dad and those kids at school did, things are really
different now. He's gone, and Maria loves you and has stayed with you even when things were really bad. Chloe
and Aiden look up to you and you care a lot about being a good father to them. You're making progress. You just
need to keep going. This compassion stuff is helping you realize that being strong and being angry are two
different things. You have what it takes to be a good man. You can do this. It will be bard, but you can do this.

If you're reading this, it’s probably because you're having a really tough day. Maybe you did or said something
that you're beating yourself up for. Remember that these times will pass. You just have to keep going. Think of all
the times when things seemed bad, but you made it through. Maybe go to the gym and let off some steam. You
know exercise helps. Hang out with Nathan. Slow down your breath. Mostly, remember why you're doing this.
Remember your family, bow much they love you, and how much you want to be there for them. You're safe, and
there's nothing wrong with you.

Sincerely,

Josh


We can have clients bring their compassionate letters to session and, if they feel comfortable,
read them out loud. It can be a powerful experience for clients to hear themselves speaking compassionately to their struggles in this way.
Some clients may find themselves stumped, unable to generate such a letter. If the issue is one
of motivation, better to not push the issue and instead use Socratic dialogue to explore the


126

[PAGE 145]

Cultivating the Compassionate Self


resistance—again, we don't want to set our clients up to resist extending compassion to themselves
because were pushing it on them. On the other hand, sometimes it will be the case that clients
simply don’t know bow to address themselves in this compassionate way. In such cases, we can do a
Compassionate Self exercise in session as described in the examples above, and then (with both
therapist and client operating from the perspective of their compassionate selves), collaborate to
write the compassionate letter—with the therapist offering support, Socratic questions, and suggestions about how the client might relate to his struggles (and the struggling version of himself)
in compassionate, supportive ways.


SUMMARY
In CFT, Compassionate Self work isn’t just a technique. It can serve as a framework for integrating
all of the other aspects of the therapy, and as a perspective from which our clients can learn to
courageously approach and work with their struggles and suffering. Once this perspective has been
established, it can be used as a reference point for problem solving (“What would your compassionate self think or do in this situation?”), for sympathy and empathy (“How would your compassionate self feel when she sees you struggling like this?” “What would your compassionate self understand
about why you are feeling and behaving this way?”), and for motivating therapeutic work. Quite
frequently, in developing a plan for home practice, I'll ask clients, “What would your compassionate
self want to make sure you do over the next week?”
As we'll see in coming chapters, establishing the perspective of the compassionate self also sets
the stage for important work occurring within the therapy session, such as compassionate chair
work and the Multiple Selves exercise. Ultimately, a primary goal of CFT is the strengthening of
this compassionate version of the self and the neural architecture that underlies it, so that these
compassionate ways of being and relating to self and others become woven into the fabric of our
clients’ day-to-day lives.


127

[PAGE 147]

CHAPTER 10


Compassionate Thinking
and Reasoning


In its approach to thought work, CFT incorporates components of both mindfulness and more
traditional cognitive therapies. Consistent with mindfulness-based approaches, CFT assists clients
in developing an awareness and nonjudgmental acceptance of their unhelpful and challenging
thoughts as mental events, refraining from clinging to these thoughts, arguing with them, or
attempting to push them out of awareness. However, recognizing the power of thoughts both as
implicit inputs to the emotional brain and as organizers of motivation and behavior, CFT shares
ground with many cognitive therapy models in emphasizing the purposeful cultivation of helpful
thinking patterns. Thought work in CFT is defined by an emphasis on compassionate thinking—
thinking that is focused on understanding, bringing balance to the emotions, encouraging the self
in facing difficult situations, and helping to develop compassionate strengths. As we saw in the
letter-writing exercise in the previous chapter, compassionate thinking is warm, validating, flexible,
and focused on facilitating helpful action.
Thought work in CFT is not seen as an isolated set of practices. Rather, it is a natural part of
the continued development and elaboration of the compassionate self. How would this kind, wise, confident, compassionate version of you think about this situation? How would you understand this experience from that deeply
compassionate perspective? What would be helpful in working with this situation? It’s not just about generating
compassionate thoughts—it's about learning to shift more fully into this compassionate
perspective.

As we explore compassionate thinking with clients, we can remind them that different emotions and social mentalities organize our mental and bodily experience in very different ways,
producing very different, interrelated patterns of attention, thinking, imagery, felt experience,

[PAGE 148]

CFT Made Simple


motivation, and behavior—with compassion organizing the mind in ways that are particularly
useful in confronting and working with suffering.


Threatened Mind Compassionate Mind


Attention Attention


Emotions ae oe and easoning
Emotions 7 Thinking and Reasoning


Threat Compassion


Imagery and => Motivation
Fantasy
Imagery and Ma Motivation
Fantasy


Behavior Behavior


Figure 9,2: How threat and compassion organize our experience. (From Gilbert, The Compassionate Mind
[2009], reprinted with permission from Little, Brown Book Group.)


Before doing compassionate thought work, it can be useful to have clients engage in a brief
Compassionate Self exercise, to have them shift into the perspective of the compassionate self
before going forward. In this way, were linking the thought work to the overall story arc of
therapy—the cultivation and reinforcement of this adaptive, compassionate version of the self.


WORKING WITH THREAT-FOCUSED THOUGHTS
Much of our clients’ psychological suffering can be triggered and maintained through patterns of
thinking, and it’s well established that negative thought patterns regarding oneself, the world, and
other people can play a central role in psychological distress (Beck, 1976). We've already introduced mindfulness, which plays an important role in compassionate thought work. Mindfulness
practices help clients keep from becoming fused with such thoughts, as they become more adept
at noticing the arising of unhelpful thoughts, refraining from judging them, and learning to redirect
their attention rather than getting caught up in rumination.
As we've seen in some of the clinical vignettes, when clients have well-entrenched patterns of
unhelpful thoughts, the CFT therapist will sometimes help them recognize these thoughts as products of how different threat emotions and learned patterns of responding organize the mind. This
can be done using language like “the anxious self,” “Depressed (client name)” or “the self-critic.” “So,


130

[PAGE 149]

Compassionate Thinking and Reasoning


Anxious Jenny is very good at listing off all of the ways this situation could go horribly wrong?” Or,
“It sounds like your self-critic has a lot to say today.”
Using such language helps clients step back from these thoughts or critical messages and relate
to them in a nonblaming way. It also helps anchor these experiences to themes of compassionate
understanding that are woven through the therapy—understanding these thoughts as natural
products of how powerful threat emotions organize the mind as they attempt to protect us, or as
habits that were learned via social shaping. We don't hate the anxious or angry self—we want to
reassure and help her. Understanding such thoughts in this way can help take the sting out of them,
and provides a structure for working with them compassionately. Let's consider what this might
look like:

Therapist: Jenny, you've been able to keep up with your mindfulness exercises and have
been practicing really consistently. Have you noticed anything new as you've
been doing that?

Jenny: It took a few weeks to remember to do it consistently, but I’m doing better. | feel
like I'm getting a lot better at noticing all the thoughts that come up throughout
the day—especially the ones that get in the way of me doing things.

Therapist. That sounds great. Could you tell me more about what you've noticed?

Jenny: Well, Pve noticed that before I do anything, I spend a lot of time thinking about
all the things that could go wrong, particularly when it involves doing stuff with
other people. I’m all the time having thoughts like, This is going to be terrible, or I can't
do this, or They aren't going to like me, or I'll look like an idiot. That sort of thing.

Therapist. So it sounds like Anxious Jenny has a lot to say.

Jenny: (Smiles.) She sure does! Anxious Jenny is working very hard.

Therapist: She's working very hard to try and protect you, isn't she? She's been burned
before, and she’s working very hard to make sure you don’t get hurt like that
again. Can we understand her perspective? Given your experience, does it make
sense that she might be really vigilant?

Jenny: (Pauses thoughtfully.) It does. It does make sense.

Therapist. The tricky bit is that Anxious Jenny has a perspective that is very limited—she
sees only the danger, and sometimes sees danger when it really isn't there. Does
that sound right to you?

Jenny: It does. | get worked up about all sorts of things. I get anxious about stuff I know
isn't a big deal. Stuff that doesn’t even matter. And I worry about it anyway.

Therapist. Have you seen those life-size cardboard cutouts of movie characters?


131

[PAGE 150]

CFT Made Simple


Jenny: Yeah. A girl down the hall from me has some of those in her room.

Therapist: From the front, they can look pretty real—they
re life-sized, and have lots of
detail. From a distance, you might even think it’s a real person.

Jenny: Yeah. She’s got Justin Bieber!

Therapist: Justin Bieber? (Smiles.)

Jenny: For real. She's got Justin Bieber. | know, right?

Therapist: (Chuckles.) That's actually a good lead-in to what I was getting at. If we think
about Anxious Jenny—this version of you that is completely organized around
fear and anxiety—it’s like she’s looking at a really scary cardboard cutout right
from the front, so it looks like a real threat. So there’s this cutout of someone
laughing at you, or a teacher who's going to criticize you...or Justin Bieber. And
this threat is right there, and from the front it looks really real. So she sees this,
and gets really scared, and we can understand why.

Jenny: (Nods.)

Therapist: But imagine that Compassionate Jenny shows up, and she sees how scared
Anxious Jenny is getting. Compassionate Jenny is kind, and wise, and
courageous—courageous enough to walk around the room and look closely,
seeing the situation from all angles. What would Compassionate Jenny see?
What would she understand?

Jenny: She'd see that it wasn’t real. She’d see that this scary person isn't really there,
that it isn’t really dangerous. It’s just cardboard.

Therapist: Would she understand why Anxious Jenny was so worked up? That from her
side, given her experience, it looks really scary?

Jenny: Yeah, she would.

Therapist: Anxious Jenny is there, reeling off all these scary thoughts: Can't you see it’s terrible?
They're going to attack us! We can't handle this: What does Compassionate Jenny think
of this?

Jenny: Compassionate Jenny wouldn’t think too much about it. She knows that Anxious
Jenny is just freaking out because she’s scared.

Therapist: That's it! That's the wisdom of compassion! So this compassionate version of
you can see the thoughts, and can understand where they come from, but can
keep from buying into them. If Compassionate Jenny wanted to help Anxious


132

[PAGE 151]

Compassionate Thinking and Reasoning


Jenny feel safe, what might she do? If this kind, compassionate, wise version of
you were there, what would she say—what would she want Anxious Jenny to
understand? How would you reassure her? Would you tell her to stop being
so stupid? (Smiles.)

Jenny: (Smiles.) No. (Pauses.) Pd tell her that it’s okay, that these scary people aren't
real, that they only look that way because of where she's standing. | might give
her a hug and then take her by the hand and lead her to the side of the room,
so that she could see they're only cardboard.

Therapist. That's beautiful, Jenny. How do you think Anxious Jenny would feel if you
were to do that?

Jenny: I think it would help.

Therapist: It occurs to me that you also wrote down a lot of really encouraging,
compassionate thoughts in the compassionate letter we reviewed last session.
Have you reread that at all this week?

Jenny: I have, and it really helped. I really liked writing the letter, and reading it
helped me calm down when those anxious thoughts were really getting
ramped up. | read it before my small group met to work on the project in my
communications class that I told you about, and it went pretty well. | even
spoke up once or twice.

Therapist: Jenny, that’s fantastic! Nice work. I’m proud of you.

Jenny: I’m proud of me, too.

In the vignette above, we see several aspects of compassionate thought work at play. First, we
see a notable absence of Let's replace that bad thought with this good one. The therapist begins by anchoring
the work in Jenny's ongoing mindfulness practice, and discussing the thoughts from a mindful
perspective—looking at them from the perspective of a curious, nonjudgmental observer. The
therapist then introduces the language of “Anxious Jenny,” contextualizing the worrisome thoughts
as products of how anxiety organizes the mind— setting up this anxious version of the self not as
an enemy to be criticized or hated, but as a sympathetic figure who is trying to help, but whose
limited perspective (characterized via the cardboard cutout metaphor) often prevents her efforts
from being truly helpful. The therapist then prompts Jenny to shift into the perspective of the
compassionate self, preparing her to connect with more reassuring, helpful ways of thinking that
arent focused on disputing or arguing with the anxious thoughts, but on soothing the anxious part
of her, and broadening her perspective.
The architecture in place, this discussion could then progress to working with thoughts around
a specific challenging situation, in which Jenny (from the perspective of her compassionate self)


133

[PAGE 152]

CFT Made Simple


could be prompted to offer encouragement, understanding, guidance, and problem solving around
how to meet and work with the situation. In the vignette, this took the form of bridging from the
current discussion to the compassionate letter we introduced in the previous chapter, which Jenny
had used to help herself work with a situation she’d been dreading. As the vignette closes, we see
how this success was able to fuel positive self-to-self relating in Jenny, as she spontaneously relates
to herself with warmth (“I’m proud of me, too”) rather than criticism.
We don’t have to use the “emotional self” language if we're not comfortable with it. Instead, we
can simply label such thoughts as products of the threat emotions that prompt them: “Sounds like
you were having lots of anxious thoughts.” After clients are fairly well acquainted with the
Compassionate Self exercise, we can prompt them to shift into this perspective: “What would your
wise, kind, confident, compassionate self think about this situation? What might she advise us to do?”
Again, the idea isn’t to dispute threat-driven or self-critical thoughts. It’s to acknowledge them and
facilitate a shift to a gradually deepening compassionate perspective. Let’s explore this a bit further.


COMPASSIONATE THINKING AND REASONING
A primary attribute of the compassionate self is the capacity to think and reason in compassionate
ways, and to develop these ways of thinking as habitual patterns of mind. Compassionate ways of
thinking and reasoning are anchored in two fundamental objectives: understanding suffering, and helping
to address, alleviate, or prevent it. As we help clients understand what compassionate thinking looks
like, it can be useful to contrast compassionate ways of thinking with threat-based ways of thinking:


Threat-Based Thinking Compassionate Thinking

Narrowly focused on the threat Broad, considers many factors in
understanding the situation

Focused on judging and labeling Focused on understanding

Inflexible and ruminative Flexible, problem-solves

Activates the threat system Activates the safeness system; helps us to feel
comfortable and at peace

Directs hostility, fear, or disgust toward others | Directs kindness toward others and ourselves
and ourselves

Judgmental and critical Noncritical, empathic, and encouraging

Focused on avoiding, dominating, or Focused on helping ourselves and others,
punishing finding solutions that benefit everyone and
harm no one


134

[PAGE 153]

Compassionate Thinking and Reasoning


In exploring this contrast with clients, it’s important not to set things up in a threat-based thinking
is bad, compassionate thinking is good sort of way. Familiar with the three circles, clients can understand
why the threat system organizes thinking in such narrow, constraining ways—it’s designed to work
that way in the face of immediate physical threats. However, they can come to recognize that in
the absence of such threats, there are likely more helpful (or as ACT therapists might say, more
workable) ways to understand and approach things. In contrast to threat-based thinking, compassionate thinking often takes the form of asking questions (Gilbert, 2009a):

e How does it make sense that I (or be or she) would feel (or think or behave) in this way?

© What is triggering my threat system here? What feelings are coming up in me?

e How would I understand this situation from the perspective of my kind, wise, confident, compassionate self?

° What might help me feel safe so that I can work with this situation more skillfully>

© What might be helpful as I tackle this challenger What resources might help me work with this situation:

e How might he or she be making sense of this situation?

°e What would my compassionate self think (or feel or say or do) in this situation? What would he or she encour-
age me to do?


Mentalizing
In helping clients emphasize compassionate understanding in their thinking, it can sometimes
be helpful to introduce the concept of mentalizing (Fonagy & Luyten, 2009, Liotti & Gilbert, 2011).
Mentalizing involves examining actions and emotions by considering what is going on in the mind
of the person who is behaving or feeling that way. What are the desires, feelings, needs, beliefs, and
motivations reflected in these behaviors? Such consideration puts even frustrating or extreme
behaviors into a context that opens the door for compassion—such as the recognition that the
patient who self-harms does so in a desperate attempt to reduce emotional pain.


Linking Thought Work to Compassionate Understanding
As were helping clients develop compassionate patterns of thinking and behaving, it can be
useful to relate what we're doing to how things work in the brain—linking the thought work back
to the compassionate understanding we've been working to develop. We can prompt clients to
consider that everything they do, say, think, or feel is reflected in the activation of corresponding
patterns of cells in the brain, and that as these patterns are activated again and again over time, the
pattern is strengthened and becomes easier to activate. As neuroscientists say, “Cells that fire
together, wire together.”


135

[PAGE 154]

CFT Made Simple


Over time, these connected patterns of cells become so well primed that they can be activated
easily—often without the client’s awareness—which is why longstanding habits like self-critical
thinking can be so hard to break. The brain patterns underlying them have been strengthened over
thousands and thousands of trials. This realization can assist the cultivation of self-compassion in
two ways: First, it can help clients ease up on self-blame around their failures, as they understand
that changing longstanding habits is difficult, not because they are weak or lack willpower, but
because of how their brains work. It also helps clarify the way to change—establishing and strengthening new patterns in the brain by repeatedly shifting into the perspective of the compassionate self
and practicing compassionate thinking, attention, and behavior consistently over time. Let’s take a
look at how this might play out in a therapy session, using a “path in the woods” metaphor:

Therapist. So we've chatted a bit about compassionate thinking and how it organizes us
in different ways than anxious, threat-based thinking.

Jenny: (Frowns and looks down.)

Therapist: Jenny, it looks like something just happened there for you. Could you tell me
a bit about how youre feeling right now?

Jenny: Pm just frustrated. We've been talking about this, but these anxious, critical
thoughts just keep coming. | try to think more positively but it's like the
anxious thoughts are always there, every time | want to do anything. It’s really
discouraging.

Therapist: (Leans in, remains silent.)

Jenny: It’s like the thoughts are automatic. They just come up, and I get stuck in them.

Therapist: It makes sense to me that it would feel discouraging—some psychologists even
call such thoughts automatic thoughts. Pd bet those anxious thoughts kind of are
automatic, at this point. Like, in your brain, automatic. Would it be all right if we
talked for a bit about why they’re like that?

Jenny: (considering) Sure.

Therapist: Imagine that there are woods behind my house, and every day for ten years,
I walked in these woods—walking a way that seemed to make sense, the
same way every time. Over time, what would happen in the woods, on the
ground where | was walking?

Jenny: You'd wear in a path.

Therapist. 1 sure would. And when it rains, where would the water run?

Jenny: Down the path.


136

[PAGE 155]

Compassionate Thinking and Reasoning


Therapist: Exactly. Why would it do that? Would the water choose to run down the path?

Jenny: No, it just would. It’s easier for it to run down the path than anywhere else.
Like a path of least resistance.

Therapist: Exactly. So what if | suggested our brains are like this forest? Every time we
think or behave in a certain way, were walking a path—activating a pattern of
cells in the brain—and the more we think or behave that way, the more “worn
in” the pattern becomes. The pattern becomes strengthened over time, making
it so that it lights up more and more easily. Eventually, it can light up almost
automatically—you think about a social situation, and that self-critical pattern
just lights right up, like a path of least resistance in your brain. So it seems like
the self-critical thoughts just show up automatically. It’s not our fault. It’s just
how our brains work.

Jenny: (after a thoughtful pause) That makes sense. It sucks, though.

Therapist: (Smiles.) It certainly can suck! But it also gives us a clue about how to create
change in our lives. Let's say I was getting tired of that path—perhaps because
every time it rained, the rain ran down the path into my backyard, flooding it.
How would | change this, assuming | didn’t want to give up going for walks?

Jenny: You'd need to stop walking on the path. You'd need to find some other way
to walk.

Therapist: Exactly. P'd need to figure out a path that worked better, and walk that way
instead. Pd probably forget sometimes, and walk the old path out of habit.
So my job would be to try and notice when that happens, and then change
over to the new path that goes where I want it to go. Can you see how this
applies to those self-critical and anxious thoughts?

Jenny: I think so. They're the really worn-in path.

Therapist: Yeah. That path is really easy to walk—automatic, almost—because it's been
worn in for years. The compassionate thinking path takes more effort.

Jenny: It sure does.

Therapist: But if I work really hard to notice where I’m walking, and remember to try and
walk the new path most of the time, it becomes easier. Over time, the forest
starts to look different, doesn't it? Eventually, the old path erodes, and the
new one slowly wears in. But the forest doesn't change overnight just because
I decide I don’t like the old path, does it? It takes consistent effort over time.

Jenny: That makes sense.


137

[PAGE 156]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: Over time, if | make effort to consistently walk a new way, the new path will wear
in— it’s just how it works. So if I find myself accidentally walking the old path
out of habit, what's the best thing to do? I mean, besides getting really mad at
myself? (Smiles and speaks warmly.) You know I’m joking, right?

Jenny: (Smiles.) | get it. No, you'd want to just stop, and go over to the new path.

Therapist: Exactly. This is the reason for the approach we're taking with these anxious and
critical thoughts. We want to increase mindfulness so that you notice when they
come up—when you are walking the old path out of habit...

Jenny: (Nods.)

Therapist: ...so you can shift over and walk that new path, over and over, to strengthen
brain patterns associated with compassionate ways of thinking. So that
compassion becomes the path of least resistance. We're not arguing with the
anxious or critical thoughts. We're just noticing that old pattern, letting go of it,
and shifting over to strengthen the new one. What do you think about that?

Jenny: Sounds good. It makes sense, anyway.

Therapist: Let’s think about a situation in which those old, anxious patterns show up. This
group project you have in your communications class is ongoing, correct?

Jenny: (Cringes a bit.) Yeah...we’re meeting twice per week for the next two weeks.

Therapists: Sounds like although you did well at the last meeting, youre still not really looking
forward to it. Do those anxious thought patterns come up before the meetings?

Jenny: (still cringing a bit) Yeah. | still get really anxious about it.

Therapist: What are some thoughts that come up?

Jenny: That it’s going to be awful. That Pll look stupid. Just running through all the
different ways it could go wrong in my head.

Therapist: So that’s the old path. Let’s work on what the new path would look like. Let’s
imagine that we've mindfully noticed those thoughts and let them go. Now, let's
shift into the kind, wise, confident perspective of your compassionate self. We'll
start with thirty seconds or so of soothing rhythm breathing. ..slowing down the
body...slowing down the mind.

Jenny: (Shifts in ber seat a bit, closes ber eyes, and slows her breathing.)

Therapist: (Waits thirty seconds to one minute.) Now imagining being filled with kindness, wisdom,
and courage as you shift into the perspective of the compassionate self. This is


138

[PAGE 157]

Compassionate Thinking and Reasoning


the part of you that wrote that compassionate letter—the part that sees how
hard it is for you to do things like that group activity, and wants to encourage
you and help you feel safe. Give me a little nod when you feel like you've been
able to connect a bit with that compassionate perspective.

Jenny: (Waits a few moments, nods.)

Therapist: What would this compassionate version of you think, as you prepare to go to the
group meeting? How would you extend kindness and encouragement to the part
of you that’s so anxious? As this compassionate self, what would you say?

Jenny: Pd say that this is really hard, but P've done this before, and I can do it again.

Therapist: What are some other things you'd say from this compassionate perspective?

Jenny: That I’m not alone. There are other people in the group who seem to like me,
people I like being around. I'd tell myself that 'm stronger than I think. Pd
remind myself that when I spoke up last week, nothing terrible happened. That
I can do this.

Therapist: How does it feel to hear yourself saying these things?

Jenny: It feels good. Kind of fake, but good.

Therapist: Does it make sense that the new path would take a while before it felt as easy and
natural as the old one?

Jenny: It does. | need to remind myself of that.

Therapist: How would your compassionate self remind you of that, when the compassionate
thoughts feel a little fake?

Jenny: She’d say that it’s because it’s a whole new way of thinking. Of course it wouldn't
feel as natural as the old path.

Therapist: Exactly! It sounds like your compassionate self is figuring some things out.

Jenny: (Smiles.) She’s trying.

At first, clients can become demoralized when the voices of the critical or threat-based selves
seem so much more powerful than the new, compassionate ways of thinking. The idea is to provide
clients with a context for understanding why this is so. This can even provide the basis for compassionate sympathy (‘It’s really difficult for me that these anxious thoughts come up so automatically”).
Given such a context, clients can see the power of shifting into a compassionate perspective again
and again—both for developing compassionate ways of thinking in the present moment, and for
strengthening the underlying neural architecture that can make these ways of thinking more likely
to arise in the future.

139

[PAGE 158]

CFT Made Simple


SUMMARY
In this chapter, we've explored ways to help clients apply compassion to their thinking and reasoning. The idea is to cultivate compassionate ways of thinking so that over time, such compassionate
thoughts will spontaneously arise more and more often. We'll continue to explore how clients can
relate compassionately to their struggles in the next chapter, which focuses on compassionate
imagery.


140

[PAGE 159]

CHAPTER II


Using Compassionate Imagery


In order for compassion to become real for our patients, it needs to be felt at an experiential level.
Increasingly, we're discovering that imagery is an effective method for facilitating experiential work
with clients (Hackmann, Bennett-Levy, & Holmes, 2011). In the Compassionate Self exercise, we
used imagery to help clients shift perspectives and practice compassionate ways of working with
difficult situations. In this chapter, we'll explore ways to use imagery to help clients manage distress
and balance their emotions.


AN ORIENTATION TO IMAGERY

Since CFT makes frequent use of imagery, let’s consider how to effectively introduce clients to
imaginal work. Often, when clients hear “imagine” or “imagery,” they think it means, “creating
vivid pictures in the mind.” This idea can be an obstacle; while some clients will be able to effortlessly create such vivid mental pictures, many others will struggle to do so. The key to overcoming
this block is to help clients realize that imaginal work isn't about making vivid pictures—it’s about
creating mental experiences (Gilbert, 2010). Let’s explore a method for introducing this practice to
clients, developed by Paul Gilbert:

Therapist: Jenny, as | mentioned in our last session, today we'll introduce some imagery
exercises to help you bring up feelings of safeness to balance your emotions
when your threat system is really going. | thought it would be useful to talk a bit
about how to use imagery before we get started. How does that sound?

Jenny: Sounds good.

[PAGE 160]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: Besides the Compassionate Self exercises we've been doing, have you ever used
mental imagery? Perhaps closed your eyes and tried to imagine something?

Jenny: Last year I took a yoga class, and sometimes the teacher would have us imagine
things—like being somewhere like a beach, or being a tree, with life flowing into
us from the ground beneath us. That sort of thing.

Therapist: Cool—how did you like it?

Jenny: I liked it, but sometimes it worked better than others. | should take another yoga
class, because it was really relaxing.

Therapist: Sounds like a good idea—yoga is fantastic, and it fits really well with what we're
doing. It’s good that you've had some experience with imagery. Sometimes
people struggle with imagery work because they think it involves creating really
vivid pictures in their minds. Some people can do that, but other people really
struggle with it.

Jenny: I think I know what you mean. I’m not really good at that.

Therapist: (Smiles.) Me neither—I’m not good at “seeing things” in my mind. But here’s the
thing: what we're after isn't about creating vivid mental pictures, but creating
mental experiences. Could we do a brief exercise to demonstrate what | mean?

Jenny: (nodding interestedly) Sure.

Therapist: Great. Let's start by shifting into that comfortable, upright position we ve been
using for our exercises...feet flat on the floor, back straight, eyes closed. Let's do
thirty seconds or so of soothing rhythm breathing, slowing down the breath, and
focusing on the sense of slowing. Slowing down the body, slowing down the mind.

Jenny: (Closes her eyes and breathes slowly.)

Therapist: (Waits thirty seconds.) I’m going to briefly prompt you to bring a few different
situations to mind. As I do, just allow yourself to imagine the situation I’m
describing.

Jenny: (Nods.)

Therapist: First, bring to mind how you got here this morning—imagining the route you
took when you were driving, riding, or walking here. (Waits thirty seconds.)
Now, bring to mind your favorite dessert. (Waits thirty seconds.)
Now, bring to mind the last vacation you took, or if one doesnt come to
mind, a vacation you
d like to take. (Waits thirty seconds.)
When youre ready, gently allow your eyes to open.


142

[PAGE 161]

Using Compassionate Imagery


Jenny: (Waits a moment, then slowly opens her eyes, shifts, and smiles a bit.) Mmmm.

Therapist: Were you able to get a mental sense of all the things | mentioned?

Jenny: I was. It was nice. | didn’t want to stop.

Therapist. Nice! It sounds like you were able to get a mental experience of those things—
the route you took, the dessert, the vacation—and like some emotions came up
as well?

Jenny: Yeah. It felt nice to imagine myself walking along the beach like I did last summer.

Therapist: Excellent! That's mental imagery. It’s about bringing an experience to mind, so
we've got a good sense of it. Sounds like you've already noticed one of the
benefits of imagery—that our old, emotional brains respond to imagery by
producing different emotions, like that pleasant feeling you got from imagining
yourself back on the beach.

Exercises like this can give clients a sense of what imaginal work is like, and can give them confidence that they can do it. We want to create a mental context in which the client is able to focus on
the imagery exercises, minimizing distractions caused by self-evaluative thoughts of whether or not
they are doing it correctly.


CREATING A SAFE PLACE
One goal of CFT is to help clients learn to work with the three circles to balance their emotions,
particularly when they notice themselves shifting into threat mode when a more balanced approach
would be helpful, or when they observe they
ve been fueling feelings of threat through rumination
or threatening imagery. Imagery can be a powerful tool for getting the safeness system online, and
one way to do this involves safe place imagery. (Sometimes it’s referred to as “soothing space” imagery
for clients who don't like the term “safe place.”)
In this practice, clients imagine themselves in a setting that creates feelings of safeness, calm,
peacefulness, and belonging. Many therapists will have used imagery in this way. As in other such
practices, we have clients focus on the various sensory details of this soothing place. In CFT, we
add a dimension to the typical safe place practice by introducing an affiliative component to the
imagery. This is done via specific instructions such as, “If there are other beings in this place,
imagine that they welcome you, value you, and are happy to see you. In fact, imagine that this place
itself values your presence—as if you complete it, and it is happy that you are here.” Let's consider
how this practice might be introduced and facilitated in a therapy session:

Therapist: Jenny, now that we've explored what we mean by imagery, I'd like to introduce a
specific practice designed to help get your safeness system working for you—to


143

[PAGE 162]

CFT Made Simple


help you connect with feelings of calm and peacefulness when you notice your
threat system is really going. How does that sound?

Jenny: Why not?

Therapist: Great. In a way, you've got a head start on this one. A few moments ago, you said
you enjoyed imagining yourself back on that beach from your vacation—so
much that you didn’t want to stop. What did you like about that?

Jenny: I love the beach. | love everything about it—the smell, the feeling of sand under
my feet, watching and listening to the waves, the sun. | like to walk on the beach
for hours. It’s so peaceful.

Therapist: That does sound wonderful.

Jenny: It is. It’s my favorite thing to do.

Therapist: That’s a perfect segue into our next exercise. This is called the “Safe Place
exercise.” We're going to imagine being in a place that helps you feel safe,
comfortable, peaceful, and soothed. The idea is to create a mental experience of
this place and the feelings that go along with being there. Sometimes it takes
time to figure out what sort of place to use—but it sounds like you may already
have a good place in mind. Do you think the beach would work for this exercise?

Jenny: The beach would be perfect.

Therapist: Great. So let's go ahead and get started. We'll begin with some soothing rhythm
breathing, to slow down our bodies and minds. Then I'll prompt you to imagine
the beach. P'll ask you to describe what it’s like on the beach—like it’s really
happening—so we can create a deep mental experience. Then I'll be quiet and
leave you to the imagery for about five minutes. If your mind begins to wander
or you get distracted by thoughts, that’s no problem—just manage it like we do
with mindful breathing, by noticing you've become distracted and gently
bringing yourself back to the beach. Ready to go?

Jenny: Let’s do it.

Therapist: Sitting in an upright, comfortable position, the eyes gently closing.

Jenny: (Shifts a bit, closes ber eyes, and slows ber breathing.)

Therapist: Allowing the breath to take on a slow, comfortable rhythm. Focusing on the
sense of slowing. (Waits five seconds.) Slowing down the body, slowing down the
mind. (Waits thirty seconds to one minute.)


144

[PAGE 163]

Using Compassionate Imagery


Jenny: (Breathes slowly.)

Therapist: Now, imagining yourself on that beautiful beach. Opening yourself to the
soothing experiences there. When you
ve got the image, describe what youre
doing and experiencing. Imagine yourself, there on the beach, with all the
sounds, smells, and images you love.

Jenny: (Pauses for five to ten seconds.) I’m walking down the beach, and I can feel the sand
squishing underneath my feet. I like the way it feels on my toes.

Therapist: That's perfect, Jenny. What else are you noticing? What does it feel like?

Jenny: It’s warm and peaceful. The sun is shining on my face, and the wind is gently
blowing through my hair. | can hear the waves and the sound of the seagulls.
(Pauses for a few seconds.) | can smell the ocean.

Therapist: Allow yourself to be filled with feelings of safeness, peacefulness, and joy at being
in this wonderful place. Maybe allow a gentle smile to cross your face, as you
enjoy being here.

Jenny: (Smiles) Mmmm.

Therapist: Imagine that the seagulls you hear are happy that you are here with them.
Likewise, if there are any people or other beings in this place, imagine that they
welcome you. They value you; they're happy you are here. (Waits twenty to thirty
seconds.) Imagine that this place itself welcomes you. It values your presence,
almost as if you complete it. It is happy you are here.

Jenny: (Breathes peacefully.)

Therapist: Let’s take some time to imagine being in this place, filled with feelings of
safeness, peace, and contentment. Imagine all the sensations that come with
being in this place.

Jenny: (Continues to breathe peacefully.)

Therapist: (Waits five minutes.) When youre ready, gently shift your attention to the slow
sensation of the breath, and allow your eyes to open.

Jenny: (Waits twenty seconds or so, then gradually opens her eyes. Smiles.)

Therapist: How was that?

Jenny: That was really nice. Really peaceful.

Therapist: Did you get a mental experience of this place, and the feelings that go with it?


145

[PAGE 164]

CFT Made Simple


Jenny: I did. It felt completely comfortable and peaceful.

Therapist: Were you able to imagine that the place and the creatures in it welcomed you?

Jenny: Yeah. It was kind of like one of those children’s movies where the animals do
funny things. | imagined seagulls flying along beside me, or looking up at me
from where they were standing on the beach. It was fun to imagine that.

Therapist. Were there any other people on the beach?

Jenny: Not at first, but after you said that, | imagined a few lying on blankets, higher up
on the beach, just lying in the sun and enjoying themselves. It was really peaceful.

Therapist: “That's exactly how it's supposed to work. Would you be up for practicing this
two or three times over the next week? The idea is to really get used to visiting
this place in your mind, activating those parts of your brain that help you feel
safe, content, and peaceful.

Jenny: Pd love to.

Therapist. Fantastic. It helps to practice initially when you're already feeling pretty calm, to
get good at bringing up the imagery. Once that feels manageable, try using the
imagery when your threat system is going and you want to balance things a bit
by connecting with feelings of safeness. Does that make sense?

Jenny: Sure does.

Things went really smoothly in the vignette above, as Jenny had identified a likely “safe place”
in the previous imagery exercise (an occasional advantage of using a “favorite vacation” prompt in
introducing imagery), and she was very good at connecting with the image of the beach. She was
also able to quickly move into the imagery and describe it in therapy. It won't always go this
smoothly. Some clients won't have a place from memory, so we'll work with them to consider what
such a place might be like. Sometimes | start by briefly mentioning a few of my “places’—a walk
on a northwestern beach, sitting in a pine forest, even having a pint in a favorite English pub, surrounded by smiling faces and 300-year-old oak, my nose filled with the soothing aroma of a steakand-ale pie at my table.
For clients who don't transition as easily into imagery as Jenny did, we can provide sensory
anchors, using our knowledge of what might be soothing to the client: “Imagine feeling the sun on
your face, the smells and sounds of the ocean...” We want to say just enough to facilitate the
imagery and feelings of peacefulness and soothing that accompany it, and then gently recede,
leaving the client with the imagery. Some clients will need to experiment with a few different
“places” before they find one to settle on. Finally, the body work is important—setting the stage
with soothing rhythm breathing and prompting a gentle smile can help clients more fully enter into
the experience, adding yet another soothing implicit input into the emotional brain.


146

[PAGE 165]

Using Compassionate Imagery


I really can’t say enough about this practice. While no practice works for everyone, I’ve seen
men in prison for violent crimes, who had spent decades struggling with anger, use this practice to
soothe themselves when they noticed their anger arising. These men used the imagery to balance
their emotions and reengage to deal effectively and assertively with situations that previously would
have led to verbal or physical aggression.


THE IDEAL COMPASSIONATE IMAGE PRACTICE

British psychologist Deborah Lee developed a practice called the “perfect nurturer” or “ideal compassionate image” practice (Lee, 2005). This practice was designed to help self-critical clients learn
to self-soothe and develop feelings of being accepted and cared for, by imagining an ideal figure
who understands them, has compassion for them, and extends kindness, support, and encouragement. In this practice, the therapist works collaboratively with the client to identify characteristics
that his ideal nurturer would have—perhaps acceptance, kind concern, and affection—and a deep
understanding of what the client is going through. In contrast to experiences that clients may have
had with people in their lives, it is emphasized that this nurturer is supportive, nurturing, and
encouraging, and is never judgmental, critical, or shaming of the client. The therapist will also help
the client develop an image of what this nurturer looks like and sounds like, and how they might
interact. As with the safe place exercise above, the idea is to help the client create as vivid a mental
experience as possible. If the client has someone in his life who embodies these qualities (or someone
he imagines embodies the qualities, such as a spiritual figure), he can use this in his visualization.
Some clients may initially struggle with the exercise, protesting that they
ve never had anyone
like this in their lives. If this happens, we can emphasize that actually, none of us has someone like
this—someone who is perfectly understanding, supportive, and nonjudgmental. The idea is to
imagine what a being like this would be like, and to imagine that person extending kindness, understanding, and acceptance to us. Let’s consider what this practice might look like in a therapy
session:


Therapist. Jenny, I’m glad you like the safe place imagery we introduced last session. How
did that go over the past week?

Jenny: Really well. It’s my favorite piece of homework so far. | did it three times over
the past week.

Therapist: Excellent! Repeated practice really is the key. As you've done the practice, have
you noticed anything that helps or gets in the way?

Jenny: Well, it helps if I have a quiet place to practice. My dorm can be pretty noisy in
the evening, which is when I have time. | ended up putting on headphones to try
and make things a little more quiet, and then it occurred to me that I could
probably download an mp3 of the sound of the ocean. So I went online and did


147

[PAGE 166]

CFT Made Simple


that, and now when | do the exercise, | listen to the ocean sounds, which makes
it seem even more real.

Therapist: Wow! I should have you teaching this stuff! That's a perfect example of
compassionate thinking, Jenny—noticing a problem or obstacle, and then instead
of getting caught up in it and giving up, asking What might be helpful in working with
thiso When you did that, not only were you able to address the obstacle, but you
found a way to make the practice work even better—a way that hadn’t even
occurred to your therapist.

Jenny: That is pretty cool.

Therapist: It sure is. I’m gonna steal that ocean-mp3 idea, by the way. That's pure gold!

Jenny: (Laugbs.) Feel free.

Therapist: | thought we might try out another imagery exercise. Does that sound all right?

Jenny: Sure.

Therapist: As we've discussed, self-criticism has been a struggle for you, and you've had
experiences of being criticized and picked on by others—really painful
experiences.


Jenny: (Gets a somewhat pained expression; looks down, speaks slowly.) Yeah.

Therapist: I can tell those memories—those experiences in your mind—still bring a lot
of hurt with them. We want to use imagery to help you have very different
experiences—experiences of being cared about, accepted, and understood.

Jenny: (Looks up at the therapist.)

Therapist: We're going to imagine a perfect nurturer—someone who absolutely cares
about you, accepts you, deeply understands you, and wishes the very best for
you. Someone who would never judge or ridicule you. How does that sound?

Jenny: It’s hard to imagine. I’ve never had anyone like that.

Therapist: None of us has, really. Real people can't support us perfectly in that way—and
your compassionate image doesn't even have to be a person. It could be an
animal, or some other type of being. | know people who have used an ancient
tree, for example. The idea is to imagine a being that could help you feel safe,
accepted, understood, and supported. Let’s start by imagining the qualities your
nurturer would have. What would this being be like? How would the being
relate to you?


148

[PAGE 167]

Using Compassionate Imagery


Jenny: Well, they'd be nice to me, and would never make me feel stupid. They'd
accept me just as | am.

Therapist: That's great. So they'd be kind, and accepting. Anything else?

Jenny: They wouldn't judge or criticize me. They'd just like me.

Therapist: They wouldn't judge you. Maybe along with that, they would completely
understand you, understand where you're coming from...really liking you and
wanting to help and encourage you when youre struggling.

Jenny: Yeah, that sounds good.

Therapist: Let’s start with those qualities: kindness, acceptance, understanding, and
encouragement. Let's imagine what this kind being might be like—if it is human
or nonhuman, if it has a gender, what it might look like, that sort of thing. What
do you think your perfect compassionate image might be like?

Jenny: I dont know... (Pauses, thinking.)

Therapist: (Waits in silence.)

Jenny: I think it would be a woman. An older woman, who's gone through it and knows
what it’s like to grow up as a woman and go through all this.

Therapist: Someone who really understands, because she’s been through it.

Jenny: Exactly. She could maybe see some of herself in me, and knows how to help me
through it, because she’s gone through it herself.

Therapist: What might she look like? Sound like? How would she act?

Jenny: She'd have gray hair, and a really kind smile. She’d have a gentle voice, and
would laugh a lot. She’d have a good sense of humor.

Therapist: It sounds like she'd be a lot like your compassionate self—kind, wise, and
confident. Able to help you handle whatever comes up.

Jenny: Exactly.

Therapist: I think we have a great start, here. Would you like to start the exercise now?

Jenny: Sure. (Shifts into an upright posture, closes her eyes, and slows ber breathing.)

Therapist: Starting with a minute or so of soothing rhythm breathing... (Waits twenty
to thirty seconds.) Slowing down the body, slowing down the mind... (Waits
twenty to thirty seconds.)


149

[PAGE 168]

CFT Made Simple


Jenny: (Breathes quietly.)

Therapist: Bringing to mind the image of this kind, wise, confident woman who cares
deeply about you, understands you, and is there to support you.

Jenny: (Face relaxes a bit; breathes quietly.)

Therapist: Imagining her with you, smiling kindly at you. Imagine that she likes you, and
wants you to feel understood. Imagine her extending kindness and compassion
to you, in whatever way would be most helpful and soothing. Imagine what she
might do or say. Imagine being filled with her kindness, understanding, and
acceptance.


Jenny: (Continues to breathe quietly.)

Therapist: (Waits five minutes.) If anxiety or other difficult emotions come up for you, imagine
her there, understanding and supporting you. Imagine her supporting you as
you struggle, believing in you. She understands how hard it can be, and how
that isn’t your fault. Imagine her extending kindness and support as you face
these challenges.

Jenny: (Breathes quietly.)

Therapist: (Waits five minutes.) When you're ready, allow your eyes to gently open, bringing
the feelings of being accepted, understood, and supported with you, back into
the room.

Jenny: (Pauses a few moments, then slowly opens her eyes.)

Therapist: How was that?

Jenny: I really liked it. It was really beautiful, actually.

Therapist: Can you tell me about it?

Jenny: I could see her, and she was there with me...and at some point I figured out that
this was my future self. And she understood exactly what I’m going through,
and... (Begins crying softly.)

Therapist: (Waits quietly with a kind smile, eyes tearing up a bit.)

Jenny: (still crying) ...and she wanted me to be happy. And she knew that I am going to
be okay. That I’m going to make it. (Smiles softly.)

Therapist: (Leans in, speaking gently.) You are going to make it, Jenny.

Jenny: (Smiles.) 'm starting to believe that.


150

[PAGE 169]

Using Compassionate Imagery


In the example, we see how powerful this practice can be. There are certain elements demonstrated above that can deepen the experiential aspects of the practice. First, notice that before
introducing the exercise, the therapist follows up on other imagery practices to see if there are
obstacles to which they should attend. Jenny, like many clients, was able to problem-solve and
deepen her practice in working with an obstacle—which the therapist warmly reinforces. Moving
into the practice, the therapist speaks to a potential obstacle—that Jenny doesn’t have anyone in
her life like this—by generalizing it (“None of us really has someone like that”), and elaborating on
the nurturer’s qualities.
Before moving into the imagery itself, the therapist facilitates a collaborative exploration of
qualities Jenny would like her nurturer to have—in terms of both the emotional qualities and orientation she will have toward Jenny, and the physical qualities that will facilitate the imagery.
During the practice, the therapist prompts Jenny to first imagine the nurturer supporting her, and
then how this might play out should anxiety or other difficulties arise for her. As always, the therapist checks in after the exercise, taking a cue from Jenny’s ideal compassionate image about how to
support Jenny.
Finally, you'll notice that the therapist is visibly moved upon hearing about Jenny’s experience
with the imagery. While this is not a planned part of CFT (that would be disingenuous), | included
it because | became teary while writing the vignette and recalling such experiences in therapy. Of
course, the therapist’s emotionality should never play out in a way that intrudes upon or detracts
from the therapy, shifting the focus from the client to the therapist. However, I’ve found it can be
a powerful experience for clients to occasionally see that the therapist is genuinely moved by their
work in therapy. It’s important for the therapist to be a real human being with real feelings, and
allowing that to show sometimes can create meaningful moments that deepen the therapy experience. It can also model courageousness and acceptance for clients who may struggle in allowing
themselves to experience or express their own emotions.
As you might suspect, the exercise doesn’t always go as smoothly as it did with Jenny. As with
all of the practices, we don’t want to force things if it becomes clear the practice isn’t working for
the client (although we don’t want to give up at the first sign of resistance, either). For example, |
had a client for whom this exercise consistently brought up deep pain associated with her experience
of never having had anyone who seemed to offer her genuine caring—the act of trying to imagine
someone being so kind to her activated her attachment system in very threatening ways. For this
client, it was much more helpful to use the Compassionate Self exercise to extend compassion to
herself—which didn’t trigger the same powerful emotional memories—as well as working to develop
real-life relationships that provided her with real-world experiences of acceptance and support.


OTHER IMAGERY EXERCISES
While I’ve focused on the safe place and ideal compassionate image practices, there are a number
of other imagery exercises that are common to CFT. A recurrent theme in these practices is the


151

[PAGE 170]

CFT Made Simple


flow of compassion—into the self from outside, from the self to the self (or aspects of the self, like
pain), and from the self to others. In each of these practices, there is an emphasis on trying to create
experiences of receiving or giving compassion, complete with motivational aspects (to extend or
receive compassion), the felt experience of being filled with compassion or the warmth of extending it to others, imagery components (of being filled with compassion or it flowing out of the self
to others), and sometimes repeated phrases (for example, May you have happiness, peace, and ease). There
are a number of resources that detail examples of compassion-focused imagery practices (e.g.
Germer, 2009; Kolts & Chodron, 2013). P'll briefly describe a few of these practices.


Compassion for Distress, Threat Feelings, and Pain
In this practice, the client shifts into the kind, wise, confident perspective of the compassionate
self, and imagines sending compassion out to parts of the self that are experiencing distress, pain,
or threat feelings like anxiety, anger, or sadness (Gilbert, 2009a; Kolts 2012; Gilbert & Choden,
2013). The client imagines feelings of compassion and warmth arising within, and imagines extending that compassion out to the pain or discomfort. It can involve a visualization in which the compassion is pictured as a warm-colored light (the client picks the color) that surrounds, soothes, and
kindly envelopes the aspect of the self that is in pain.


Compassion for the Self
In this practice, which is similar to many Buddhist practices, the client imagines being filled
with compassion from an external or internal source. One variation involves imagining compassion
flowing in from the universe or an external source (such as one’s compassionate image) in the form
of colored light coming in through the heart or the crown of the head, filling the body, and creating
feelings of safeness and ease as it flows in and fills the person.
Another variation of this practice (which we touched on earlier) involves the client shifting into
the perspective of the compassionate self and imagining that she is extending compassion to a
struggling version of the self. In this practice, after a brief compassionate self induction, the vulnerable version of the self is imagined (anxious self, self-critical self, angry self, and so on), perhaps in
a difficult situation. From the perspective of the compassionate self, the client imagines extending
warm, compassionate feelings toward the struggling self—moved by how much this vulnerable self
is struggling. Perhaps she connects with the feelings and good intentions behind the struggle. (In
the case of Jenny, for example, the anxiety may be a reflection of how much she really wants to
connect with others). She then imagines extending compassion to this vulnerable version of the self
in whatever way would be most helpful, soothing, and reassuring. This practice can also involve
repeating phrases out loud or imaginally, in a warm tone of voice, tailored to what would be most
helpful. Common phrases used in compassion and loving-kindness meditation (in which compassion is the wish that the being be free from suffering, and loving-kindness is the wish that she has
happiness) include things like:


[52

[PAGE 171]

Using Compassionate Imagery


May you be free from suffering, (name).

May you be bappy, (name).

May you flourish, (name).

May you find peace, (name). (Gilbert & Choden, 2013, 247)

Variations of these phrases can be designed to focus on extending compassion to versions of
the self that are experiencing specific sorts of difficulties, including anxiety (May you be free of agitation
and anxiety. May you feel safe.), anger (May you be free of turmoil which stirs your anger and frustration), or selfcriticism (May you be free of pain that causes this self-criticism) (Gilbert & Choden, 2013). Statements involving “being free” of difficult affective states should ideally be embedded within an overall practice
that involves building up feelings of safeness, peace, and balance.


Compassion for Others
Increasingly, research shows that practices such as loving-kindness and compassion meditation
focused on the well-being of others produces measurable benefits for the self in terms of both happiness and behavioral outcomes such as mindfulness, purpose in life, social support, and reductions
in illness (e.g. Frederickson, Cohn, Coffey, Pek, & Finkel, 2008). While CFT places a strong focus
on the development of self-compassion, I think it’s important that the focus really be on developing
compassion for everyone, with an acknowledgment that the self is included in this. Given that the
safeness system is designed by evolution to respond to connection, the social gains that can be
produced through development of increased compassion for others are clearly desirable for clients.
Additionally, deepening compassion for others can play a primary role in the treatment of clients
struggling with behaviors that can actually harm others, such as in problematic anger (Kolts, 2012).
A number of practices can be used in cultivating compassion and loving-kindness for others, many
of which are adapted from Buddhist sources (e.g. Salzberg, 1995):

e Loving-kindness meditation: Imagine sending compassion out to another person—a
loved one, someone who is suffering, or even someone with whom the client is strug-
gling. (It’s usually easier to begin with someone the client cares about and wants to
help.) Shifting into the perspective of the compassionate self, the client visualizes
sending kindness, warmth, and compassionate wishes to the other person. This can
involve the client imagining his kindness and compassion extending to the other person
in the form of light, filling that person with peace, ease, and happiness. It can also
involve saying the phrases described in the “Compassion for the Self” section above,
this time directed at the other person. The phrases can be tailored to the specific needs
of the recipient, with the emphasis on feelings of warmth, compassion, and the desire
to be helpful to the person.


153

[PAGE 172]

CFT Made Simple


e The client can visualize another person (or actually look at the person), reminding
herself that this person, just like everyone else, only wants to be happy and to not
suffer. This brief practice can be done while walking, or waiting at a stoplight, or at any
other time another person is present. The idea is to repeatedly get into the habit of
becoming aware of others in a compassionate way.

e Asan extension of the previous practice, the client can visualize another person, with
the awareness that just like everyone else, that person has a life that runs just as deep as
the client’s—just as filled with hopes, dreams, triumphs, tragedies, disappointments,
and the full range of human experiences. The other person can be visualized going
through the cycle of life from birth to death, being born as a helpless child, growing up
and maturing (with all that entails), growing older, and dying, with the meditator imag-
ining extending compassion and loving-kindness to the individual throughout the
process. This practice can be punctuated by the reflection, If I could contribute to this person’s
life, what sort of life would I want them to bave?, connecting with one’s deep wish that others
could find happiness and freedom from suffering (Kolts, 2012; Kolts & Chodron, 2013).

There are many other compassion and loving-kindness practices that motivated clients can use
to deepen their experience of compassion for themselves and others. In addition to books (e.g.
Kolts £ Chodron, 2013; Gilbert & Choden, 2013; Germer, 2009; Neff, 2011), a quick Internet
search for “compassion and loving-kindness meditation” brings up numerous written and guided
audio practices that can be used to cultivate compassion for oneself and others. Pd recommend
working collaboratively with individual clients to find specific practices that work for them. The key
is to find ways to help clients learn to feel moved (warm sympathy rather than harsh criticism)
when faced with their suffering and the suffering of others, and to develop feelings of warmth and
the kind motivation to help.


SUMMARY
Imagery can be a powerful tool as clients grow in their capacity to work with emotions and extend
compassion to themselves and others. In using imagery in therapy, the key is to begin with an idea
of the underlying psychological processes we wish to facilitate. Is it helping the client create feelings of safeness in herself? Learn to accept compassion from an external source? Learn to develop
and extend compassion toward her own pain and difficult emotions? Learn to develop and extend
compassion to other people? With these processes in mind, we can select imagery exercises and
structure a practice plan that will help clients gradually deepen their capacity to self-soothe and to
feel genuine compassion for themselves and others.


154

[PAGE 173]

CHAPTER 12


Embodying Compassion:
Chair Work in CFT


In helping clients work compassionately with difficult emotions, CFT seeks to make things as experiential as possible. A powerful way to accomplish this is through chair work, including emptychair, two-chair, and multiple-chair exercises. Chair work brings an immediacy and intensity that
allow clients to work compassionately with difficult emotions in real time.
CFT draws heavily from the work of a pioneer of modern chair work, Leslie Greenberg, who
along with his colleagues has placed chair work as a central component of emotion-focused therapy
(EFT) and applied it extensively with self-critical patients (Greenberg, Rice, & Elliot, 1993,
Greenberg & Watson, 2006; Pos & Greenberg, 2012). A recent pilot study demonstrated the usefulness of such chair work for increasing self-compassion and self-reassurance in self-critical clients, in
addition to decreasing self-criticism and symptoms of anxiety and depression (Shahar et al., 2012).


CHAIR WORK IN CFT
CFT builds upon the EFT approach to chair work by emphasizing the role of the compassionate
self. In CFT, the focus is on the continued development of the compassionate self and the application of this aspect of the self in working with difficult emotions and self-criticism (Gilbert, 2010).
In this chapter, I’ll present a few variations of how compassion-focused chair work can be applied
in therapy.

[PAGE 174]

CFT Made Simple


Empty-Chair Work
When working with self-critical clients who may have a hard time viewing their difficulties
from a compassionate perspective, empty-chair work can be a good way to start. Empty-chair work
can be brought into the therapy shortly after introducing the Compassionate Self practice as a way
to help clients more deeply connect with this compassionate perspective, especially as it applies to
themselves. In this practice, we bring in another chair, positioned across from the client’s chair.
Beginning with a Compassionate Self exercise, we have the client imagine another person, perhaps
someone the client cares about, sitting in the chair opposite him. We have him imagine that this
person is presenting with a challenge that is very similar to the one the client has been experiencing, and around which he has criticized himself. We have the client imagine how he would feel
about and interact with this beloved person from the kind, wise, confident perspective of the compassionate self. Let’s consider how this exercise might look:

Therapist: Josh, we've been talking about your struggles with anger, and how you feel a lot
of shame around that.

Josh: Yeah. ..it makes me feel like a piece of shit. This stuff has been helping, but
sometimes | come home from work and I just want to have a good time with my
wife and the kids. Then some small thing sets me off—the kids whining about
their homework or something—and | find myself raising my voice to them
instead. You can see them tense up, and they all look at me like I’m the problem.
I see them walking on eggshells around me. It makes me sick. I’m trying to get
my shit together, but | just keep doing it. ’m a terrible husband and father.

Therapist: That sounds like it feels awful.

Josh: Yeah, but it’s my own damn fault.

Therapist: I'm wondering if you'd be willing to try an exercise that would help us bring
some compassion to this situation. Something to strengthen that compassionate
self we've been building up to help you work with your anger?

Josh: I guess I’m willing to try anything at this point.

Therapist: That’s the sort of courage that’s really going to help as we go through this
process. This is going to be an “empty-chair” exercise, so I’m going to move this
chair right here opposite yours, okay?

Josh: Okay... (somewhat dubiously)

Therapist: (Smiles.) Trust me...there’s a reason for the chair. When| first learned about chair
techniques, | thought it was a little weird, too. But I’m sold on it, now.

Josh: All right.


156

[PAGE 175]

Embodying Compassion: Chair Work in CFT


Therapist: Let’s begin with the Compassionate Self practice we introduced last session.
We'll start by doing some soothing rhythm breathing, focusing our attention on
slowing down the body, slowing down the mind.

Josh: (Straightens, closes his eyes, and slows his breathing.)

Therapist: (Waits one minute or so.) Now let’s shift into the kind, wise, confident perspective
of the compassionate self. Imagining that youre filled with the kind wish to
benefit others and yourself. (Waits thirty seconds.) Filled with a deep wisdom and
the ability to see things from many perspectives. (Waits thirty seconds.) And a
deep, courageous confidence, knowing that whatever arises, I can work with this, too.
(Waits thirty seconds.) When youre ready, slowly open your eyes, bringing this
compassionate perspective with you into the room.

Josh: (Waits a bit, then slowly opens his eyes.)

Therapist. Josh, Pd like you to imagine that in this chair is someone you like and care
about...maybe a good friend you enjoy hanging out with and would want to
help. Do you have someone like that?

Josh: Yeah. My buddy Nathan is like that. We hang out all the time, watching sports
and things like that. We also talk a lot—he’s about the only person I talk about
this stuff with.

Therapist: It’s great to hear that you have someone you can talk with. It sounds like you
guys are pretty close.

Josh: Nathan gets it. He's like a brother.

Therapist: Perfect. Josh, let's imagine that Nathan is sitting here in this chair, and that
he's just been really vulnerable. He's told you that he's struggled with anger
his whole life, that he's worked really hard to control it but it seems like
nothing works. He's told you that despite his best efforts, he sometimes raises
his voice to his wife and kids, and he knows they walk on eggshells around
him. He's even getting therapy to try and help with it, which was really
difficult for him to do. He tells you he feels like a terrible husband and father.
He’s really feeling ashamed.

Josh: I think I see where you're going with this...

Therapist: I bet you do. But let’s see if we can go with it, shall we? If Nathan were here in
this chair, and he had just told you all of this about his struggles with anger, how
would you feel about him? Would you condemn him?

Josh: Condemn him? No. Pd tell him I know what it is like.


157

[PAGE 176]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: Seeing him struggle with this anger, seeing how hard this is for him, what would
you feel?

Josh: I'd feel terrible for him. And I guess I'd look up to him for being so honest about
it, and for getting help. That’s hard to do.

Therapist: It sure is. From this place of compassion—seeing his struggle and wanting to
help—what would you want him to understand? How might you reassure him?

Josh: Pd want him to understand that he isn't the only one...that I feel like that too,
sometimes. I’d tell him some of what we've talked about—that it isn’t his fault
that he learned to get angry, and that he can learn things that will help. Pd tell
him the fact that he's concerned about what kind of husband and father he is
probably means he's a pretty good one, and that I know for sure he's a damn
good friend. And going to therapy—that’s tough.

Therapist: Josh, that's wonderful. Your compassionate self has a lot to say to Nathan. How
do you think he'd feel if he heard that?

Josh: I think he’d feel better. I know I’ve felt better when he’s said that kind of stuff
to me.


Therapist: So he’s encouraged you like this in the past?

Josh: Yeah. Like I said, he’s like a brother to me.

Therapist: I've noticed that the things you would say to Nathan—and the things he says to
you—are very different from the condemning way your self-critic talks to you
when youve struggled with anger. Which ways of talking seem to be more
helpful—the compassionate reassurance and encouragement, or the condemning
self-criticism? Which way of talking to yourself will help you shift out of the
angry, threatened self and into the man you want to be?

Josh: I think I get it. Beating myself up only makes it worse.

Therapist: True. But were not just talking about refraining from beating yourself up. It’s
about finding ways to compassionately reassure yourself and encourage yourself
to do better—to help yourself the way you would want to help someone you
cared about, like Nathan. Or the way Nathan would help you. Do you think that
would be more helpful than beating yourself up?

Josh: It probably would.

Therapist: When youre home at the end of the day, just wanting things to go well, and one
of the kids starts whining, you might even try to take a few breaths, slow things


158

[PAGE 177]

Embodying Compassion: Chair Work in CFT


down, and imagine what that compassionate version of you might do. Or even
imagine what Nathan might say to help you keep from getting angry.

Josh: I believe that might help. I think Pl try that.

This example is adapted from numerous sessions in which I’ve used chair work with clients who
struggle with anger. It was very helpful that Josh was able to identify a good friend— Nathan—for
whom it was easy for Josh to feel and direct compassion. It also helped that Josh and Nathan had a
friendship in which they actually talked about things, so it was easier for Josh to connect with a
compassionate, encouraging perspective around the anger. This isn’t always the case, particularly
for people who struggle with anger (and perhaps even more so with men), so sometimes more work
is required to set up the imagery of someone the client is likely to relate to in a compassionate
versus condemning manner. This is one reason that I often like to do CFT for anger treatment in
groups. In groups, we can create a shared camaraderie and compassionate understanding among
members who know how hard it is, and can model the sort of compassionate understanding and
encouragement to one another that Nathan modeled to Josh in the example above.


Two-Chair Work
The hope is that by the time we get to chair work, previous layers of therapy (the therapeutic
relationship, understandings about the evolved brain and social shaping of the self, Compassionate
Self work) will have laid the groundwork for self-compassion. If so, we can use two-chair work to
deepen the client’s experience of self-compassion, bringing it directly into the present moment.
There are different ways to set this up. First, we'll explore putting the compassionate self in one
chair, and the vulnerable self (anxious, depressed, angry, and so on) in the other, and facilitating a
dialogue between them. In the second case, we can assist the client in working with self-criticism
by facilitating a dialogue between the compassionate self and the self-critical self. In CFT, all of this
work is focused on developing and strengthening the kind, wise, courageous perspective of the
compassionate self so that clients can get better and better at applying these qualities in their lives.


FACILITATING DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE COMPASSIONATE
AND VULNERABLE SELVES

In this practice, two chairs are set up, and the therapist assists the client in having a dialogue
between a version of herself that represents the emotion with which she is struggling (such as
anxiety, depression, or anger) and her wise, kind, confident compassionate self. Typically, we'll have
the client begin in the vulnerable chair, inviting that version of the self to speak its piece—to really
let the fear, sadness, or anger flow. Sometimes more than one of these emotions will show up for
the client, in which case we can use the Multiple Selves exercise introduced in chapter 14.
Once the threat-based self has had its say, the client is prompted to shift into the compassionate
chair, at which point the therapist guides her in shifting into the perspective of the compassionate


159

[PAGE 178]

CFT Made Simple


self. From this perspective, the client then compassionately addresses the vulnerable self, offering
validation, understanding, kindness, and encouragement (with guidance from the therapist if
needed). Should the client find herself shifting out of the perspective of the compassionate self and
back into threat-based language, its no problem—the therapist just prompts her to switch chairs
until the vulnerable self has had her say. Let’s consider how this might look:

Therapist: Jenny, we've been exploring how you can bring compassion to your fears with
the Compassionate Self practice and things like the compassionate letter. It’s my
sense that these have been helpful. Is that right?

Jenny: They really have. It’s been nice to see things from that perspective. The letter
has really helped—I've read it a lot, and it’s helped encourage me to do things
that I usually don't.

Therapist: That's great. As we've discussed, a big part of working compassionately with
anxiety is to help you to face your fears—to be able to do things, even when
youre scared of them, so that you can learn that you can do it.

Jenny: Yeah, I’ve been doing more of that. It seems to be helping, although it isn’t fun.

Therapist: | would imagine not—it’s tough to face the things that scare us, and you're doing
a great job. Today I'd like to introduce another practice we can use to deepen
that work and bring compassion and encouragement to that anxious part of you.
How does that sound?

Jenny: Pd be up for that.

Therapist: Great! This is a two-chair exercise, so I'll have you moving arounda bit. (Gets up
to set up two chairs facing one another in the middle of the room.) This chair is the “anxious
chair.” (Gestures toward the chair.) We'll put Anxious Jenny in this chair, and let her
express all of her fears.

Jenny: (Nods.) Okay.

Therapist: (Gestures toward the other chair.) In this chair, we'll put Compassionate Jenny, who'll
be listening to Anxious Jenny, feeling compassion for her, and offering her
compassion, understanding, and encouragement. Does that make sense?

Jenny: I think so. It seems a little weird, though.

Therapist: Initially it can seem a little weird. No worries—I'm here to facilitate things.
Ill give you prompts for what to think about and do, instructions on when to
change chairs, and things like that. If you’re ready, how about you sit down
over here in the anxious chair?


160

[PAGE 179]

Embodying Compassion: Chair Work in CFT


Jenny: Okay. (Moves to the anxious chair.)

Therapist: In this chair, we'll give Anxious Jenny the mic, so that we can really hear her
perspective. You've got a lot of things you're working on—this group project,
wanting to do more social activities, even to start dating. Does Anxious Jenny
have much to say about that stuff?

Jenny: She sure does.

Therapist: Well, here’s her chance. Take a few minutes to allow yourself to feel the fears and
anxiety about these things you want to do. Notice how the anxiety feels in your
body. Imagine yourself working in the group project, going out with friends,
going on dates. What fears or anxieties come up? Talk about how youre feeling
in real time.

Jenny: (Closes her eyes for a bit, then opens them.) There are all these things I want to do, but
I’m terrified of doing them.

Therapist: What are you afraid of?

Jenny: I’m afraid that I'll put myself out there, and they’ll all hate me. I'll say the wrong
thing, and look stupid. I’m afraid that just when | start feeling comfortable,
they'll make fun of me, and reject me. (Becomes tearful.)

Therapist: You're doing great, Jenny. Let the fears come.

Jenny: If they get to know me, really get to know me, they won't like me. I’m not like
them, and they’ll see that. (Cries openly.) It'll be just like it was before. What's
wrong with me? Why won't they like me?

Therapist: (Leans in kindly, waits silently.) Does Anxious Jenny have anything more she needs
to say?


Jenny: (Dabs her tears and gently smiles.) No, | think that’s about it.

Therapist: Think youre ready to switch chairs?

Jenny: I think so. (Gets up and switches chairs.)

Therapist: Slowing down the breath. (Waits thirty seconds.) Bringing up the kind, wise,
courageous perspective of the compassionate self. Once again, imagining
yourself filled with these qualities: the kind wish to help yourself and others,
the wisdom to see deeply from many perspectives, the courage to face the
scary things. Imagine yourself filled with compassion.

Jenny: (Closes ber eyes and breathes slowly and quietly.)


161

[PAGE 180]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: When youre ready, opening your eyes and looking at Anxious Jenny, sitting
there, sharing her fears with us. She just wants to be accepted—to participate, to
have friends, to date. She's doing her best, but she's scared because of the things
that have happened to her. From this compassionate perspective—filled with
kindness—how do you feel about her?

Jenny: I feel terrible for her. It’s so hard for her. She just wants to fit in, wants people
to like her. She's so scared she'll be hurt again.

Therapist: It makes sense that she’d feel this way, doesn't it?

Jenny: It does make sense, after what happened to her.

Therapist: From this compassionate perspective, I'd like you to talk with Jenny—validate
her, encourage her—offering whatever might be helpful. Talk with Jenny like
she’s sitting right there in this chair, right now.

Jenny: (Pauses, thinking.) Jenny, you've been scared for a long time, and you've tried
locking yourself away from the world so you don't get hurt again. But what
happened to you wasn't your fault. (Pauses.) | don't know why those girls did
what they did, but it didn't have anything to do with you. That was a long time
ago. Youve met lots of people since then who have been nice to you, and who
like you. (Pauses.)

Therapist: That's great, Jenny. Can you encourage her? What do you want her
to understand?

Jenny: Jenny, it makes sense that youre scared, but you're working hard on this, and it's
paying off. The other members of your group like you. The girls on your floor
invite you out with them, which means they probably like you. It’s time to start
taking more chances.

Therapist: Jenny, (gesturing toward the other chair) she’s afraid that if they really get to know her,
they
Il reject her. What do you want her to know?

Jenny: (Looks at the other chair.) You are a good person. You are kind, and you think of
others before yourself. You do your best. (Pauses.) There’s nothing wrong with
you. (Eyes redden.)

Therapist: Jenny, could you say that again?

Jenny: There's nothing wrong with you. (Cries, smiling gently)

As we see above, the power of two-chair work is its ability to translate the understandings of
the compassionate self into felt experiential realizations. These can be powerful moments in therapy,


162

[PAGE 181]

Embodying Compassion: Chair Work in CFT


as clients learn what it means to really feel and express kindness and compassion toward themselves. The therapist sets the stage for the interchange and uses Socratic dialogue to facilitate it,
but creates space so that the dialogue comes directly from the client—helping only as needed to
aid the client in connecting with the emotional selves, and to connect with and express compassion.
This work is a lot easier (and tends to go more smoothly) when the groundwork has been laid in
the ways described in previous chapters.


FACILITATING DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE COMPASSIONATE,
VULNERABLE, AND SELF-CRITICAL SELVES

Another way to use two-chair work is to help facilitate a dialogue between the compassionate
self, the vulnerable self, and the self-critic. This work is reminiscent of that seen in Emotion-Focused
Therapy, in which chair work is used to help the client come face-to-face with the self-critic
(Greenberg, Rice, & Elliot, 1993, Greenberg & Watson, 2006; Pos & Greenberg, 2012). As we discussed above, the difference is that in CFT, a strong emphasis is on the development and application of the compassionate self in understanding, relating to, and soothing the vulnerable self and
self-critic.
This can play out in different ways, depending upon the motivation of the internalized selfcritic. We can get at this by asking Socratic questions like, “What does your self-critic want?”
“What is his motivation?” “What are you afraid might happen if your self-critic stopped talking?”
For some clients, self-criticism plays a primarily behavioral function and is simply the learned strategy they use to motivate themselves. As we've seen with Jenny, it’s a tool that seems to work sometimes, despite its drawbacks (You're so pathetic. Everyone else can do this. Just get on with it!). In other clients,
the self-critic can be motivated by fear—designed to keep them in line, shutting them down so that
they don't engage in behaviors that might be risky (You're just going to screw this up. There's no point in even
trying.).
For other clients, however, the self-criticism is anchored in a deep sense of self-loathing or selfhatred, often acquired through abusive experiences, trauma, or the experience of having done
something that is antithetical to their values. In this case the critic can arise from the internalized
voice of an abuser, or from a desire to harm and punish the self (Gilbert, 2010). It can be useful to
have a sense of this beforehand, because it gets at the underlying motivation of the self-critic—to
help, or to harm. For the client who uses self-criticism to motivate herself, we can frame the dialogue around the compassionate self acknowledging that the self-critic is only trying to help, and
stepping in to help by taking over the role of self-motivator. Chair work can also help to explore the
motivation behind the self critic, to identify whether it is an internalized voice of an abuser, and to
build mindful awareness of the emotional impact of the self-critical inner voice. The exercise can
also help clients learn distress tolerance in the face of self-criticism, as well as the ability to shift
perspectives between the critical, vulnerable, and compassionate selves. Let's consider a clinical
example in which a number of the self-critical dynamics mentioned above are manifested:


163

[PAGE 182]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: Josh, you did a great job with the chair exercise last week. When you imagined
your friend Nathan struggling with anger, it seemed like you were able to
connect with your compassionate self in understanding and relating to him.

Josh: Yeah, that seemed to go pretty good.

Therapist: It sounds like the compassionate way you related to Nathan in that exercise was
very different from how you talk to yourself a lot of the time. Like last session
when you called yourself “a terrible father.” It sounds like your internal self-critic
can get pretty loud sometimes.

Josh: Yeah. | disgust myself. | keep trying to get my shit together, and it seems like it
works for a while, and then I just fuck it up again.

Therapist: Sounds like your self-critic has a lot to say. Now that you've had some experience
of how the wise, kind, compassionate version of you would relate to Nathan, |
was wondering if we could do another chair exercise, in which we explore the
different perspectives of self-criticism and compassion in working with these
feelings. Up for giving it a go?

Josh: Sure. I don’t really know what you want me to do, though.

Therapist: Well, let’s see if we can make that clear. I’m going to arrange these three chairs
here. (Sets out three chairs in a triangle-shaped pattern, with each chair pointed inward, toward the
others.) This chair (pointing) will be for your self-critic. Anytime you have anything
critical to say about yourself, you can let it roll...as long as youre sitting in this
chair. This chair (pointing to the second chair) is for your vulnerable self—the part of
you that the critic is criticizing and attacking. This is the part of you that feels
the effects of the criticism. Over here (pointing to the third chair) is for your
compassionate self. This is the wise, kind, courageous part of you that wants to
help both of these other parts of the self—to help the criticized self feel safe and
manage his emotions, and help calm the self-critic so that he doesn't have to be
so attacking. That make sense so far?

Josh: (looking a bit skeptical) I think so...

Therapist: Great. How about you sit in this chair (pointing to vulnerable-self chair), and tell me
about a recent time when you struggled with anger?

Josh: Okay. (Moves to the chair.) Two nights ago | let the dog out in our backyard. My
daughter Chloe and her friends had been playing outside, and had left the gate
open. So the dog takes off through the open gate and starts running around the
neighborhood. I was so pissed. I had to chase him down, and I was yelling at
him as I carried him back in the house. When I got back in, I just dropped him


164

[PAGE 183]

Embodying Compassion: Chair Work in CFT


and snapped at Chloe for not closing the gate. She and her mother just looked
at me like | was a monster, and they both avoided me the rest of the night.

Therapist: What was that like for you?

Josh: I was just so angry when it happened—at the dog, at Chloe. | looked like an
idiot chasing the dog around the neighborhood. Why can't she just close the
damn gate, you know? But then I made it worse by yelling and snapping at her.
I always make it worse.

Therapist: It sounds like your self-critic has something to say about this. Want to shift into
this chair over here? (Points to the critic chair.)

Josh: (Switches chairs.) Okay.

Therapist: So in this chair, you can let the criticism roll. Looking back at this chair (gesturing
toward the chair Josh just vacated), see that version of yourself...the one that got angry,
chased after the dog, yelled, dropped the dog, and snapped at Chloe. The one
you said always makes it worse. What does your self-critic have to say to him?
Imagine that youre speaking directly to him, just like last week.

Josh: You're screwing everything up. (Looks at the therapist.) Like that?

Therapist: (Nods, gesturing back toward the criticized-self chair.) Just like that.

Josh: (Looks back to the chair.) You're an idiot. You're a terrible father and husband. What
the fuck is wrong with you, making a huge deal out of everything? If they had
any sense, they'd leave you! Why do you always have to fuck everything up?
You disgust me! (Shakes his bead and looks down.)

Therapist: (Waits in silence for thirty seconds or so.) Anything else?

Josh: I think that about covers it.

Therapist: So let’s shift back to this chair... (Gestures toward the vulnerable-self chair.)

Josh: (Switches chairs.)

Therapist: Let yourself receive all those things the self-critic had to say. (Gestures toward the
self-critic chair.) He called you a terrible father and husband, accused you of always
fucking everything up... What’s it feel like to hear those things?

Josh: (Shrinks into the chair and looks down.) It feels terrible. It feels like it’s true. | want to
do better, but it seems like I just keep screwing things up.

Therapist: Look at him. (Gestures toward the self-critic chair) How do you feel about him?


165

[PAGE 184]

CFT Made Simple


Josh: I’m scared of him. He sounds just like my dad. | just want him to leave me alone.

Therapist: So your father used to criticize you like that.

Josh: All the time. I could never do anything right.

Therapist: That sounds like compassionate wisdom to me—figuring out where part of
that self-critical voice and maybe some of the anger you struggle with comes
from. How about we give the compassionate chair a try? (Gestures toward the
compassionate-self chair.)

Josh: All right. (Switches to the compassionate-self chair.)

Therapist: So let’s take a few moments to slow down our breathing, and connect with those
qualities of the compassionate self. (Waits ten seconds.) Imagine being filled with the
kind desire to help both of these guys (gesturing toward the two empty chairs) .. the
wisdom to look deeply and see things from different perspectives. ..and the
courage to work with the really difficult stuff.

Josh: (Sits quietly.)

Therapist: From this wise, compassionate perspective, how can we understand these two
guys? Let's start with this one. (Gestures toward the vulnerable-self chair.) He's sitting
there, feeling ashamed about what he’s done, hearing all this criticism. How
does he feel?

Josh: He feels terrible. Hopeless. He just wants to be left alone.

Therapist: He feels like he’s always screwing up?

Josh: Well, he is always screwing up.

Therapist: That sounds like your self-critic showing back up. Should we switch chairs?
(Gestures toward the critic chair.)

Josh: No, I'm good.

Therapist: So looking at this guy (pointing back to the vulnerable self) from this kind,
compassionate perspective, what do you understand about him? Is he trying to
screw everything up? Is that what he wants?

Josh: No. He’s not trying to screw it up. He feels terrible about it. He’s not doing it
on purpose.


Therapist: So his motivation is actually to do better, but it’s hard for him?

Josh: Yeah. He wants to do better, but he doesn’t know how.


166

[PAGE 185]

Embodying Compassion: Chair Work in CFT


Therapist: (Gestures toward the self-critic chair.) What about him? What’s his story?

Josh: He just wants that guy (gesturing toward the vulnerable-self chair) to quit being such
a fuck-up. He’s just sick of it.

Therapist: He’s pretty harsh... You said he sounds like your father used to sound?

Josh: Yeah. That’s just the kind of thing my father used to say to me.

Therapist: So we can understand how the self-critic learned to be this way?

Josh: Oh yeah...

Therapist: So when your self-critic attacks him (gesturing toward the criticized-self chair), does it
help? Does it help him do better?

Josh: (Pauses for a moment.) No. It just makes him feel bad.

Therapist: That sounds like compassionate understanding to me. It sounds like you
understand how the self-critic learned to be so harsh—from your father—but
you know that the harshness isn’t helpful. What would you like to say to him,
from this compassionate, understanding perspective? (Gestures toward the self-critic.)

Josh: (Turns toward the self-critic chair.) Look, | get it. You're tired of it. We're all tired of it.
But the attacking and running him down doesn't help. It just makes you mad and
makes it harder on him. (Gestures toward the criticized self) You don’t want to be like
Dad. (Hangs bis bead.)

Therapist: Josh, you're doing really well. That feels really vulnerable. How about switching
back to that chair? (Points to the vulnerable-self chair.)

Josh: (Switches chairs.)

Therapist: It sounds like part of you is really scared of ending up like your father.

Josh: Yeah... | mean, he was a great man. But growing up, I was scared of him a lot
of the time. He got so angry at every little thing. I’d just avoid him whenever
I could. I don’t want my kids to feel that way about me. | don’t want them to
learn that stuff from me the way I learned it from him.

Therapist: How do you want them to feel about you, Josh?

Josh: (tearful) | want them to love me, you know. And to know that I love them.
But I keep fucking it up. | need to do better.

Therapist: That's why youre here, isn’t it? Because you want to do better? You've been
working hard at that, haven’t you?


167

[PAGE 186]

CFT Made Simple


Josh: Yeah. | just wish it worked faster.

Therapist. Josh, would you be willing to switch back to this chair? (Gestures toward the
compassionate-self chair.)

Josh: Sure. (Moves.)

Therapist: From this compassionate perspective, look at Josh here. (Gestures toward the
vulnerable-self chair.) He's here in therapy, trying to learn to do better, to be a good
model for the kids. It’s not easy for him, is it?

Josh: No, it’s really hard.

Therapist: How do you feel about him?

Josh: | feel bad for him, you know?

Therapist: Do you want to help him?

Josh: I do. I mean, I would if I could.

Therapist: Well, you've seen how hard he's been working. Has he made any progress?

Josh: I guess he has. A couple of times this week, I—I mean, be—started to get mad
and then calmed down. I don’t know if anyone even noticed, but I did. It was
one of those times when I would have gotten worked up, and I just breathed for
a while instead. I’ve also been spending more fun time with the kids like we
talked about.

Therapist: So youve seen his efforts pay off a bit. But he’s sitting there, feeling hopeless and
terrible about himself—terrified that he’ll make his kids feel just like he felt
about his father. What do you want to say to him? What do you want him to
understand? (Gestures toward the vulnerable-self chair.)

Josh: (Looks at the chair.) You’re not Dad, at least not the bad parts. He never even saw it
as a problem, and he sure as hell didnt seem to care what we thought about it.
You care, and youre trying to do better.

Therapist: How might you encourage him to keep going?

Josh: Youre working hard, and it's helping. Sure, you still screw up sometimes, but
you can't expect to be perfect.

Therapist: That's great...keep going. ..let him know you see what he's doing right.

Josh: You did a good job calming down and making time to play soccer with the kids.
They hada lot of fun. (Turns to the therapist.) It really was fun.


168

[PAGE 187]

Embodying Compassion: Chair Work in CFT


Therapist: Sounds like it. Would your compassionate self recommend more of those sorts
of activities with the kids?

Josh: Sure would.

Therapist. How about we finish up back in this chair? (Gestures toward the vulnerable-self chair.)

Josh: (Switches chairs.)

Therapist. Let's take a moment to let those things that Compassionate Josh had to say sink
in—noticing how hard youre working to do better, the successes you've had,
encouraging you to keep going. How does that feel?

Josh: It feels good. A little weird.

Therapist. A little weird...

Josh: Yeah, I’ve just never talked to myself like that before.

Therapist. But it feels good?

Josh: Yeah...not so hopeless. Encouraging, | guess.

Therapist. So which of those voices seems more helpful in terms of helping you manage the
anger and improve relationships with your family? (Gestures toward the empty chairs.)

Josh: That one. (Points to the compassionate-self chair.)

Therapist: It sounds like once you let yourself really listen to Compassionate Josh, your
self-critic didn’t have as much to say.

Josh: No, he didn’t, did he?

In the vignette above, we see a number of things happening. The therapist elicits a dialogue
between the self-critic and the vulnerable self, to get a sense of the dynamics of Josh’s self-criticism.
The critic appears to be at least partially an internalized voice of Josh’s father, who modeled a lot
of anger. The critic also has a flavor of disgust, as well as perhaps the misguided intention to get
Josh to do better by attacking him. Note that when the therapist has Josh switch chairs, it’s often
quickly followed by a prompt to connect him with the affective dynamics of the interaction: “How
do you feel about him?” “How does it feel to hear that?” Compassionate understanding is brought
to both the perspective of the vulnerable self—who is trying but still struggles—and the perspective of the critic, who is playing out an angry, critical script learned from childhood experiences.
Finally, the compassionate self is prompted to extend understanding, kindness, and encouragement to the vulnerable self (with help and encouragement from the therapist), and then a contrast
is drawn between the impact of this compassionate interaction and the previous, critical ones.
You
ll note that we aren't trying to argue with or conquer the self-critic. Rather, the focus is on the


169

[PAGE 188]

CFT Made Simple


facilitation of compassionate understanding. Space permits only a small sample of what this exercise can involve—consider how you might have continued to facilitate things to help Josh learn
more about his internal dialogue, shift among these perspectives, and relate compassionately to
different aspects of the self.


SUMMARY
In this chapter, we explored the use of chair work to bring a strong experiential focus to the compassionate self, and to explore and apply compassion to the dynamics of self-criticism. The more we
can translate compassion into felt experiences, thoughts, and behaviors in the present moment, the
better. In the next chapter, we'll explore the role of case formulation in organizing our understanding of our clients and their challenges.


170

[PAGE 189]

CHAPTER 13


Compassionate Integration:
Case Formulation in CFT


A number of therapies use case formulation as a framework for developing an organized understanding of problem origins, maintaining factors, and treatment interventions that is centered on
the individual client (Eells, 2010). Particularly for complex cases, a case formulation gives clinicians
a way to organize all the information that clients are giving them in a way that sets the stage for
theory-based intervention. In this chapter, we'll explore case formulation in CFT.


KEY COMPONENTS OF A CFT CASE FORMULATION

The focus of case conceptualization and formulation in CFT can be thought of as “unpacking” the
threat response, so we can understand how historical and current factors have triggered threat
experiences in our clients that have shaped their behavioral responding (and over time, their lifestyles), as well as how they relate to themselves and others. Case formulation in CFT parallels our
focus on depathologizing client difficulties, in that it helps us understand their challenges in a
developmental context in which they make sense. Gilbert (2010, 69) describes CFT case formulation as developing an understanding of innate and historical influences that give rise to key external and
internal threats and fears that give rise to externally and internally focused safety strategies that produce problematic
unintended consequences, which impact self-to-self and self-to-other relating, which themselves shape ongoing
safety strategies. The CFT case formulation worksheet below depicts these elements in relationship to one another. (This worksheet is also available for download at http://www.newharbinger
.com/33094.) Let’s briefly explore each component of the formulation.

[PAGE 190]

CFT CASE FORMULATION WORKSHEET
CLI 14d


ape)

Unintended
Consequences [duis

External:


Innate and
Internal:
Historical Influences Key Fears Safety Strategies/
Defensive Behaviors
Emotional/Shame Memories:
External:
External:


Self as:
Internal:
Internal:


Others as: Relating


Self-to-Self:


Self-to-Other:


This worksheet was developed for the book CFT Made Simple, by Russell Kolts, based upon work by Paul Gilbert and the Compassionate Mind Foundation
(http://www.compassionatemind.co.uk). Permission is granted for the free reproduction and dissemination of this form for clinical or training purposes.

[PAGE 191]

Compassionate Integration: Case Formulation in CFT


Innate and Historical Influences
As we've discussed in previous chapters, a compassionate understanding of our client's problems and behaviors is based on understanding how these challenges make sense within the context
of the various biological and social influences that have shaped the client’s life. In this section of the
formulation, we'll draw upon client memories of significant life events, as well as early attachment
experiences and learning history, which we discussed in chapter 6. Emphasis is given to emotional
memories of care, threat, neglect, abuse, aloneness, shame, and any other experiences that may
have powerfully shaped how the client experiences herself and others (Gilbert, 2010). As you might
imagine, this history-taking takes place over time, as relational safeness is established within the
therapeutic relationship. With each revelation, we have the opportunity to model compassion, and
to help the client learn to relate to her own experiences with compassion, validation, and understanding of how these experiences shaped her life in ongoing ways.
This exploration can help us understand how clients learned to relate to themselves (as competent, vulnerable, flawed, worthy or unworthy of love and care, and so on) and to others (as safe,
dangerous, trustworthy or not). Cognitive therapists and schema therapists might call these basic
ideas self-schemas (or other-schemas), while attachment-oriented therapists might refer to them as
internal working models. In CFT, we emphasize the relationship of these core self- and otherrepresentations to emotional memories of interactions with others, and the felt-sense that they can
engender—playing out in terms of powerful emotional and bodily reactions that clients may struggle to understand or verbalize (Gilbert, 2010). We can also consider how such experiences shape
our clients’ experience of the three circles—relating to themselves and the world in ways that are
defined by patterns of threat, drive, and safeness—and whether they will tend to become rigidly
stuck within experiences of threat or drive, or are able to fluidly shift among emotions, motives,
and perspectives in response to different situations.


Key Fears
In a CFT case formulation, these historical influences can then give rise to key fears, core
threats, and unmet needs. These fears often originate in childhood and organize themselves around
core themes such as abandonment, rejection, shame, and harm or abuse (Gilbert, 1989, 2010; Beck,
Davis, £ Freeman, 2014). In CFT a distinction is made between external threats and internal threats
(Gilbert, 2010). External threats are anchored in one's experiences with others and the outside
world, and include themes like rejection, exploitation, or being harmed by others. Internal threats
can include things like fears of losing control, of being fundamentally flawed or unlovable, or of
being overwhelmed by depression, anxiety, or anger. Identifying core threats can be useful in
helping clients relate compassionately to their struggles, as they begin to understand relationships
between their histories, their basic fears, and troubling experiences they have in the present.


173

[PAGE 192]

CFT Made Simple


THE DOWNWARD ARROW METHOD

Given the sheer amount of material our clients may present to us, it can sometimes feel tricky
to identify a client’s core fear schemas. A powerful, straightforward method for doing so is the
downward arrow method, drawn from David Burns’s CBT work (Burns, 1980). In the downward arrow
method, the clinician begins by identifying a troubling thought or situation that is bothering the
client. Once the situation or thought is identified, the clinician responds with the questions (stated
together in a single verbalization), “Why is that upsetting to you? What does it mean?” (The words
“about you” can be inserted at the end of the second statement, if appropriate). After the client
responds, the statements are repeated until the client and therapist find themselves at the core
threat—a moment often marked bya visible shift in the client’s nonverbal behavior, as the emotional reality of stating the core threat hits home. Rather than trying to vary the wording of the
statements, it can be useful to let the client in on the technique, as demonstrated in the vignette
below:

Therapist. Josh, you were saying that you've been really upset lately about your son’s
behavior in the classroom. Although his report card was good, it sounds like you
have concerns about his behavior in class?

Josh: Yeah, I’ve really been worked up about it. At our conference, the teacher said
Aiden had been up out of his seat and was sometimes overly talkative, distracting
other students. I’ve gotten really angry about it—-way beyond what was called
for, because his grades are good. It just really bothers me.

Therapist: Let's see if we can get to the bottom of this. A lot of times, there are core fears
lying underneath troubling thoughts and situations that really bother us. Pd like
to try a technique called the downward arrow. What we're going to do is that I’m
going to ask you about this situation, and then repeat a couple of questions to
you over and over when you respond. Don’t be annoyed by that—these
questions will lead us right to your core fear. Does that sound all right?

Josh: Why not?

Therapist: Good. You mentioned getting really upset about Aiden’s behavior in class.
Why is that upsetting to you? What does it mean?

Josh: Well, it’s a problem. I mean, the teacher identified him as sometimes being
disruptive.

Therapist: So she mentioned he’s sometimes disruptive. Why is that upsetting? What
does it mean?

Josh: Well, in every class, there are a few “problem kids,” you know. I’m worried that
Aiden will be labeled as one of the problem kids in his class.


174

[PAGE 193]

Compassionate Integration: Case Formulation in CFT


Therapist: Why is that upsetting? What does it mean?

Josh: You know what people do with those kids. They blame the parents. They always
blame the parents.

Therapist: Why is that upsetting? What does it mean?

Josh: It means that the teacher or the other parents might think that I’m a bad father.

Therapist: So they might think that you're a bad father. Why is that upsetting? What does
that mean?

Josh: (Pauses, looks down.) Maybe I am a bad father.

Therapist: (Pauses.) Do you think that might be your core fear? That you might be a bad
father?

Josh: (Looks pensive, slowly nods.) Yeah. I think that's it. I've been worried about that
since before Aiden was born.

We see above that Josh’s core fear relates to an internal threat—that there is something about
him that guarantees he will fail as a father. Depending on their backgrounds, clients may also have
core fears related to both external and internal threats. Jenny, for example, presents with the external fear that others ultimately will reject her no matter what she does, and a related internal fear—
that perhaps there is something wrong with her that prompts such rejection. Understanding these
core fears can often provide a compassionate context for understanding the development of “maladaptive” coping on the part of the client.


Safety Strategies and Defensive Behaviors
Core fears can create great distress in our clients, and many of their problems will be rooted in
attempts to avoid this distress. In CFT, these are called safety strategies—defensive behaviors designed
to minimize threat-related distress. Often rooted in avoidance, these strategies are at work in many
of our clients—the PTSD patient who avoids situations that remind him of the trauma, and drinks
to cope with memories of it; the depressed or panic-disordered patient who doesn’t leave the
house; the angry client who blames everyone else for her outbursts, the acutely distressed teen who
cuts his arm to cope with powerful emotions. As we use Socratic dialogue to explore our clients’
presenting problems, examples of such safety strategies will often become apparent.
The key to recognizing safety strategies—whether they are acute coping behaviors or longstanding lifestyle choices—is that they tend to be threat-based, and often involve avoidance. Such
strategies are focused on minimizing contact with threatening situations, thoughts, memories, and
experience—not on building the sort of lives that clients want to have. Compassion comes from
understanding these behaviors in context. As nonsensical or even harmful as they may seem in


175

[PAGE 194]

CFT Made Simple


isolation, in the context of the client’s core threats and historical background, we see that they
make complete sense. The client is doing whatever he can to cope with the threat, often using
strategies that were overtly or covertly taught to him in ways we've discussed. However, as you
might imagine, such defensive strategies often have unintended and undesirable consequences—
which leads us to the next step of the formulation.


Unintended Consequences
Safety strategies very frequently have unintended and maladaptive consequences which can
serve to maintain the client’s problems, make them worse, or create other difficulties (Gilbert,
2010; Salkovskis, 1996). They often involve avoidance, as the client tries to limit contact with aversive emotional experiences, thoughts (as in the case of compulsions in OCD), and situations. These
unintended consequences can be crippling, as we see in the socially anxious client who avoids
social situations and misses out on potentially important life opportunities in order to avoid the
anxiety caused by such situations. Clients like Jenny who fear rejection may avoid emotionally
honest conversation out of fears of being judged (Gilbert, 2010). These consequences can also be
overtly harmful to the client or other people, as we see in those who struggle with self-harm and
substance abuse to cope with emotional distress, or who engage in aggression to create feelings of
social dominance to ward off feelings of vulnerability.
Socratic dialogue can be used to assist clients in compassionately exploring both how their
safety strategies relate to their backgrounds and core fears, and how these strategies produce undesirable consequences in their own lives. As we've seen in previous vignettes, Jenny has been able to
observe that her strategies of avoiding and withdrawing from social situations made sense in light
of the traumatic rejection experiences she had when she was younger. At the same time, her strategies prevent her from having the potentially nurturing social contacts that she ultimately desires
(and which would help her learn to feel safe in relation to others).
Josh presents with a more nuanced safety strategy—his tendency to blame his wife and child
for “making me angry” after an outburst. While space precludes including the interchange here,
through Socratic dialogue, Josh could be helped to recognize that almost immediately following his
anger outbursts, there is a powerful rush of emotional pain and shame (likely related to activation
of his core fears of being a bad father and husband). Questions might include: “How do these situations usually play out?” “What does it feel like to see that your wife or son has been hurt by something youve said?” and “What happens next?” To escape this pain, Josh would move almost
immediately to blaming his family—relieving himself of the responsibility of how he had treated
them. As we can imagine, this behavior creates more problems for Josh, as his family responds to
his volatility and blaming by distancing from him and “walking on eggshells” when he is near. Josh
then observes this pulling back, reinforcing his sense of himself as a flawed parent and partner.
The unintended consequences of these threat-based safety strategies can continually shape
patterns of self-to-self and self-to-other relating that keep clients stuck in their threat circles. While


176

[PAGE 195]

Compassionate Integration: Case Formulation in CFT


they play out scripts that ever more deeply entrench them in shame-based self-schemas, those
scripts prevent them from engaging in nurturing connections with others.


Relating to Self and Others
In the final component of a CFT case formulation, we consider how the unintended consequences described above can shape and reinforce how our clients experience and relate to themselves and to others. There’s nothing cold or formulaic about CFT case formulation—at each
stage, were linking back to the core affective experiences of the client. These affective experiences
are particularly important in terms of how clients’ implicit feelings about themselves and others are
shaped over time by the elaboration and consequences of safety strategies. Avoiding others out of
fear of rejection produces distance and the withering of social contacts, reinforcing our clients’
self-perceptions of being unlikeable and of others as cold and rejecting. Substance abuse to cope
with traumatic memories can lead to relationship problems and decreased effectiveness, shaping
and reinforcing a shame-based view of themselves as broken and incompetent. As clients observe
(or simply feel) the consequences of their safety strategies, their experience of themselves and
others can be elaborated in ways that seem overwhelming and inescapable.
Like core fears, these patterns of relating to self and others (and related distress) can lead to the
development of more safety strategies that produce even more problematic unintended consequences. Over time, clients can find themselves feeling trapped in a cycle in which everything they
try—each effort making complete sense in light of the preceding experiences—seems to deepen
their problems. By exploring the linkages between the different components of the formulation, we
can help our clients compassionately understand the factors that maintain their “stuckness.” Having
developed that understanding, we can then work collaboratively to help them replace safety strategies with effective, compassionate coping and relating that will yield positive consequences in their
lives and build positive self-experiences of being compassionate and competent. Let’s look at a
completed case formulation worksheet for Josh.


177

[PAGE 196]

178 LAD 3SVD NOILVINWYOA :LI HSAYOM HSOÍ

papuajulupy CFT Made Simple
saduanbasuo>)

:¡2UJ193X3

e “LM PIIYO UDISIP Sumpm,
UO ¿S]oység9
e pauIDas sdiysuonpja4 YUM
SJOJOM-0)
a3euu] pue
e MOT AYIDGLUA PADMO} sJa/10
[EDIJOISIH sa2Uuan|Ju| ÁJajes /sa13938.135
Á9N s1e94
:yeuseU|
SAISUZJOQ SIOIARYOG
SWEUS/JeUONOWF :SOIJOW9|A] :[eUIOIXZ
JUSDAIQUIY/-2.39SU|
e PaNUNUO) “JaSUD siomDyag
Y
JUALUYIDN — JUSLU OPUDAY pub —uondalal :[eu1oIxg
arnısngD “J9YAD] JUDISIP ‘JOYIOWW ABU, ||IM 3ADIY "QW ag, SUONS PuD Ul ]04UOD ,
pal ing Aq sisad ul Apuawajo ON QUO ||IM JUDM QU YsNq, sıayJo ADMD aloloq Naya
*|OOYDS May spuar] Ul yaıy Jooyos UD) ny alu
:¡2uJa3u]
SunD.nsnAl SuNDp "Mo3sIy pubWag Suup> pub ‘uondaf{o
‘SıgpAoJUN —Jua}adwiosul
Jas :S '3|GDAQ|U[) 9/qp1d393DUN DUUD|G SISYIO JO) "SISINGINO
DW, POG „Found
UW], D ppq PUBgSNY 4 :¡euJa3u]
SABYIO :Se 'Sunda/ay quaysisuodu!
Suıpuodsa4 0} Jagub Aq Sumba] SUIZI[DUONDy J98UD JOIADYag
4


LIY QUOD —SuNDUILUNY |, UD) 03 Y “QUOD
|, 2,U0p paau QUOAUD ,
SA, 4a ¿APO -3195-03-3/95

e MO, Jo„oruo>
e pDg, aynD| „pupgsny
e BUIYJOLUOS,, BUOIM YUM „SW
sıgpdoauı Josdiysuonpja

:49YI0-07-3/95

e SISyIO SD 'Sundalal ‘Suupaun
mun Su 07 JW SIY 'spaau
ajqoun 0} ajpupy wiıy

[PAGE 197]

Compassionate Integration: Case Formulation in CFT


A good case formulation frequently leads us straight into treatment planning. Considering the
formulation above, we can consider that Josh would likely benefit from Socratic dialogue to help
him compassionately understand how his anger and problems make sense in the context of his
temperament and social shaping. Mindfulness training would help him learn to recognize the arising
of anger and irritability as well as thoughts of rejection, unlovability, and negative ruminations
about himself and others. Strategies such as soothing rhythm breathing, safe place imagery, and
compassionate letter-writing would help him soothe himself in such situations, enabling him to shift
into a more compassionate perspective and avoid his previous cycle of outbursts, blaming, and selfshaming. Josh would also likely benefit from compassionate self work, which emphasizes the development of specific skills such as mentalizing and empathy for others and himself. This work would
be aimed at developing compassionate self-talk and adaptive ways of relating to his family and
coworkers, such as assertiveness training.


SUMMARY
Some of our clients will present with a dizzying array of challenges that can make it difficult to
know where to begin treatment. Case formulation helps to organize our observations about clients
and to plan effective treatment strategies. As you might imagine, the process of developing a formulation and exploring it with the client can be an emotional one. It can be heartbreaking for
clients to realize how their lives have been shaped in ways that have created terrible suffering for
them over time—suffering that may have been exacerbated by their own attempts to cope. In CFT,
this process is continuously rooted in compassionate understanding and in connecting our exploration to the client’s affective experience. In the next chapter, we'll explore a powerful way of helping
clients explore their emotions through the process of chair work (introduced in the previous
chapter): the Multiple Selves exercise.


179

[PAGE 199]

CHAPTER 14


Exploring Affect: The Multiple

Selves Practice


A primary goal of CFT involves helping clients bring compassion to their emotional experiences.
We've discussed how different affects and motivations can organize our clients’ experience in very
different ways, and we've proposed Compassionate Self work as an organizing framework for developing an adaptive, warm, confident version of the self. In this chapter, we'll introduce a chair exercise that will tie all of this together: the Multiple Selves practice (Kolts, 2012).


MULTIPLE VERSIONS OF THE SELF

In the Multiple Selves practice, developed by Paul Gilbert, clients are guided through an exploration of how various affects and motives shape their experience. We'll prompt clients to identify a
situation they
ve been struggling with, and help them explore their response to the situation in
terms of the feelings, thoughts, and motivations associated with different emotional states, guiding
clients into and back out of these different emotional “selves.” The Multiple Selves exercise commonly focuses on anger (“angry self"), anxiety (“anxious self”) and sadness (“sad self”), but different “selves” can be substituted, depending upon a client’s presenting concerns. After exploring the
perspectives of these different selves, the client is guided to shift into the perspective of the compassionate self, and prompted to consider both the situation and the perspective of the other emotional selves from this compassionate perspective. This works well as a chair exercise, in which a
different chair is used for each emotional self, but clients can also complete the exercise in writing

[PAGE 200]

CFT Made Simple


as homework, or even in group settings, using a piece of paper divided into four sections—one for
each self.
While the Multiple Selves exercise is fairly straightforward, there is a lot going on. My friend
and colleague Tobyn Bell, who is conducting research on the Multiple Selves exercise, highlights a
number of potential objectives we can keep in mind for the practice—these are just a few (personal
communication, 2015):

Increasing awareness of, and exposure to, threat emotions that may be avoided

Exploring how different emotional perspectives organize the mind and body

Providing a window into the emotional dynamics of self-criticism (“What does your
angry self think about your anxious self?”)

Learning to shift in and out of different emotional experiences and perspectives, and
developing confidence around being able to do this

Developing and expressing compassion for these different emotional selves

Compassion-in-action: practice putting the compassionate self in the driver’s seat

Developing tolerance and compassion for avoided aspects of the self, so that they can
be integrated into a positive self-identity


Exploring the Selves
In exploring the perspectives of different emotional selves, the therapist begins by prompting
the client to “invite in” this aspect of the self, giving herself permission to dive deeply into emotions she may commonly tend to avoid. This can be challenging, as clients may have learned that
certain emotions shouldn’t even be acknowledged, much less experienced. Some clients may need
to engage in the exercise multiple times before they can connect with avoided aspects of the self.
Here are some tips for facilitating the practice:

Provide reassurance that you'll be there to guide the client into and out of the
exercise.


Start by prompting the client to connect with how the emotion is felt in the body, and
instruct her to imagine these sensations building within her.

Then prompt her to consider the mental experiences associated with the emotion:
thoughts, imagery, and motivation. If this emotion could speak, what would it say?
What would it want to do? If the (angry/anxious/sad) self had complete control and
unlimited power, what would it do? What does this emotional self want?


182

[PAGE 201]

Exploring Affect: The Multiple Selves Practice


e Perhaps begin with an emotion to which the client has an easier time connecting, then
proceed to less familiar emotions.

e When shifting from one self to another, have the client do some soothing rhythm
breathing. | also sometimes like to offer a mental “palate cleanser,” tossing out a few
random—often silly—things for the client to visualize or think about, to aid the shift
out of an emotion and to lighten the experience a bit.

e Let clients know that it is all right if they find an emotion to be “sticky” and have
trouble shifting out of it. Reassure them that this is normal, and encourage them to
honor this aspect of themselves, and to keep going.


The Captain of the Ship
One goal of the Multiple Selves exercise is to help clients relate compassionately to the various
threat-based versions of the self. The idea is to shift their relationship with these emotions from
something that is wrong with me to understandable responses to perceived threats. Our evolved threat emotions
aren't bad; they just aren't always the most useful responses to modern stressors.
Pve found that clients often have an easier time relating compassionately to these threat-based
emotional selves if we set the stage for the exercise by using a metaphor, which I’Il call the “captain
of the ship” (Kolts & Chodron, 2013). In this metaphor, we have the client imagine a ship at sea,
with various passengers on board, including the various emotional selves. When the ship eventually
encounters a storm (as we all will face emotional “storms” in life), we imagine the emotional passengers doing what they always do: the angry self rages and criticizes, the anxious self worries and
cowers; the sad self shrinks and becomes mournful. We then set up the compassionate self as the
captain of the ship. Kind, wise, and confident, this captain understands that storms are just a part
of sailing, and has the wisdom and experience to guide the ship to safety. The captain also understands that such storms can be very scary for the passengers, so instead of becoming upset with
them, the captain comforts them, reassures them, and offers to take care of things.
This metaphor sets the stage for clients to relate compassionately to the understandable reactions produced by various threat emotions, while understanding that we don’t want to give these
emotional selves control of the ship. Instead, we set up the compassionate self as a superordinate
aspect of the self and apply this perspective in working with both the situation and the emotions
produced by it.
Let's consider an example of how this might play out in a session:

Therapist: Josh, we've spent some time discussing your anger, but in doing the case
formulation, it sounds like there might be some other emotions worth looking
at as well. | was wondering if you'd be up to trying another chair exercise to
explore these different feelings.


183

[PAGE 202]

CFT Made Simple


Josh: I’m not sure | understand the point of it. The anger is really the problem.

Therapist: Interestingly, anger can sometimes act as a secondary emotion—this means that
it can arise in response to other feelings. If we look deeply at our anger, we often
find that there are other, more vulnerable feelings behind it—like fear, sadness,
or anxiety. Sometimes we can even use anger to try and avoid those feelings.
Does that make sense?

Josh: It makes a lot of sense. | do that.

Therapist: Could you tell me more about that?

Josh: I feel anger so I don’t have to feel that stuff. | don't go there.

Therapist: Ahh... P've heard that a lot. A lot of us tend to use anger in that way. Do you
think you might be willing to go there if | were there to help?

Josh: (reluctantly) | guess so.

Therapist: Remember when we talked about compassion being about having the courage to
face the stuff that scares us? This is exactly what we were talking about. In this
practice, we'll consider a recent situation that triggered your anger, and explore
how different emotions relate to that situation. We'll visit the perspective of your
angry self, your anxious self, and your sad self, and finish up with the
compassionate self, which youre familiar with.

Josh: Mmm-hmm.

Therapist: While I set up the chairs for the exercise, could you bring to mind a recent time
when you struggled with anger? (Gets up and arranges four chairs positioned a few feet apart
as corners of a square, pointed inward.)

Josh: That's easy. My wife and I got in a fight last night.

Therapist: (sitting back down) Could you tell me a little more about that?

Josh: Sure. | got home from work, and the moment I walked in the house, she started
in on me. A couple of weeks ago, our lawn mower had stopped working. I'd told
her that I'd fix it as soon as | could —even though | don't know what's wrong
with it. Well, Pd planned to try and fix it over the weekend, but we got busy with
other things. Last night, the moment I walked in the door, she points out that it’s
still not working——(in a nagging voice) "Is the lawn mower fixed yet?” She knew it
wasn't! | just blew up at her, and told her that if she wanted the damn thing fixed,
maybe she should fix it herself. After that, she just shut down. She and the kids
avoided me for the rest of the night, and I just spent the evening stewing over it.


184

[PAGE 203]

Exploring Affect: The Multiple Selves Practice


It’s like I’m always the problem...] mean, Pd just walked in the door from work.
But I feel terrible about it. | thought I’d been doing better at this...

Therapist: This sounds like a perfect experience for this exercise, Josh. It sounds like you
have a lot of feelings about this situation. Ready to start?

Josh: I guess so.

Therapist: Great. To start, how about you move over into this chair? (Points to the chair.)

Josh: (Moves to the chair and sits.)

Therapist: This is where your angry self is going to sit. Remember when we discussed that
different emotions can organize our minds and bodies in different ways? Our
attention, thoughts, feelings—that sort of thing? We're going to explore that. P'd
like you to invite your angry self into the room. Thinking of this situation; allow
any anger you feel about it to come to the surface. If you were to feel that anger
rising in you, how would you feel it in your body?

Josh: I feel it as tension—in my jaw, my forehead, my gut. | tighten up all over.

Therapist: Imagine that tension filling your body, building and building... your angry self
completely in control. Imagine being completely being taken over by the anger.
We want to give that angry version of you a voice—to hear what it has to say.
Imagining yourself filled with anger, how do you feel?

Josh: Furious! Furious at her, and furious at me.

Therapist: Youre doing great. From this perspective of your angry self, what are you
thinking? What does this angry version of you have to say?

Josh: That she doesn’t appreciate any damn thing | do. I had just walked in from
work! All I wanted was to relax and unwinda little bit, and she starts nagging
me about the lawn mower. Why doesn’t she fix the fucking lawn mower? Why
do I have to be the one that does everything? She always says, “We need to do
this...” or “We need to do that...” Well, | know what that means—that I need
to do it! I get sick of it, you know?

Therapist: It sounds like your angry self has a lot to say. If your angry self were in complete
control in this situation, what would he want to do? What would you do?

Josh: | know exactly what I’d do. I'd tell her where she could stick her lawn mower.
I'd tell her that I’m sick of being taken for granted, and then I’d pack up my shit,
get in my car, drive away, and never come back. (Begins breathing more quickly, and
shakes his bead back and forth.)


185

[PAGE 204]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: Josh, you mentioned feeling angry at Karen, but also at yourself. Could you talk
about that, from the perspective of your angry self? How does your angry self
feel about you?

Josh: My angry self hates me. Why do I keep screwing it up? What the fuck is wrong
with me? And then, after...l wanted to apologize to her, to try and talk to her,
but | couldn’t do it. What the hell is wrong with me?

Therapist: So it sounds like there is some anger with yourself for how you handled things,
both during the situation and after, but also maybe some other feelings—like
some fear or anxiety that kept you from apologizing, or some disappointment
with yourself.

Josh: (Nods, hangs his head, and looks down.)

Therapist: This seems like it might be a good time to shift to another chair. Before we do,
does your angry self have anything else to say?

Josh: (Shakes his head to indicate “no.")

Therapist: In that case, how about you move to this chair over here? (Points to the adjacent
chair.)

Josh: (Moves to other chair and sits.)

Therapist: Before we move on, let’s do some soothing rhythm breathing—slowing down
the breath. ..slowing down the body...slowing down the mind. (Waits for thirty
seconds to one minute.)

Josh: (Slows bis breathing.)

Therapist: Looking over to the angry chair, let’s thank your angry self for sharing his
perspective with us. He did a good job of helping us to understand the
perspective of your anger.

Josh: (Looks at the anger chair with a neutral expression on his face.)

Therapist: Let's have some mental “palate cleansers.” P'll say a few things, and you think
of them, okay?

Josh: Okay.

Therapist: Tater tots! (Waits five seconds.) Dancing pandas! (Waits five seconds.) Your favorite
sports team! (Waits five seconds.) What is your favorite sports team, anyway?

Josh: I like the Oakland Raiders.


186

[PAGE 205]

Exploring Affect: The Multiple Selves Practice


Therapist: Well, that explains the anger. (Smiles.) Just joking—lI’m a Chargers fan.

Josh: (Smiles.) | get you. Too bad they’ve never won a Super Bowl.

Therapist: Ouch—well played! That was just a way to focus our attention on something
else, to transition from the anger. | find a little silliness can sometimes help with
that. Ready to keep going?

Josh: Why not?

Therapist: Good. This chair were in now is the “anxious chair.” In this chair, were going to
invite your anxious, fearful self to share his perspective. Bringing up the situation
last night with Karen, is there any anxiety or fear that comes up? Any worries
about how things happened?

Josh: Yeah. Yeah, there are.

Therapist: Like we did before, let's give your anxious self the floor. Imagine the anxiety
building in your body. How would you feel it in your body?

Josh: Restless, and jittery, like I can't relax. And an unsettled feeling in my stomach...
a little nauseous.

Therapist: Imagining that anxiety building and building, how does your anxious self feel
about this situation?

Josh: Scared, and worried.

Therapist: Scared?

Josh: Scared that I'll never be good enough. That I'll keep coming to these sessions but
nothing will change. Worried that they'll finally get sick of it, and leave me. Scared
that Pll push them away, and P'll be alone. Hell, I’m even worried that I can’t fix
the lawn mower, and that Karen will decide that I’m not good for anything.

Therapist: It sounds like there’s a lot of anxiety in there with the anger. If this anxious
version of you were in complete control, what would he do? From this
perspective of your anxious self, what would you do?

Josh: Pretty much what I did last night—nothing. Just sit there and think about it over
and over, scared to do anything. (Pauses, becomes tearful, looks down, then up at therapist.)
I wanted to apologize, you know. | wanted to tell her I was sorry for snapping at
her, that Pd meant to fix the lawn mower but wasn't sure how to do it. But I was
scared that she wouldn't care—that she'd tell me if I was really sorry, | wouldn't
talk to her like that. Maybe she'd be right. I’m scared that she doesn't love me
anymore, and that the kids just see me as this raging lunatic.


187

[PAGE 206]

CFT Made Simple


Therapist: lt sounds like your anxious self is really scared that there's no making things
better, that maybe there's no way to control the anger and repair your
relationship with your family.

Josh: (Looks down.) Yeah.

Therapist: It also sounds like there's some real sadness coming up about this situation as well.
Rather than resisting it, why don't we invite your sad self into the room? Would
you mind shifting over to this chair? (Points to the next adjacent chair to the right.)

Josh: (Quietly moves to the next chair.)

Therapist: This is the “sad self” chair. It seems to me that there is some sadness coming up
in you about this situation. Is that right?

Josh: (Nods.)

Therapist: Let's go with the sadness, then.. .inviting your sad self to share his perspective.
What does the sadness feel like in your body?

Josh: Heavy, like a sinking feeling, right here. (Motions toward his gut.)

Therapist: Imagine if that sad, heavy, sinking feeling were to build and build in you.
What feelings would come up?

Josh: This is the worst. I don't do this.

Therapist: I’m here to help, Josh. You can do this. How does that sad version of you feel?

Josh: (crying) | just feel hopeless. Look at me, sitting here crying like a baby. I feel
helpless, like there's nothing I can do.

Therapist: There's a lot of sadness in there, isn't there? Sadness, and feelings of hopelessness.
What does your sad self think about all this? What thoughts come up?

Josh: (crying) That I’m losing my family, and it's my fault. That they don't love me, and
they'd be better off without me. That my daughter and son are ashamed of me.

Therapist: (nodding quietly) Mmm-hmm.

Josh: I feel like I’m a terrible father. Like 'm teaching them all the wrong stuff. That
they're ashamed of me, and ashamed to be with me.

Therapist: If this sad self were in complete control, what would he want to do? What would
he do?

Josh: Just give up. Just lay down and die. Maybe then they could just forget about me
and go on with their lives.


188

[PAGE 207]

Exploring Affect: The Multiple Selves Practice


Therapist: (Pauses.)

Josh: (Pauses, wipes bis eyes, and sighs.)

Therapist. You did it, Josh. You let yourself feel it

Josh: For whatever it’s worth...

Therapist: I think it’s worth a lot. That took a lot of courage. That's what we've been talking
about—the courage of compassion. (Pauses.) Would you mind moving to this last
chair? (Gestures.)

Josh: Sure.

Therapist: This chair is where your kind, wise, courageous, compassionate self sits. In a
minute, we'll slow down our breathing, and invite the compassionate self into
the room. But first, let's look around at these other emotional selves (gesturing)
the angry self, the anxious self, the sad self—and thank them for sharing their
perspectives. They've done a good job helping us understand your anger,
anxiety, and sadness. (Pauses.)

Josh: (Slows bis breathing, looks around at the chairs.)

Therapist: Now this self will be more familiar, as we've been practicing here and in your
homework. Let’s take a bit of time to do some soothing rhythm breathing—
slowing things down, and paving the way for compassion to arise. (Pauses for
one minute.)

Josh: (Closes his eyes, slows his breathing.)

Therapist: Now allowing yourself to feel those compassionate qualities rising in you...the
kind motivation to work with the suffering, to help yourself and others... (Pauses.)
The wisdom to look deeply, and understand things from different perspectives...
(Pauses.) The confidence and courage to work with whatever comes up... (Pauses.)
And when youre ready, opening your eyes, bringing these compassionate
qualities with you.

Josh: (Opens bis eyes.)

Therapist: Now, were going to hear from the compassionate self, but | want to set things up
a bit. We all have these different versions of us—angry, anxious, sad—but the
idea is that we can choose which part of ourselves we want to put in charge.
Imagine that we're out at sea, on a ship. Imagine that there is a big storm—just
like we'll all face stormy times in life—and that there's thunder, and rain, and
water sloshing over the side of the ship. These emotional selves (gesturing toward the


189

[PAGE 208]

CFT Made Simple


chairs) are passengers on the ship. It’s scary, and they're freaking out—doing the
only things they know how to do. Your angry self is raging and blaming. Your
anxious self is shaking and worrying. Your sad self shrinks into a corner, hopeless.
They
re doing their best, but they don’t have what it takes to steer us to safety.
And here you are—the compassionate self. Imagine that the compassionate
self—this kind, wise, confident version of you—is captain of the ship. You've
spent a lot of time on ships, and you know that storms just happen sometimes.
More than that, you know what to do. You know how to get the ship through
safely, and how to rely on your crew when you need help. This compassionate
captain is also kind. You understand how scary this can be for the passengers
(gesturing), and that they’re doing the best they can.

Josh: (Nods.)

Therapist: Looking at the other passengers—the other versions of you in this stormy
situation—does it make sense that they'd be freaking out?

Josh: It sure does.

Therapist: How do you feel about them?

Josh: I feel bad for them. They’re scared and they don’t know what to do—and what
they do know how to do doesn’t help.

Therapist: So as this kind, wise, courageous captain, what would you do? How would you
reassure them? What would you say?

Josh: I'd tell them it’s going to be okay. I’d tell them not to worry—that I’m going to
handle it.

Therapist: How do you think they'd feel, hearing that?

Josh: Maybea little better.

Therapist: Now let's think about your current situation. You've had this argument with
Karen. Your angry self is raging—at her, and at you—and wants to just storm
off. Your anxious self wants to apologize, but is scared to do so, and scared to be
rejected if he does. Your sad self is ready to give up, feeling like a terrible
husband and father, like nothing is working. What do you have to say to them?
How would you reassure them?

Josh: Pd tell them that this isn’t the end of the world. Deep down, | know that | want
to be with Karen, Chloe, and Aiden, and that they want to be with me—they
ve
told me so. While we still go at each other sometimes, it happens a lot less than it


190

[PAGE 209]

Exploring Affect: The Multiple Selves Practice


used to. Even last night, | let it drop rather than keeping at it. Karen knows I’m
trying, and she appreciates it. She told me last week that she was proud of me for
going to these sessions, and for keeping at it.

Therapist: So you
d reassure them that all isn’t lost, and that things are getting better?

Josh: (Nods.) They are getting better. We had a really good weekend—
went to the lake,
went swimming and fishing. It was the best time we’d had in a while, and I didn’t
get angry once.


Therapist: Do you normally get angry at the lake?

Josh: Well, Aiden’s a little kid, and so he’s always getting his fishing line tangled, or
losing lures. In the past I’ve gotten irritated and lectured him about how he
needs to be more careful, which always shuts things down. This time, I didn't
even mind. | reminded myself that even I get tangles sometimes, and he’s just a
little kid. He doesn’t do it on purpose.

Therapist: That’s great, Josh. That’s just what compassion looks like—trying to understand
what’s going on from the other person’s perspective, and to be helpful.

Josh: Well, it worked a lot better than getting all worked up about it.

Therapist: If you could go back to the situation last night and work with it from the
perspective of your compassionate self, would you do anything differently?

Josh: I would. First, P'd try not to get worked up in the first place, and try to remind
myself that she wasn’t purposefully trying to criticize me—she's probably just
noticing the grass getting longer and wondering when she might be able to
mow it.


Therapist: What if you had gotten worked up, and had the conflict. Would your
compassionate self have handled things differently afterward?

Josh: Yeah. Pd apologize, tell her Pll get to it as soon as | can, and ask her to be patient
with me. | think she could do that, as long as she sees that | really am trying.

The vignette above demonstrates several characteristic aspects of the Multiple Selves exercise.
The therapist guides the client into the perspective of various affective “selves,” beginning with
physical sensations, and then prompting the client to explore feelings, thoughts, and motivations
associated with these emotions. Transitions are eased via the use of breathing exercises, and making
things a bit lighter through a bit of banter about football. Although a mental “palate cleanser” was
used once, the therapist was able to find easy transition points the rest of the time, taking advantage of natural shifts in the client’s dialogue to move fluidly from one emotional self to the other.


191

[PAGE 210]

CFT Made Simple


Sometimes our clients will be reluctant to explore an emotional “self” that feels particularly
threatening or unfamiliar. When Josh became hesitant to enter the perspective of the sad self, the
therapist offered encouragement, providing reassurance to the client that he had support. The
therapist followed up on this later, reinforcing the client for his willingness to enter these vulnerable
perspectives, and linking to the ongoing work (“That's the courage of compassion.”). You may have
also noticed the therapist beginning to explore the dynamics of self-criticism through considering
the interactions between different selves (How does your angry self feel about you?”). This exploration could be deepened when time allows (“How do your sad and anxious selves feel about your
angry self?”).
Finally, the therapist spent a fair bit of time paving the way for the transition to the compassionate self via the “captain of the ship” metaphor, and through various suggestions (“How would you
reassure them?”). Depending on how deeply the client has been able to connect with the perspective of the compassionate self through previous therapeutic work, the therapist will be more or less
active in facilitating this perspective—not “feeding him lines,” so much as suggesting particular
affective orientations ("Can you understand how they'd be scared? How would you reassure
them?”). If things go well, by the time the transition is made to the client’s problematic situation,
he'll be ready to offer a compassionate perspective, as Josh did—bringing compassion both to his
own feelings about the situation and to how he might handle similar situations more helpfully in the
future. One thing the therapist could have done (but in this case didn’t) was to have the compassionate self speak directly to the other selves, reassuring them and offering to help.


Debriefing the Exercise
It’s important to follow this (and all such exercises) with a debriefing. We want to explore what
the experience was like for the client, and what he learned from it. If a client struggled with entering the perspective of a particular self, or has any other problems, we can offer validation and
encouragement—this is tough stuff! This is a good time for the therapist to draw upon the perspective of her own compassionate self, connecting with sympathy and empathy around the difficulty of what she’s asking the client to do in exploring these feelings, and considering what might
be most helpful in helping him make sense of the experience. Here are a few questions that can be
useful in the debriefing:

e What was that like for you?

e Were you able to connect with the emotional selves? Which were easier, or more
difficult?

e Did you find yourself able to shift from one self to another? What challenges showed
up as we did that?


192

[PAGE 211]

Exploring Affect: The Multiple Selves Practice


e What was it like looking at these emotions from the perspective of your compassionate
self?

e Were you able to see how each of these reactions makes sense?

e What did we learn from this that we can take forward into our work?

When it comes to the Compassionate Self work in the exercise, we want to focus on reinforcing
the effort—validating the challenges, and acknowledging the triumphs. The key is to try and help
the client consider how he might bring compassion to both aspects of the experience: the feelings
he has, and the situation itself.


SUMMARY
I’ve placed the Multiple Selves exercise toward the end of the book because it allows us to tie
together many of the themes that run through a course of CFT. Rather than avoiding uncomfortable emotions and situations, clients are helped to compassionately turn toward these scary
experiences—with warmth rather than judgment—so that they can really understand them.
Clients can develop the confidence that comes from learning they can feel these emotions without
getting trapped in them, and consider how it makes sense that these feelings might arise in them.
Emotional conflicts can be explored, and clients can be guided to see how different emotions can
serve as triggers for other emotions—for example, how they might shift to anger in the effort to
avoid sadness, or experience anxiety when faced with their own rage, sadness, or fears. They can
learn to relate to these emotions as valuable parts of themselves that nonetheless aren't equipped
to “steer the ship.” Finally, the exercise can help clients learn to empower the compassionate self as
a helpful perspective for working effectively with challenging emotions and the situations that
trigger them.


193

[PAGE 213]

CHAPTER 15


Riding the Third Wave:

Integrating CFT into

Your Therapy


This is an exciting time to be a mental health professional. Recent decades have proven revolutionary in terms of how quickly we're learning new things about how human beings work. Even as we've
only explored the tip of the iceberg, the rapidly growing bodies of research in neuroscience, behavioral science, and emotion are allowing the beginnings of a truly integrative understanding of
human functioning. CFT seeks to represent this evolved, integrated understanding of what it means
to be a human being, and to translate this science into powerful, practical methods for helping
people turn toward their struggles with warmth and acceptance, and work with these struggles
effectively.


WHAT DOES A CFT THERAPIST LOOK LIKE?
In approaching this book, I’ve attempted to emphasize the aspects of CFT that distinguish it from
other therapies. Particularly in a “Made Simple” book, space prohibits me from exploring much
more than the basic elements of the therapy. This is why I’ve generally chosen not to cover even
compassion interventions that, while entirely CFT-consistent, are well covered in other places
(such as in Kristin Neff and Chris Germer's excellent Mindful Self Compassion program; Neff &
Germer, 2013). While reading the various case vignettes in the book, you may have had questions

[PAGE 214]

CFT Made Simple


like, “Would a CFT therapist use exposure therapy with this patient?” “What about social skills
training, activity scheduling, and behavior activation?” “Would a CFT therapist prompt a client to
explore her values?” The answer to all of these questions is a resounding “Yes!”
A core value CFT therapists hold is that we don’t ignore good science. What this means is that
CFT is constantly evolving from both a theoretical and a practice perspective. For example, over
the past few years, we've placed increasing emphasis on breath and body work in consideration of
Stephen Porges’ excellent work on polyvagal theory (e.g. Porges, 2011) and other research demonstrating the power of engaging the parasympathetic nervous system. Applications of CFT have
been developed that consider the new science of memory reconsolidation (Monfils, Cowansage,
Klann, & LeDoux, 2009, Schiller et al., 2010) in applying Compassionate Self work within exposure
therapy (Kolts, Parker, & Johnson, 2013). My friends and colleagues Dennis Tirch, Benji Schoendorff,
and Laura Silberstein have worked to integrate the compassion focus of CFT with the theoretical
perspective of acceptance and commitment therapy, or ACT (Tirch, Schoendorff, & Silberstein,
2014). And I’m increasingly intrigued by the implications of relational frame theory (Hayes, BarnesHolmes, & Roche, 2001) for understanding the nuances of threat system processing in CFT.
When one hears the word “compassion,” one doesn’t necessarily think empiricism. But from the
perspective of CFT, one of the most compassionate things we can do is to get better and better at
really understanding the sources and dynamics of human suffering, and do a better and better job
at researching and refining powerful ways to help alleviate and prevent it. Compassion is about
helping effectively, not just about feeling helpful. In this way, science is core to compassion, and the
CFT therapist is likely to draw upon any tools that have good science behind them. So if you want
to do CFT, you don't have to give up any of the things you already do that work.
What may change, however, is how you do them. Because CFT is rooted in compassion. This
emphasis should be present in all aspects of the therapy—the way the therapist relates to the client,
and how we help clients relate to themselves, and to others. Rooted in our understanding of underlying affective systems, this means that CFT will always contain warmth (expressed in ways that
work for the client), an emphasis on assisting clients to relate to their experiences with understanding and kindness rather than shame, a focus on helping clients learn to create feelings of safeness in
themselves, and the development of the emotional courage to approach and work with the things
that really scare them. Like ACT, CFT isn’t about moving away from feelings and experiences that
make us uncomfortable. It’s about moving toward effective, compassionate ways of being in our
minds and in the world, and even moving toward the things that bother us, so that we can compassionately work with them. So whatever were doing in CFT, there is always an emphasis on warmth,
understanding, safeness, and courage.


CFT AND OTHER MODELS

In writing this book, it wasn't my intention to convert therapists to CFT, but to provide you with
compassionate perspectives, understandings, and tools that you can use to further develop your


196

[PAGE 215]

Riding the Third Wave: Integrating CFT into Your Therapy


effectiveness as a therapist, regardless of your existing modality. As you may have noticed, CFT has
a good deal in common with some other therapy approaches. While I’ve discussed some of the
common ground between CFT and approaches such as ACT, DBT, and EFT, those of you with
different therapeutic backgrounds may notice similarities with other models as well—attachment
therapy approaches, schema therapy, and even newer psychodynamic approaches spring to mind,
for example. It’s my hope that practitioners from many other traditions will find something here to
deepen their existing therapy practices, particularly in helping clients relate warmly and compassionately to themselves, to their problems, and to other people.
In considering where CFT interfaces theoretically with other approaches, | see it falling within
the “third wave” of behavior therapies, with an emphasis on changing one’s relationship to uncomfortable thoughts and emotions (rather than trying to get rid of them), the cultivation of mindfulness, anda priority placed on helping people build adaptive, meaningful lives (versus simply reducing
symptoms). While it’s a bit more of a stretch, | also see CFT generally fitting alongside therapies like
ACT and functional analytic psychotherapy (FAP) within the realm of contextual behavioral science
(CBS). The philosophical core of CBS—functional contextualism—involves understanding that
the function of a behavior (which can include thoughts and perhaps even emotions and motives)
must be understood within the context in which it occurs. In understanding human functioning,
CFT expands the meaning of “context” from strict behavioral terms to include the neurological
contexts that influence affect, cognition, and behavior, as well as the evolutionary contexts that
have shaped how emotions, motivations, and their behavioral manifestations play out in our lives.
This is both a strength and a weakness of the CFT approach, depending upon one’s perspective. It’s certainly a trade-off. I think that considering the evolved functions of emotions and motives
and having a neuroscience-based understanding of the ways emotions operate in our brains and
bodies has tremendous power in helping to deshame the challenges faced by our clients.
Understanding why and how our emotions play out the way they do—and that this is not our fault
(as we didn't design these processes)—can be quite powerful in helping people stop beating themselves up for their own experiences and learn to work with these experiences effectively.
However, the intellectually honest CFT practitioner must admit that drawing upon such explanations comes with sacrifices, from the standpoint of strict empiricism. Behaviorists would note
that ontological statements about the evolutionary origins and evolved functions of emotions and
motives in large part defy empirical observation, and they'd be right. It’s fair criticism.
In weighing these issues for myself, Pve concluded that the trade-off is worth it. I think the
benefits of considering the functions and dynamics of our emotions and motives within evolutionary and neurological, as well as behavioral, contexts (as best we understand them), justify this
compromise—if we keep a steady eye to the science. The Dalai Lama is well known for having said,
"If science disproves some aspect of Buddhism, then Buddhism must change.” The same can and
should be said for CFT, or, | would argue, for any approach that aspires to be empirically based. To
the extent that an approach extends beyond tenets that have been established through solid,
observable science, that approach must be amenable to change based on new data. (Of course, the
hope is that all approaches would be amenable to change based on new data.) Dogmatism benefits


197

[PAGE 216]

CFT Made Simple


no one—our patients least of all. Humility, on the other hand, offers the promise of approaches
which can be continually refined in the service of doing an ever-better job at eliminating and preventing human suffering.


BRINGING CFT INTO YOUR THERAPY ROOM
It’s my hope that you've found something useful in CFT, and want to begin bringing what you've
learned into your therapy practice. One way to do this would be to select a clinical case and try to
follow the progression I’ve attempted to lay out in this book—incorporating the various layers of
relationship, understanding, mindful awareness, and purposeful cultivation of compassion. If that
feels like a lot, perhaps simply try to incorporate one or more of the elements you've found here
that falls outside the things you normally do in therapy. Below, I’ve included a few suggestions
about how you might begin to do this.


Consider the Roles You Are Inhabiting as the Therapist
We've discussed the various roles served by the CFT therapist—teacher, facilitator of a process
of guided discovery, secure attachment base, and model of the compassionate self. As we do
therapy, we can consider the roles we are inhabiting, and how best to do that. What function are
we serving within the context of the therapeutic relationship, and how can we use our presence to
facilitate the goals and direction of the therapy? Perhaps try to pay a bit more attention to these
roles, and consider whether doing so helps clarify questions in the therapy such as What should I do
now? In this way, we can borrow from the Compassionate Self practice as we reflect on the therapeutic work outside the session: when our clients throw us a curveball, we can consider—from the
perspective of the teacher, facilitator, secure base, or compassionate model—How would I understand
what is happening bere? How might I respond?


Occasionally Bring in the Evolutionary Model
We don't have to go into deep discussions of evolution—
in fact, those generally aren't helpful.
But helping people recognize the different things that happen to their minds and bodies when they
feel threatened or driven versus when they feel safe can be helpful. Considering threat emotions as
having evolved to help us protect ourselves can help clients understand why they get so “stuck” in
these emotions. It's no accident that these emotions narrow our attention, thinking, and mental
imagery onto perceived sources of threat, and it’s certainly not the client’s fault that this happens.
Learning that helping themselves feel safe reverses this process (facilitating more flexible attention
and reasoning, reflective thinking, and prosocial tendencies) can improve client motivation around
working with these emotions. Helping clients understand what to do and why or how it will be
helpful can be very powerful in building their willingness to do something new.


198

[PAGE 217]

Riding the Third Wave: Integrating CFT into Your Therapy


Use Socratic Dialogue to Undermine Self-Attacking
With or without going into the evolutionary model, we can use Socratic dialogue to help clients
shift from shaming themselves for their internal experience to the awareness that there are many
aspects of their lives that they neither chose nor designed—things which are quite literally not
their fault.

e “What was your experience of that emotion? Did you choose to get angry/afraid/resent-
ful there, or did those feelings just arise in your mind and body?”

e “When did you learn that you ? What experiences taught you that?”

e = “Given what we know about your/her/his background, does it make sense that you/she/
he would feel/think/experience things in this way?”

e “When your self-critic attacks you for , how do you feel? What
does it motivate you to do? What do you end up doing?”

Questions like these can help clients begin to let go of the tendency to attack themselves for
things they didn’t choose or design, and to understand their experiences and behaviors in the
context of their lives. In other words, the questions set the stage for them to compassionately take
responsibility for making their lives better.


Use the Three Circles as a Facilitator for Mindfulness
Clients who initially struggle with mindfully observing and accepting their thoughts and emotions can sometimes be helped by the simplicity of the three circles. ’'ve had numerous clients who
had great difficulty observing thoughts or labeling specific emotions, but who were able to consider which of those three circles was active at any given time. Combined with an understanding of
how those circles organize our minds and bodies (for example, that threat emotions tend to narrow
and focus attention and thinking, and safeness emotions lead to reflectiveness, flexibility, and prosociality), it can be a powerful thing for a client to learn to notice what circle am I in? As Pve mentioned, a former student of mine who was also a cheerleading coach came up with a pithy way to
remember this: “When in doubt, circle out!”


Use the Three Circles in Considering Your Interactions
with the Client
We can also “circle out” in the therapy room. I’ve found it can be useful to consider the three
circles both in my treatment planning and in working with challenges that arise in therapy. For


199

[PAGE 218]

CFT Made Simple


example, | roughly shoot for around a 3-2-2 safeness-drive-threat ratio in therapy: three parts safeness, two parts drive, two parts threat. My goal for the therapeutic environment is to create an
experience of safeness for my clients that grows as they learn to create these experiences in themselves. Good therapy also gets the drive system going— inspiring and motivating clients to work
for change in their lives. Finally, there will be a good bit of threat in the therapy if we’re working
with real issues—but the key is that there is a balance, with threat experiences evoked in an intentional manner so that they can be compassionately worked with. It’s not just about safeness—we
re
striving for a flexible, fluid balance in which different affective experiences and motivations can
arise and be evoked as they serve the situation at hand. Together, we want to appropriately work
with perceived threats, activate and maintain motivation around pursuing therapeutic goals, and
create a context of safeness in which comfort can be experienced and questions of meaning and
values can be reflected upon.
Considering the three circles can also be helpful when we're struggling in therapy or the relationship doesn't seem to be going as well as we'd like. Sometimes we'll find that we've inadvertently
become a threat cue for the client. We can think of countertransference in this way—considering
that perhaps our own threat or drive systems have been triggered by the client’s behavior, or something about that client that triggers our own previous conditioning. We may observe that we've
been so much in drive—excited by our wonderful new treatment plan—that we've left our client
behind. When therapy seems to have hit a sticking point or there’s a rupture in the therapeutic
relationship, considering the situation in terms of the three circles either on our own or together
with the client can sometimes shed light on the challenge and provide direction:

e Which circle am I triggering in my client? Which do I want to be triggering?

e Which circle has been running the show for me?

e What would help to bring balance to both me and the client as we work with this situation?

Sometimes, simply naming the situation and slowing things down to have a process-level discussion of how things have been playing out in the session can be a great help. The three circles
can help us do this in a compassionate way: “Looks like our threat circles have been bouncing off
of one another. This happens sometimes when dealing with real-life issues. Let’s take a minute to
do some soothing rhythm breathing and consider how we want to proceed.”


Use the Perspective of the Compassionate Self
One nice thing about the Compassionate Self practice is that once this kind, wise, courageous
perspective has been established, we can use it as an anchor-point to facilitate other aspects of the
therapy. Let’s consider just a couple of examples:


200

[PAGE 219]

Riding the Third Wave: Integrating CFT into Your Therapy


THE COMPASSIONATE SELF AS AN ANCHOR-POINT

There's a growing appreciation of the value of behavioral activation in creating emotional
change. Simply getting clients moving in the direction of value-based goals (a major focus of ACT)
can be tremendously powerful, and most good treatment protocols for problems of anxiety and
depression involve mobilizing client behavior to help them address life areas they may have been
avoiding. This can be challenging with clients who struggle with motivation, perhaps because they
are deeply entrenched in avoidance, habitually procrastinate, or are very depressed. Therapists
who take it upon themselves to be “motivator in chief” can inadvertently set up a coercive environment in therapy that can disempower clients or even invite them to resist the therapist’s efforts to
get them moving. However, once such clients have connected with the perspective of the compassionate self, this perspective can be useful in shifting the role of motivator from the therapist to the
client. “What does your compassionate self know that you need to do?” “If that kind, wise, coura-
oO


geous version of you were here, what home practice would she assign?” Questions like these can
help clients shift from a perspective of avoidance and resistance to one that is driven by intuitive
wisdom about what they really need to work on—in a way that also helps them empower themselves by shifting into the perspective of the compassionate self, and acting from that perspective.


THE COMPASSIONATE SELF IN EXPOSURE THERAPY

Exposure therapy is historically one of the most effective treatment methods we have at our
disposal, as well as one of the most avoided by clinicians. Because coming into contact with feared
memories and situations can be quite an aversive experience for the client, it can be challenging for
clinicians to motivate their clients and themselves to engage with exposure practices. However,
there’s quite a lot of literature supporting exposure as a core component in the treatment of many
different problems.
In CFT, the compassionate self can be used both as a motivator to engage with exposure and
as a means to make it more palatable to clients and therapists alike. First, the question “What does
your compassionate self know that we need to do?” can be helpful in building motivation for the
exposure. Many clients intuitively know (or can come to realize through Socratic exploration) that
facing their fears is something they need to do to progress toward their goals.
Additionally, some preliminary work has been done to incorporate Compassionate Self work
into exposure therapy itself, with promising (albeit unpublished) preliminary results (Kolts, Parker,
& Johnson, 2013). Over the years, various theorists have utilized the addition of imaginal elements
to exposure therapy protocols. Recently, exciting new research on memory reconsolidation (e.g.
Monfils, Cowansage, Klann, & LeDoux, 2009; Schiller et al., 2010) has demonstrated that exposure
can be done in a way that not only adds new learning, but can produce alterations in original fear memories
by considering certain time constraints, and adding in new, nonfearful elements during the exposure process. These researchers have observed that a “reconsolidation window” appears to open


201

[PAGE 220]

CFT Made Simple


approximately ten minutes following an initial imaginal reexposure to a fear memory, during which
time the fear memory itself becomes somewhat malleable. During this time, new elements can be
introduced, allowing the “rewriting” of memories so that fear is no longer expressed (Schiller et al.,
2010).
In CFT, this can be done by having the client initially bring up a fear memory—for example,
an acute trauma memory or “hot spot” (particularly fearful piece of a longer trauma memory). The
reconsolidation literature indicates that a period of ten minutes or so needs to pass between the
initial recall of the fear memory and the point at which it becomes malleable to updating via new
information. We can spend this time assisting the client to shift into the perspective of the compassionate self, say, by doing one minute of soothing rhythm breathing, five minutes of mindful breathing, and a five- to seven-minute Compassionate Self exercise (Kolts, Parker, & Johnson, 2013).
Then, the client is instructed to return to the fear memory in standard fashion, keying into both
the sensory aspects of the memory and the feelings and thoughts that are present. Once the
memory is vivid, we can prompt clients to slow down their breathing, shift into the perspective of
the compassionate self, and imagine that they are in the situation as their current, compassionate
self—observing the vulnerable version of themselves in the memory, feeling compassion for that
scared version of themselves, and offering support and reassurance in whatever way would be experienced as most helpful. Focus is placed on creating feelings of warmth, kindness, and a desire to
help the suffering self, and on offering support and encouragement to this vulnerable self. “How
would you support that vulnerable version of you?” “What would you want that vulnerable self to
understand?” “How might you be there for her and encourage her?”
Then the client can be prompted to shift back and forth between the perspective of the compassionate self (now placed into the context of the memory) and the perspective of the vulnerable
version of the self that experienced the event. The client imagines himself back in the situation,
with all of the scary aspects of the event still present, but also having the future kind, wise, courageous version of the self there as well—offering kindness, encouragement, support, and perhaps
the certainty that you will make it through this, to become this future self. The therapy then progresses,
shifting back and forth between these two versions of the self, using subjective distress ratings as
anchor-points for tracking the client’s distress.
While the efficacy of this variant of exposure therapy needs to be systematically evaluated
through research, it is consistent with recent science on memory reconsolidation, and preliminary
observations seem to indicate that it can significantly reduce client distress and avoidance while
producing similar gains to traditional exposure therapies. These few cases have also demonstrated
anecdotal evidence consistent with the reconsolidation studies, with clients saying things like, “The
memory is still there, but instead of the fear that used to be there, there is an experience of being
supported—of not being alone” (Kolts, Parker, & Johnson, 2013).


202

[PAGE 221]

Conclusion


Whether you picked up this book in the hope of learning to formally practice CFT as a cohesive
therapy approach, or simply wanted to add some new tools and perspectives to your existing treatment approach, I hope you've found something of use. Compassion offers powerful tools for helping
clients to overcome shame, and relate to their struggles with warmth, courage, encouragement, and
the commitment to build better lives.
I’ve attempted to organize and present CFT as a collection of layered processes and practices:
the roles embodied in the therapeutic relationship; a compassionate understanding of the human
condition based in an understanding of evolution, affective neuroscience, attachment, and behavioral science; the cultivation of a mindful awareness, and the purposeful development of compassion and compassionate strengths. When CFT is at its best, these various layers deepen, strengthen,
and reinforce one another. While we can choose to select certain practices and techniques and use
them in isolation, Pd encourage you to consider all of these layers, and how you might weave them
into the therapy process.
As we began, let's end by reminding ourselves of the price of admission: if we're going to have
human lives, were going to face pain and suffering. We'll all face difficulties, disappointments, challenges, and grief. It’s understandable that we (and our clients) wouldn’t want to face these things—
we
d often prefer to turn away and avoid the things that make us uncomfortable. But that doesn't
work, because in organizing our lives around minimizing discomfort, we shut ourselves off from
many of the things that can make them deeply meaningful. We can build our lives around endless
efforts to stay comfortable, or we can make them about pursuing goals and relationships that are
deeply important to us and imbue us with meaning, safeness, fulfillment, and joy. But we can’t do
both.
Compassion gives us a way to turn toward the things that scare us—with kindness, wisdom, and
courage—and to work with them. When we stop trying to avoid discomfort, we can turn toward
suffering and look deeply into it, so we can come to understand the causes and conditions that
create it—perhaps even learning enough to help make things better.

[PAGE 222]

CFT Made Simple


Perhaps most of all, compassion involves courage: the courage to let our hearts break. But
here’s the thing: our hearts are going to break anyway. Bad things sometimes happen in life, and we all
have to find ways to work with them. Remember, it’s the price of admission to have a human life.
The question is this: What are we going to do when that bappens? Will we close ourselves off, or open ourselves up?
What if we accept this pain and occasional heartbreak as simply part of what it costs to have an
amazing life? What if we consider what that kind, wise, courageous, compassionate version of us
would do? What if we let ourselves care, connecting with likeminded others to support one another
in the courageous work of making positive change in our lives, and in the world? Let’s keep ourselves pointed toward the things that are important to us, help our clients do the same, and keep
going. This is compassion.


204

[PAGE 223]

Afterword:

Unpacking the
Compassionate Mind


This book is a wonderful beginning guide to compassion-focused therapy (CFT). CFT is part of a
family of contextual forms of cognitive and behavioral therapy that are concerned with issues such
as self-kindness, compassion for others, mindfulness, and values-based actions. The specific theories and techniques that are part of these new methods vary, but they are clearly interconnected.
Thus, even though | am not an expert in CFT, | am honored to have been asked to write a short
afterword to this book, and it is those interconnections that | would like to focus on.
I predict that evidence-based therapies in general, and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) in
particular, will soon be thought of more as comprising evidence-based processes and procedures
for solving problems and for promoting human prosperity, than as named packages of therapeutic
techniques linked to syndromes and the elimination of symptoms. As that transition occurs, |
expect that process-oriented forms of contextual treatment will increasingly link a portion of their
evidence-based change principles to compassion as it’s considered from the point of view of more
basic scientific areas including evolution, learning, emotion, cognition, and culture. Thus the core
vision of CFT, in my opinion, is likely to have a very long life indeed.
Through books like this, therapists can quickly see for themselves how central these issues are
in therapy. They are central in part because of the modern world itself. The human mind did not
evolve for the present day. Modern technology, gushing a constant stream of images and sound,
has created a fire hose of human language. Everything imaginable is there in the stream, but the

[PAGE 224]

CFT Made Simple


biases of commerce and media mean that messages conveying courage, love, and connection are
simply being overwhelmed by those spreading pain, horror, criticism, and judgment. If it bleeds, it
leads. Pain sells.
There is, in effect, no place that the cacophony cannot reach. | am a few feet from a television
remote, my iPhone is inches away, I’m typing on my laptop, and the newspaper sits on the floor
next to my chair. Without so much as lifting my rear end from this chair I can tell you that the man
who long represented Subway sandwich shops is going to jail for molesting children, that it has
been one year since news correspondent James Foley was beheaded; that a baby boy died after his
father was seen beating him in a car while driving; that July was the hottest month in recorded
history; that a talk-show host wants to house undocumented immigrants in tents and rent them out
as slaves, and that a fifty-eight-year-old homeless Latino person was beaten and urinated on by men
who said Donald Trump was right about immigrants.
That is just one day, and I’ve hardly gotten started.
Human beings are cooperative primates, and both the desire to be included and the effects of
mentally including others are built into our bones, into our language systems, and into our cultures.
Our ability to cooperate and to care about others is why we have a civilized society. It is why we
even have television, or iPhones, or laptops, or newspapers.
We should neither romanticize these abilities nor take them for granted. In order to have compassion for others, we need to take their perspective and not run away when it is emotionally hard.
At the same time, multilevel selection theory teaches us that we evolved to be cooperative in part
because of between-group competition. In the modern interconnected world, we can no longer
rely on that mechanism—being “for” our in-group and “against” outsiders—to foster compassion
and concern. We need now to care about that much larger group called “humanity.” That can be a
challenge to us all.
If the core vision of CFT is here to stay, then it is up to evidence-based therapists across the
board to take that vision seriously. This means digging into the more specific predictions about
processes of change, and their linkage to specific methods relevant to compassion, made by the
contextual forms of CBT. We need to know, and soon, not just that compassion is important in a
general sense, but how and why it is important in specific areas, and how best to target those areas.
It will take a lot of cooperation and effort from a very large group to acquire that knowledge in
detail and in a reasonable time frame. Those interested in compassion as a clinical issue and those
practicing CFT will need to take part.
For all of these reasons, a book like this is invaluable. It opens up CFT ideas to the larger therapeutic community so that the involvement and interest in these issues and methods can continue
to broaden and grow. In the modern world, compassion is too crucial for us to do anything else.

—Steven C. Hayes
Foundation Professor, University of Nevada, Reno
Cofounder of ACT and author of
Get Out of Your Mind and Into Your Life


206

[PAGE 225]

Acknowledgments


First, sincere appreciation goes to my wife, Lisa Koch, and my son, Dylan Kolts, who never grumbled when I snuck away to write on a weekend morning. Also to my parents, John and Mary Kolts,
who offered continuous support and encouragement for this book as for all things.
Thanks to all at New Harbinger who nurtured this book and me while I was writing it, including Tesilya Hanauer, Catharine Meyers, Nicola Skidmore, and Jess Beebe. Sincere thanks also to
Susan LaCroix, whose copyediting made this a much better book.
Paul Gilbert is the reason this book exists—Paul, I hope | haven't butchered your model too
much! To credit Paul as he deserves would make for an impossibly cumbersome text, as virtually
every page contains something I learned from Paul—if not from his written works, then from evenings spent chatting about CFT over glasses of red wine and the occasional interlude to play guitar.
Thanks also to my dear friends in the CFT community: Dennis Tirch, Laura Silberstein, Jean and
the entire Gilbert family, Chris Irons, Korina loannou, Christine Braehler, Deborah Lee, Tobyn
Bell, Fiona Ashworth, Michelle Cree, Kate Lucre, Corinne Gale, Mary Welford, Neil Clapton, Ken
Goss, lan Lowens, and many others.
Sincere thanks also go to Matthieu Villatte for his valuable feedback on the sections regarding
relational frame theory, and to the many others who contributed directly or indirectly to this book,
including Susanne Regnier, Jason Luoma, Melissa Ranucci-Soll, Kelly Koerner, Amy Wagner, Sandy
Bushberg, and Kelly Wilson.
I also want to acknowledge my wonderful colleagues and students at Eastern Washington
University, who have supported and nurtured my career for going-on two decades now. In particular, Pd like to recognize my department chair, Nick Jackson; my dean, Vickie Shields; and my dear
friends and colleagues Phil Watkins, Amani El-Alayli, and Kurt Stellwagen. | also want to acknowledge the fantastic students in my research team, including Amy Frers, Leah Parker, Elijah Johnson,
Ahva Mozafari, and Blaine Bart.

[PAGE 227]

Appendix: Reproducible Forms


The following forms are also available for download at http://www.newharbinger.com/33094.

[PAGE 228]

CFT CASE FORMULATION WORKSHEET
O17 14d


ape)

Unintended
Consequences [duis

External:


Innate and
Internal:
Historical Influences Key Fears Safety Strategies/
Defensive Behaviors
Emotional/Shame Memories: External:

External:


Self as:
Internal:
Internal:


Others as: Relating


Self-to-Self:


Self-to-Other:


This worksheet was developed for the book CFT Made Simple, by Russell Kolts, based upon work by Paul Gilbert and the Compassionate Mind Foundation
(http://www.compassionatemind.co.uk). Permission is granted for the free reproduction and dissemination ofthis form for clinical or training purposes.

[PAGE 229]

Appendix: Reproducible Forms


THREAT EMOTION MONITORING FORM
The purpose of this homework is to help you become familiar with the situations that tend to provoke
your
anger and the ways in which you tend to respond, and to learn to generate compassionate alternatives,
Pick
one time during the week when you experienced a threat emotion, such as anger or anxiety.


Situation/Trigger:


Emotions:


Thoughts:


Behaviors (What did | do?):


211

[PAGE 230]

CFT Made Simple


Outcome (How did the situation turn out?):


What does my compassionate self say?


What would my compassionate self have done?


This worksheet was developed for the book CFT Made Simple, by Russell Kolts. Permission is granted for the free reproduction and dissemination of this form for clinical or training purposes.


212

[PAGE 231]

Appendix: Reproducible Forms


FILLING OUT THE THREAT EMOTION
MONITORING FORM

Situation/Trigger: Briefly describe what happened—the situation that provoked your threat response. What
threat was involved? Describe the context as well (I was late, and the people in front of me were...). Often,
there are fairly consistent “triggers” that tend to activate us. It is important to identify what our specific triggers

are—what sorts of experiences tend to make us feel threatened—so we can learn to work skillfully when
faced with them.


Emotions: What feelings came up in the situation? Use specific terms (anger, irritation, anxiety, loneliness,
embarrassment, shame, fear, sadness, excitement).


Thoughts: What words and images came up in your mind? (For example: She can't treat me like that! or | can’t
handle this.) Did your thoughts fuel or calm your threat system?


Behaviors: What did you do? What actions did you take?


Outcome: How did it turn out? What helped in this situation? What did you do that worked? What got in the
way of your handling the situation the best way you could?


What does my compassionate self say? How would your wise, kind, confident, compassionate self understand and approach this situation?


What would my compassionate self have done? How would your compassionate self behave in this situation?


213

[PAGE 232]

CFT Made Simple


INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPASSIONATE
LETTER-WRITING
This exercise is designed to help us develop the compassionate self. We want to build and strengthen mental
patterns that will help us find the courage to work with difficult experiences, to accept ourselves, and to build a
sense of peace within ourselves that we can share with others. Learning to think and behave compassionately
can sometimes be helped by writing a letter to ourselves. In this exercise, you're going to write about difficulties, but from the perspective of your compassionate self. You can write a general letter
to yourself, or you can
tailor the letter to support yourself around a particularly challenging situation.


First, get out a pen and paper. You might even pick out a special journal or notebook,


Spend a few moments doing soothing rhythm breathing. Allow yourselfto slow down and settle into
your experience.


Now try to shift into the perspective of your compassionate self. Connect with your compassionate
self, imagining yourself at your best—your calmest, your wisest, your most caring, your most confi-
dent and courageous. Feel yourself filled with feelings of kindness, strength, and confidence. Imagine
yourself as this compassionate person who is wise, understanding, and committed to helping. Imagine
your manner, your tone of voice, and how you feel as this compassionate being.


When we are in a compassionate frame of mind, even slightly, we try to use our personal life experi-
ences wisely. We know that life can be hard. We can look deeply into the perspectives of ourselves
and other people involved in difficult situations, and try to understand how it makes sense that they
might feel and act this way. We offer strength and support, and try to be warm, nonjudgmental, and
noncondemning. Take a few breaths and feel that wise, understanding, confident, compassionate part
of you arise—this is the part of you that will write the letter.


If thoughts of self-doubt, like Am I doing it right? or I'm not really feeling it arise, note these thoughts as
normal comments our minds make, and observe what you are experiencing as you write the best
that you can. There is no right or wrong...you're just practicing, working with your compassionate
self. As you write, try to create as much emotional warmth and understanding as you can.


As you write your letter, try to allow yourself to understand and accept your distress. For example,
you might start with, | am sad, and | feel distress. My distress is understandable because. ..


Note the reasons—realize that your distress makes sense. Then continue... I would like myself to know
that...


The idea is to communicate understanding, caring, and warmth while helping ourselves work on the
things we need to address.


214

[PAGE 233]

Appendix: Reproducible Forms


When you have written your first few compassionate letters, go through them with an open mind and
see whether they actually capture compassion for you. If they do, see if you can spot the following qualities in

your letter:


It expresses concern, genuine caring, and encouragement.


It is sensitive to your distress and needs.


It helps you face your feelings and become more tolerant of them.


It helps you become more understanding of your feelings, difficulties, and dilemmas.


It is nonjudgmental and noncondemning, helping you to feel safe and accepted.


A genuine sense of warmth, understanding, and caring fills the letter.


It helps you think about behavior you may need to adopt in order to get better.


It reminds you why you are making efforts to improve.

This handout was developed for the book CFT Made Simple, by Russell Kolts. Permission is granted for the free
reproduction and dissemination of this form for clinical or training purposes.


215

[PAGE 234]

CFT Made Simple


COMPASSION PRACTICE JOURNAL

Day Type of Practice and How Long Comments—What Was Helpful?


Monday


Tuesday


Wednesday


Thursday


Friday


Saturday


Sunday


This worksheet was developed for the book CFT Made Simple, by Russell Kolts. Permission is granted for the free reproduction and dissemination of this form for clinical or training purposes.


216

[PAGE 235]

References


Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1963). The development of infant-mother interaction among the Ganda. In B. M. Foss (Ed),
Determinants of Infant Behavior, Vol. 2, 67-112. New York: Wiley.
Andrews, B., Brewin, C. R., Rose, S., & Kirk, M. (2000). Predicting PTSD symptoms in victims of violent crime: the
role of shame, anger, and childhood abuse. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 69-73.
Andrews, B., & Hunter, E. (1997). Shame, early abuse, and course of depression in a clinical sample: a preliminary
study. Cognition and Emotion, 11, 373-381.

Andrews, B., Quian, M., & Valentine, J. (2002). Predicting depressive symptoms with a new measure of shame: the
Experiences of Shame Scale. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 41, 29-33.
Ashworth, F., Gracey, F., & Gilbert, P. (2011). Compassion focused therapy after traumatic brain injury: theoretical
foundations and a case illustration. Brain Impairment, 12, 128-139.
Baumeister, R. E, Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs, K. D. (2001). Bad is stronger than good. Review of General
Psychology, 5, 323-370. doi:10.1037//1089-2680.5.4.323.
Beaumont, E., & Hollins Martin, C. J. (2013). Using compassionate mind training as a resource in EMDR: a case
study. Journal of EMDR Practice and Research, 7, 186-199.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders. New York: International Universities Press.

Beck, A. T., Davis, D. D., & Freeman, A. (2014). Cognitive Therapy of Personality Disorders (3rd ed.). New York: Guilford
Press.

Bowlby, J. (1988). A secure base: clinical applications of attachment theory. London: Routledge.

Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Vol.1. Attachment. London: Hogarth Press and the Institute of Psycho-Analysis.
(Original work published 1969.)
Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss: Vol.2. Separation: anxiety and anger. New York: Basic Books.

Braehler, C., Gumley, A., Harper, J., Wallace, S., Norrie, J., & Gilbert, P. (2013). Exploring change processes in com-
passion focused therapy in psychosis: results of a feasibility randomized controlled trial. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 52, 199-214.
Burns, D. D. (1980) Feeling good: the new mood therapy. New York: New American Library.

Carvalho, S., Dinis, A., Pinto-Gouveia, J., & Estanqueiro, C. (2013). Memories of shame experiences with others and
depression symptoms: the mediating role of experiential avoidance. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, doi:
10.1002/cpp.1862. [epub ahead of print].

Cozolino, L. J. (2010). The Neuroscience of Psychotherapy: Healing the Social Brain. New York, NY: Norton.
Depue, R. A., £ Morrone-Strupinsky, J. V. (2005). A neurobehavioral model of affiliative bonding: implications for
conceptualizing a human trait of affiliation. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 313-349.

[PAGE 236]

CFT Made Simple


Eells, T. D. (2010). Handbook of Psychotherapy Case Formulation (Qnd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Feeney, B. C., & Thrush, R. L. (010). Relationship influences upon exploration in adulthood: the characteristics and
function of a secure base. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 57-76. doi: 10.1037/a00169691
Fonagy, P., & Luyten, P. (2009). A developmental, mentalization-based approach to the understanding and treatment
of borderline personality disorder. Development and Psychopathology, 21, 1355-81.
Frederickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coffey, K. A., Pek, J., & Finkel, S. (2008). Open hearts build lives: positive emo-
tions, induced through loving-kindness meditation, build consequential resources. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 95, 1045-1062.

Fung, K. M., Tsang, H. W., & Corrigan, P. W. (2008). Self-stigma of people with schizophrenia as predictor of their
adherence to psychological treatment. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 32, 95-104.
Gale, C., Gilbert, P, Read, N., & Goss, K. (2014). An evaluation of the impact of introducing compassion-focused
therapy to a standard treatment programme for people with eating disorders. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy,
21, 1-12.

Germer, C. K. (2009). The Mindful Path to Self-Compassion. New York: Guilford Press.
Gilbert, P. (2014). The origins and nature of compassion focused therapy. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 53, 6-41.
Gilbert, P. (2010). Compassion Focused Therapy: The CBT Distinctive Features Series. London: Routledge.
Gilbert, P. (2009a). The Compassionate Mind. London, UK: Constable & Robinson; Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.

Gilbert, P. (2009b). Overcoming Depression: A Self-Help Guide to Using Cognitive Behavioral Techniques (3rd ed.). New York: Basic
Books.

Gilbert, P. (2002). Body shame: a biopsychosocial conceptualization and overview, with treatment implications. In P.
Gilbert & J. Miles (Eds.), Body Shame: Conceptualisation, Research, and Treatment, 3-54. London: Brunner.
Gilbert, P. (2000). The relationship of shame, social anxiety, and depression: the role of the evaluation of social rank.
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 1, 174—189.
Gilbert, P. (1998). What is shame? Some core issues and controversies. In P. Gilbert & B. Andrews (Eds.), Shame:
Interpersonal Bebavior, Psychopathology, and Culture, 3-36. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gilbert, P. (1989). Human Nature and Suffering. Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gilbert, P., & Choden. (2013). Mindful Compassion. London: Constable & Robinson.
Gilbert, P., & Irons, C. (2005). Focused therapies and compassionate mind training for shame and self-attacking. In P.
Gilbert (Ed.), Compassion: Conceptualisations, Research, and Use in Psychotherapy, 263-325. London: Routledge.
Gilbert, P., McEwan, K., Catarino, F., Baiao, R., & Palmeira, L. (2013). Fears of happiness and compassion in relation-
ship with depression, alexithymia, and attachment security ina depressed sample. British Journal of Clinical Psychology,
53, 228-244.

Gilbert, P, McEwan, K., Matos, M., & Rivas, A. (2011). Fears of compassion: development of three self-report mea-
sures. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 84, 239-255.
Gilbert, P., & Proctor, S. (2006). Compassionate mind training for people with high shame and self-criticism: over-
view and pilot study of a group therapy approach. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 13, 353-3709.
Gillath, O., Shaver, P. R., & Mikulincer, M. (2005). An attachment-theoretical approach to compassion and altruism.
In P. Gilbert (Ed.), Compassion: Conceptualisations, Research, and Use in Psychotherapy. London: Routledge.
Goss, K. (2011). The Compassionate-Mind Guide to Ending Overeating: Using Compassion-Focused Therapy to Overcome Bingeing and
Disordered Eating. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger; London: Constable & Robinson.
Goss, K., & Allan, S. (2009). Shame, pride, and eating disorders. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 16, 303316.
Greenberg, L. S., Rice, L. N., & Elliot, R. (1993). Facilitating Emotional Change: The Moment-by-Moment Process. New York:
Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L.S., & Watson, J. C. (2006). Emotion-Focused Therapy
for Depression. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological
Association.


218

[PAGE 237]

References


Hackmann, A., Bennett-Levy, J., & Holmes, E. A. (2011). Oxford Guide to Imagery in Cognitive Therapy (Oxford Guides in
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Harris, R. (2013). Getting Unstuck in ACT: A Clinician’s Guide to Overcoming Common Obstacles in Acceptance and Commitment
Therapy. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Hayes, S. C., Barnes-Holmes, D., & Roche, B. (Eds.) (2001). Relational Frame Theory: A Post-Skinnerian Account of Human
Language and Cognition. New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and Commitment Therapy: An Experiential Approach to Behavior
Change (st ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Henderson, L. (2010). The Compassionate-Mind Guide to Building Social Confidence: Using Compassion-Focused Therapy to Overcome
Shyness and Social Anxiety. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger; London: Constable & Robinson.
Hofmann, S. G., Grossman, P., & Hinton, D. E. (2011). Lovingkindness and compassion meditation: potential for
psychological interventions. Clinical Psychology Review, 34, 1126-1132.

Hofmann, S. G., Sawyer, A. T., Witt, A. A., & Oh, D. (2010). The effect of mindfulness-based therapy on anxiety and
depression: a meta-analytic review. The Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78, 16983.
Holman, G., Kanter, J., Tsai, M., & Kohlenberg, R. J. (2016). Functional Analytic Psychotherapy Made Simple. Oakland, CA:
New Harbinger.

Hoyt, W. T. (1996). Antecedents and effects of perceived therapist credibility: a meta-analysis. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 430-447.
Judge, L., Cleghorn, A., McEwan, K., & Gilbert, P. (2012). An exploration of group-based compassion focused
therapy for a heterogeneous range of clients presenting to a community mental health team. International Journal of
Cognitive Therapy, 5, 420-429.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1994). Wherever You Go, There You Are: Mindfulness Meditation in Everyday Life. New York: Hyperion.
Kaleem, J. (2013). Surprising number of Americans don’t believe in evolution. The Huffington Post. Retrieved from
http://www. huffingtonpost.com/2013/12/30/evolution-survey n 4519441.html

Kannan, D., & Levitt, H. M. (2013). A review of client self-criticism in psychotherapy. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration,
23, 166-178.

Kelly, A. C., & Carter, J. C. (2014). Self-compassion training for binge eating disorder: a pilot randomized controlled
trial. Psychology and Psychotherapy. Theory, Research, and Practice. doi:10.1111/papt.12044.
Kim, S., Thibodeau, R., & Jorgenson, R. S. (2011). Shame, guilt, and depressive symptoms: a meta-analytic review.
Psychological Bulletin, 137(1), 68-96.
Knox, J. (2010). Self-Agency in Psychotherapy. Attachment, Autonomy, and Intimacy (Norton Series in Interpersonal
Neurobiology). New York: Norton.
Kohlenberg, R. J., & Tsai, M. (1991). Functional Analytic Psychotherapy: A Guide for Creating Intense and Curative Therapeutic
Relationships. New York: Plenum.
Kolts, R. L. (2012). The Compassionate-Mind Guide to Managing Your Anger: Using Compassion-Focused Therapy to Calm Your Rage
and Heal Your Relationships. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger, London: Constable & Robinson.
Kolts, R. L. (2013, December). Applying CFT in Working with Problematic Anger: The “True Strength’ Prison Program. Paper pre-
sented at the 2nd Annual Conference on Compassion-Focused Therapy, London.

Kolts, R. L., & Chodron, T. (2013). Living with an Open Heart: How to Cultivate Compassion in Everyday Life. (US title: An Open-
Hearted Life: Transformative Lessons on Compassionate Living from a Clinical Psychologist and a Buddbist Nun). London: Constable
and Robinson; Boston: Shambhala.
Kolts, R. L., Parker, L., & Johnson, E. (2013, December). Initial Exploration of Compassion-Focused Exposure: Making Use of
Reconsolidation. Poster presented at the 2nd Annual Conference on Compassion-Focused Therapy, London.
Laithwaite, H., O'Hanlon, M., Collins, P., Doyle, P., Abraham, L., Porter, S., & Gumley, A. (2009). Recovery after
psychosis (RAP): a compassion focused programme for individuals residing in high security settings. Behavioral
and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 37, 511-526.


219

[PAGE 238]

CFT Made Simple


Leahy, R.L. (Ed.). (2006). Roadblocks in cognitive-behavioral therapy: Transforming challenges into opportunities for change. New York:
Guilford Press.

Leaviss, J., & Uttley, I. (2014). Psychotherapeutic benefits of compassion-focused therapy: an early systematic review.
Psychological Medicine, doi:10.1017/S0033291714002141.
LeDoux, J. (1998). The Emotional Brain. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Lee, D. A. (2005). The perfect nurturer: a model to develop a compassionate mind within the context of cognitive
therapy. In P. Gilbert (Ed.), Compassion: Conceptualisations, Research, and Use in Psychotherapy, 263-325. London: Routledge.

Lee, D. A., & James, S. (2011). The Compassionate-Mind Guide to Recovering from Trauma and PTSD: Using Compassion-Focused
Therapy to Overcome Flashbacks, Shame, Guilt, and Fear. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger, London: Constable & Robinson.
Liotti, G., & Gilbert, P. (2011). Mentalizing, motivation, and social mentalities: theoretical considerations and impli-
cations for psychotherapy. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 84, 9-25.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Guilford Press.
Lucre, K. M., & Corten, N. (2013). An exploration of group compassion-focused therapy for personality disorder.
Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 86, 387-400.
Luoma, J. B., Kulesza, M., Hayes, S. C., Kohlenberg, B., & Larimer, M. (2014). Stigma predicts residential treatment
lengthforsubstanceusedisorder. The American Journalof Drugand Alcohol Abuse, 40,206-212.doi:10.3109/00952990.2014.
901337.

Maclean, P. D. (1990). The Triune Brain in Evolution: Role of Paleocerebral Functions. New York: Plenum Press.

Martin, D. J., Garske, J. P., & Davis, K. M. (2000). Relation of the therapeutic alliance with outcome and other vari-
ables: a meta-analytic review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 438-450.
Mascaro, J. S., Rilling, J. K., Negi, L. T., & Raison, C. L. (2013). Compassion meditation enhances empathic accuracy
and related neural activity. SCAN, 8, 48-55.

Mikulincer, M. & Shaver, P. R. (2007). Attachment in Adulthood: Structure, Dynamics, and Change. New York: Guilford Press.

Mikulincer, M. & Shaver, P. R. (2005). Attachment security, compassion, and altruism. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 14, 34—38.
Mikulincer, M., Gillath, O., Halevy, V., Avihou, N., Avidan, S., & Eshkoli, N. (2001). Attachment theory and reac-
tions to others’ needs: evidence that activation of the sense of attachment security promotes empathic responses.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1205-1224.
Monfils, M-H., Cowansage, K. K., Klann, E., LeDoux, J. E. (2009). Extinction-reconsolidation boundaries: key to
persistent attenuation of fear memories. Science, 324, 951-955, doi:10.1126/science. 1167975.
Neff, K. D. (2011). Self-Compassion: Stop Beating Yourself Up and Leave Insecurity Behind. New York: William Morrow.
Neff, K. D. (2003). The development and validation of a scale to measure self-compassion. Self and Identity, 2 f


223-250.

Neff, K. D., & Germer, C. K. (2013). A pilot study and randomized controlled trial of the mindful self-compassion
program. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 69, 28-44.
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and Animal Emotions. New York: Oxford University Press.
Panksepp, J., & Biven, L. (2012). The Archaeology of Mind: Neuroevolutionary Origins of Human Emotions. New York: Norton.
Pepping, C. A., Davis, P. J., O’Donovan, A., & Pal, J. (2014). Individual differences in self-compassion: the role of attach-
ment and experiences of parenting in childhood. Self
and Identity, 14, 104-117. doi:10.1080/15298868.2014.955050.
Persons, J. B., Davidson, J., & Tompkins, M. A. (2000). Essential Components of Cognitive-Bebavior Therapy for Depression.
Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
Pinto-Gouveia, J., & Matos, M. (2011). Can shame memories become a key to identity? The centrality of shame
memories predicts psychopathology. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25, 281-290.

Porges, 5. W. (2011). The Polyvagal Theory: Neurophysiological Foundations of Emotions, Attachment, Communication, and Self-
Regulation. New York: Norton.


220

[PAGE 239]

References


Pos, A. E., & Greenberg, L. S. (2012). Organizing awareness and increasing emotion regulation: revising chairwork
in emotion-focused therapy for borderline personality disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 26, 84-107.
Ramnerö, J., & Törneke, N. (2008). The ABCs of Human Behavior: Behavioral Principles for the Practicing Clinician. Oakland, CA:
New Harbinger, Reno, NV: Context Press.
Rector, N.A., Bagby, R. M., Segal, Z. V., Joffe, R. T., & Levitt, A. (2000). Self-criticism and dependency in depressed
patients treated with cognitive therapy or pharmacotherapy. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 24, 571-584.
Riisch, N., Corrigan, P. W., Wassel, A., Michaels, P., Larson, J. E., Olschewski, M., Wilkniss, S., & Batia, K. (2009).
Self-stigma, group identification, perceived legitimacy of discrimination and mental health service use. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 195, 551-552.
Rüsch, N., Lieb, K., Góttler, I., Hermann, C., Schramm, E., & Richter, H. (2007). Shame and implicit self-concept in
women with borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 500-508.
Salkovskis, P. M. (1996). The cognitive approach to anxiety: threat beliefs, safety-seeking behavior, and the special
case of health anxiety and related obsessions. In P. M. Sarkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of Cognitive Therapy, 48-74. New
York: Guilford Press.

Salzberg, S. (1995). Lovingkindness: The Revolutionary Art of Happiness. Boston: Shambhala.
Schiller, D., Monfils, M-H., Raio, C. M, Johnson, D. C., LeDoux, J. E., & Phelps, E. A. (2010). Preventing the return
of fear in humans using reconsolidation update mechanisms. Nature, 463, doi:10.1038/ nature08637.
Schore, A. N. (1999). Affect Regulation and the Origin of the Self. The Neurobiology of Emotional Development. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum & Associates, Inc.
Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D . (2001). Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy
for Depression: A New Approach
to Preventing Relapse. New York: Guilford Press.
Shahar, B., Carlin, E. R., Engle, D. E., Hegde, J., Szepsenwol, O., & Arkowitz, H. (2012). A pilot investigation of
emotion-focused two-chair dialogue intervention for self-criticism. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 19, 496—
507. doi:10.1002/cpp.762.
Siegel, D. J. (2012). The Developing Mind: How Relationships and the Brain Interact to Shape Who We Are (2nd ed.). New York:
Guilford Press.

Sirey, J. A., Bruce, M. L., Alexopoulas, G. S., Perlick, D., Friedman, S. J., & Meyers, B. S. (2001). Stigma as a barrier
to recovery: perceived stigma and patient-rated severity of illness as predictors of antidepressant drug adher-
ence. Psychiatric Services, 52, 1615-1620.
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and Human Behavior. New York: Macmillan.
Sroufe, L. A., & Waters, E. (1977). Attachment as an organizational construct. Child Development, 48, 1184-1199.
Tangney, J. P, Wagner, P, & Gramzow, R. (1992). Proneness to shame, proneness to guilt, and psychopathology.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 469-478.
Teasdale, J. D., & Barnard, P. J. (1993). Affect, Cognition and Change: Remodelling Depressive Affect. Hove, UK: Psychology
Press.

Teyber, E., & McClure, F. H. (2011). Interpersonal Process in Therapy (6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Tirch, D. (2012). The Compassionate-Mind Guide to Overcoming Anxiety: Using Compassion-Focused Therapy to Calm Worry, Panic, and
Fear. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger; London: Constable & Robinson.
Tirch, D., Schoendorff, B., & Silberstein, L. R. (2014). The ACT Practitioner's Guide to the Science of Compassion: Tools for
Fostering Psychological Flexibility. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Tórneke, N. (2010). Learning RFT: An Introduction to Relational Frame Theory and Its Clinical Application. Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger, Reno, NV: Context Press.
Tsai, M., Kohlenberg, R. J., Kanter, J., Kohlenberg, B., Follette, W., & Callaghan, G. (2009). A Guide to Functional Analytic
Psychotherapy: Awareness, Courage, Love and Behaviorism. New York: Springer.
Wallin, D. J. (2007). Attachment in Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press.


221

[PAGE 241]

About the author


Russell L. Kolts, PhD, is a licensed clinical psychologist and professor of psychology at Eastern
Washington University, where he has taught for the past seventeen years. Kolts has authored or
coauthored numerous books and scholarly articles, including The Compassionate-Mind Guide to Managing
Your Anger, and has pioneered the application of compassion-focused therapy (CFT) to the treatment of problematic anger. An internationally recognized expert in CFT, he regularly conducts
trainings and workshops on compassion and CFT, and has appeared in his own TEDx Talk.


Foreword writer Paul Gilbert, PhD, is world-renowned for his work on depression, shame, and selfcriticism, and is the developer of CFT. He is head of the mental health research unit at the University
of Derby, and has authored or coauthored numerous scholarly articles and books, including The
Compassionate Mind, Mindful Compassion, and Overcoming Depression.


Afterword writer Steven C. Hayes, PhD, is Nevada Foundation Professor and director of clinical
training in the department of psychology at the University of Nevada. An author of forty-one
books and nearly 600 scientific articles, his career has focused on analysis of the nature of human
language and cognition, and its application to the understanding and alleviation of human suffering
and promotion of human prosperity. Among other associations, Hayes has been president of the
Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapy, and the Association for Contextual Behavioral
Science. His work has received several awards, including the Impact of Science on Application
Award from the Society for the Advancement of Behavior Analysis, and the Lifetime Achievement
Award from the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapy.

[PAGE 243]

Index


A B
A-B-C process, 80 behavior: compassionate, 30—31; defensive, 175-176;
about this book, 5—7 functional analysis of, 80-82
acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT), 10, 91, behavior therapy, 80-87
196, 197 behavioral activation, 201
activity scheduling, 123 beliefs of clients, 7-10
affect: practice for exploring, 181-193. See also Bell, Tobyn, 182
emotions biological influences, 173
affective neuroscience, 19, 53, 61, 197 body: practicing mindfulness of, 102; soothing
affiliation contexts, 20 rhythm breathing and, 57-59
amygdala, 52, 63, 64 Bowlby, John, 40, 76
anger, 153, 159, 183-186 brain: challenges of our evolved, 18; evolutionary
antecedents to behavior, 80 shaping of, 49-59; exploring the old vs. new,
anxiety, 77, 187-188 50-56; parts of the triune, 49-50. See also mind
archetypal motives, 52 breathing: mindful, 57-58, 97-102, soothing rhythm,
attachment: aversion and, 64; history and style of, 30, 57-59

76-79 Burns, David, 174
attachment anxiety, 77
attachment avoidance, 77 C
attachment behavioral system, 40
captain of the ship metaphor, 183, 190, 192
attachment security, 77
cardboard cutout metaphor, 131-132, 133
attachment theory, ix, 40
case formulation, 171-179, description of
attention: focusing in a soothing way, 59; mindfulness
components in, 171; innate and historical
and, 29-30, 93-94
influences in, 173; key fears explored in, 173-175;
aversion, 64, 82
patterns of self and other relating in, 177, safety
avoidance: attachment, 77, of mindfulness practice,
strategies recognized in, 175-176, treatment
103-104, safety strategies and, 176; shame-related,
planning based on, 179; unintended consequences
15
explored in, 176-177, worksheet for CFT, 172,
awareness, compassionate, 91-105. See also
178, 210
mindfulness

[PAGE 244]

CFT Made Simple


cerebral cortex, 50 compassionate thinking and reasoning, 29, 129-140,
CFT. See compassion-focused therapy compassionate understanding linked to, 135-139;
CFT Case Formulation Worksheet, 172, 178, 210 examples of working with, 131-134, 136-139;
chair work, 155-170; benefits of, 155, empty-chair importance of mindfulness for, 130; mentalizing
work, 156-159, Multiple Selves practice and, 181; for, 135; threat-based thinking vs., 134-135
two-chair work, 159-170 compassionate understanding: of the evolution of our
Circle of Compassion, 27 brains, 49-59, of the social shaping of the self,
coercive environment, 201 75-89; thought work linked to, 135-139; of the
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 205 three types of emotion, 61-73
colleague consultations, 48 compassion-focused therapy (CFT): approach of,
common humanity, 42, 47 3-4, case formulation in, 171-179; chair work in,
compassion: attributes of, 26-29; building blocks of, 155-170; characteristics of, 195-196; compared to
17-19, CFT as rooted in, 196; circle of, 27, other approaches, 196-198, core ideas of, 14-23;
connecting with qualities of, 44; cultivation of, evidence base for, 4-5, 205, 206; general
43—44, definition of, viii, 16-17, 25-26; extending description of, 2-3; integrating into your practice,
to vulnerable self, 119-123, fears of, 41, 87-89; 10-11, 198-202; layered approach to, 5—7, origins
flow of, 152; skills related to, 29-31 of, 13-14, roles of the therapist in, 33-47, 198;
compassion for others practice, 153-154 scientific basis of, 5; unique features of, xxi
Compassion for Voices (film), xi competitive social rank, xi
Compassion Practice Journal form, 216 conditioning: operant, 80-82; respondent, 82-83
compassionate action, 30 consequences: of behavior, 81; unintended, 176-177
compassionate awareness, 91-105 contextual behavioral science (CBS), 197
compassionate behavior, 30-31 coping strategies, 30

compassionate correction, 16 core fears/threats, 173-175
compassionate imagery. See imagery countertransference, 200
compassionate letter-writing, 124-127, example courage, vii, 26, 42

letter, 126; instructions for, 124-126, 214-215 credibility, therapist, 35
Compassionate Mind, The (Gilbert), 43
Compassionate Mind Foundation, 36, 172 D
compassionate motivation, viii, 12, 28
Dalai Lama, 197
compassionate self, 7, 115-127, captain of the ship
debriefing exercises, 192-193
metaphor and, 183, 190, 192, chair work with, 156,
defensive behaviors, 175-176
159-170, example dialogue on practicing, 116-119,
derived relationships, 84-85
exposure therapy and, 201-202, helping clients
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), 10, 43, 91
cultivate, 17, 115-127, home practice of, 123-124;
discriminative stimuli, 80
imagery practices based on, 152-153; letter-
distress tolerance, 28, 163
writing exercise for, 124-127; loving-kindness
downward arrow method, 174-175
meditation and, 153; method-acting approach to
drive system: explanation of, 63-64; inspiring
developing, 116; modeling in therapy, 41-44;
through therapy, 200
motivation and, 201; strengthening the
perspective of, 123-124, therapeutic perspective
using, 200-202, vulnerable or suffering self and,
E
119-123. See also self-compassion eating mindfully, 102

Compassionate Self practice, 30, 43, 116-119, 123, emotional brain, 50, 52

127 emotional courage, 26, 42


226

[PAGE 245]

Index


emotional inertia, 57 flow of compassion, 152
emotional tone, vii—viii forgetting to practice, 103
emotion-focused therapy (EFT), 10, 155, 163 forms, 209-216; CFT Case Formulation Worksheet,
emotion-regulation systems, ix, 19-20; evolution of, 172, 178, 210; Compassion Practice Journal, 216;
52, three-circles model of, 62-65 Instructions for Compassionate Letter-Writing,
emotions: breathing and, 57, 59; care-oriented, viii; 214-215; Threat Emotion Monitoring, 124,
chair work for working with, 155, compassionate 211-212, 213

feelings and, 30; evolutionary function of, x, 18; frozen prawns metaphor, 88
mindful awareness of, 92-93, Multiple Selves functional analysis of behavior, 80-82
practice and, 181-193, organization of mind and, functional analytic psychotherapy (FAP), 10, 35, 197
65-71, shown by therapists, 151; threat, 20, 35, 63; functional contextualism, 197
three types of, ix, 61-73, understanding vs.
judging, 56 G
empathy, 29
Germer, Chris, 195
empiricism, 196, 197
Gibran, Kahlil, 1
empty-chair work, 156-159
Gilbert, Paul, xii, 2, 5, 13, 59, 72, 141, 172, 181
environments: childhood development and, 75; goal
Good Will Hunting (film), 19
for therapeutic, 200, insecure or invalidating, 20
Greenberg, Leslie, 155
evidence base for CFT, 4—5, 205, 206
guided discovery, 37-39; experiential exercises for,
evolution: CFT approach and, 3, 8, 197; client beliefs
38; exploring interpersonal dynamics for, 38-39,
about, 7-10; cognitive challenges related to, 18;
Socratic dialogue for, 37-38; working with
teaching clients about, 35, 198
obstacles for, 39
evolutionary functional analysis, ix, 35, 61
exercising mindfully, 102
experience: case formulation related to, 173;
H
emotions and the organization of, 65—71 Hayes, Steven C., 206
experiential avoidance, 14 heartfelt motivation, viii
experiential exercises, 11, 38; Compassionate Letter- helpfulness, viii, 29

Writing, 124-127, 214-215; Connecting with historical influences, 173

Compassionate Qualities, 44; Ideal Compassionate home practice: compassionate self, 123-124; soothing
Image Practice, 147-151, Mindful Checking-In, rhythm breathing, 59, supplementary materials for,
94-97; Multiple Selves practice, 181-193, 36-37, threat emotion monitoring, 124, 211-213
Soothing Rhythm Breathing, 58, Two Teachers humility, 198

vignette, 110-113; Working with Motivation and
Intention, 11-12 I
exposure therapy, 11, 196, 201-202
imagery, 30, 141-154; compassion for distress, threat
external shame, 14, 23
feelings, and pain practice, 152; compassion for
external threats, 173
others practice, 153-154; compassion for the self
practice, 152-153; exposure therapy using, 201,
F introducing clients to, 141-143, perfect nurturer
failure, feelings of, 104-105 practice, 147-151; safe place created with, 143-147

fears: of compassion, 41, 87-89; exposure therapy for, implicit processing systems, 52

201-202, identifying key, 173-175 innate influences, 173

feelings: cultivating compassionate, 30; mindful Inside Out (film), x
awareness of, 92—93. See also emotions


227

[PAGE 246]

CFT Made Simple


Instructions for Compassionate Letter-Writing mind: emotions and the organization of, 65-71;
(form), 214-215 mindfully noticing movement in, 105. See also brain
intention, exercise on working with, 11-12 mindful breathing, 97-102; soothing rhythm
internal affiliative relationship, x breathing vs., 57-58; teaching to clients, 98-101,
internal shame, 14, 23 therapist practice of, 102
internal threats, 173, 175 Mindful Checking-In exercise, 94-97
internal working models, 40, 173 Mindful Compassion (Gilbert and Choden), 43
interpersonal dynamics, 38—39 Mindful Self-Compassion program, 195
invalidating environments, 20 mindful task completion, 102
mindfulness, 91-105, attention and, 29-30, 93-94,

J benefits of practicing, 92-93, breathing based on,
97-102; Checking-In exercise, 94-97, common
judging thoughts/emotions, 56
activities utilizing, 102-103; compassionate
thought work and, 130; definition of, 92;
K facilitating with the three circles, 199; obstacles to
Kabat-Zinn, Jon, 92 practicing, 103-105, preparing clients for, 93-94
key fears, 173-175 mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT), 10, 91
motivation: brain evolution and, 52, compassionate,

L viii, 12, 28, 201; exercise on working with, 11-12;
guiding force of, xi; mindfulness practice and,
layered processes and practices, 5—7
103-104; self-criticism used for, 163; social
learned responses, 30
mentalities and, 72—73
learning: prepared, 83; social, 85-87
Multiple Selves practice, 181-193, captain of the ship
learning theory, 80-87
metaphor and, 183, 190, 192; debriefing with
Lee, Deborah, 147
clients, 192-193; example dialogue illustrating,
letter-writing. See compassionate letter-writing
183-191, explanation of, 181-182; potential
lifestyles, compassionate, 115
objectives of, 182; tips for facilitating, 182-183
lightheartedness, 43
limbic system, 49-50
loving-kindness practices, 153-154 N
Neff, Kristin, 42, 195
M negative punishment, 81
neo-mammalian brain, 50
Maclean, Paul, 49
neuroscience, affective, 19, 53, 61, 197
maladaptive consequences, 176
New Harbinger website, 36
memories: case formulation drawing on, 173;
nonjudgment, 28
emotions shaped by, 71; exposure therapy and,
201-202, reconsolidation of, 196, 201-202
mental experiences, 141. See also imagery O
mental “palate cleanser,” 183, 186, 191 obstacles: in mindfulness training, 103-105; working
mentalizing, 135 collaboratively with, 39
metaphors: captain of the ship, 183, 190, 192; old vs. new brain, 50-56
cardboard cutout, 131-132, 133; frozen prawns, operant conditioning, 80-82
88; path in the woods, 136-138 organization of experience, 65—71; compassionate
method-acting approach, 116 mind and, 130; safeness system and, 68-71; threat
Mikulincer, Mario, 40 system and, 65, 66-68, 130


228

[PAGE 247]

Index


other-directed compassion, 153-154 safeness: creating feelings of, 19-23, 200, emotionother-schemas, 173 regulation system for, 64-65; imagery practice for,
143-147, secure base related to, 40-41; social

P connectedness and, 64-65; therapeutic
environment of, 31
paleo-mammalian brain, 49
safeness system: explanation of, 64-65, organization
parasympathetic nervous system, ix, 196
of the mind and, 68—71
path in the woods metaphor, 136-138
safeness-drive-threat ratio, 200
peer-supervision process, 48
safety strategies, 77, 175-177, recognizing in clients,
perfect nurturer practice, 147-151
175-176; self and other relating and, 177,
phrases, compassionate, 152-153
unintended consequences of, 176-177
polyvagal theory, 196
Schoendorff, Benji, 196
Porges, Stephen, 196
secure attachment, 77
positive punishment, 81
secure base, ix, 40-41
prepared learning, 83
self. different versions of, 76; emotions and the
present-moment affective work, 35
organization of, 68, multiple versions of, 181-193;
progressive muscle relaxation, 59
practicing compassion for, 152-153, social shaping
Prophet, The (Gibran), 1
of, 18-19, 75-89
punishment, 81
self-attacking, 199
self-compassion: chair work for experiencing, 159,
R common humanity as core component of, 42, 47,
randomized controlled trials (RCTs), 4 imagery practice for developing, 152-153; Two
reasoning, compassionate, 56, 103, 134—135. See also Teachers vignette for developing, 110-113;
compassionate thinking and reasoning understanding as foundational layer of, 89. See also
reconsolidation of memories, 196, 201-202 compassionate self
reinforcement, 81 self-criticism, 107-113; chair work for, 155, 156, 159,
relational frame theory (RFT), 84-85, 196 163-170, crippling effect of, 14-16, discovering
relational safeness, 31 the motivation behind, 163; Socratic dialog for
relationships: affiliative, x; derived, 84-85. See also exploring, 108-110, 112-113, 163; Two Teachers
therapeutic relationship vignette on, 110-113
relaxation exercises, 58-59 self-disclosure, 47-48
reptilian brain, 49 self-harm, 176
respondent conditioning, 82-83 self-schemas, 173
response cost, 81 self-stigma, 15
roles of CFT therapist, 33-47, considering the sensitivity, 27
functions of, 198, facilitator of guided discovery, sensory anchors, 146
37-39; model of compassionate self, 41-44; sensory focusing, 30
provider of secure base, 40-41; putting into play sexual fantasies, 52
with clients, 44-47, teacher of CFT model, 34-37 shame: crippling effect of, 14-16, internal vs.
external, 14, 23; process of overcoming, 3

S Shaver, Philip, 40
showering mindfully, 102
sadness, 72, 188
Silberstein, Laura, 196
safe haven, ix
slowing, creating a sense of, 58
safe place imagery, 143-147


229

[PAGE 248]

CFT Made Simple


social experiences: safeness system related to, 64-65; judging, 56, working with threat-focused, 130—
the self shaped through, 18-19, 23 134. See also compassionate thinking and reasoning
social influences, 173 Threat Emotion Monitoring form, 124, 211-212, 213
social learning, 85-87 threat emotions: effects of, 20, 35; form for
social mentalities, 72-73, 115 monitoring, 124, 211-212, 213; softening the
social shaping of the self, 18-19, 76-87, attachment intensity of, 30, 58, 59
history/style and, 76-79; learning theory/behavior threat system: explanation of, 63; organization of the
therapy and, 80-87 mind and, 65, 66-68, 130; therapy experience and,
Socratic dialogue, 37-38; safety strategies and, 176; 200

self-criticism and, 108-110, 112-113, 163; threat-focused thoughts, 130-135, compassionate
undermining self-attacks through, 199 thoughts vs., 134-135; example of working with,
soothing rhythm breathing, 30, 57-59; instructions 130-134

for practicing, 58; mindful breathing vs., 57-58; three-circles model of emotions, 62-65; client
safe place imagery and, 146 interactions and, 199-200, drive system in, 63-64;
stimulus functions, 84 mindfulness and, 199, safeness system in, 64-65;
substance abuse, 176, 177 threat system in, 62
suffering, CFT orientation to, 25-26 Tirch, Dennis, 196
supplementary materials, 36-37 treatment planning, 179
sympathy, 27-28, 139 triune brain, 49
True Strength program, vii

T Two Teachers vignette, 110-113
two-chair work, 159-170; with compassionate and
teacher role in CFT, 34-37, client's lived experience
vulnerable selves, 159-163; with compassionate,
and, 35-36; supplementary materials related to,
vulnerable, and self-critical selves, 163-170
36-37

temperaments, 75

therapeutic relationship, 33-48; guided discovery in, u
37-39; modeling the compassionate self in, 41-44; understanding. See compassionate understanding
roles of the therapist in, 33-47, 198; secure base unintended consequences, 176-177
provided in, 40-41; teaching the CFT model in,
34-37, therapist self-disclosure in, 47-48; three- V
circles model and, 199-200
vulnerable self: chair work with, 159-170, extending
therapists: characteristics of CFT, 195-196;
compassion to, 119-123
credibility of, 35; emotion shown by, 151; mindful
breathing practice of, 102; roles performed by,
33-47, 198. self-disclosure used by, 47-48
W
“third wave” therapies, 10, 91, 197 walking mindfully, 102

thoughts: cultivating compassionate, 29, 129-140; warmth, 16, 196; modeling with clients, 42;
mindful awareness of, 92-93; threat-based vs. therapeutic context of, 26, 41

compassionate, 134-135; understanding vs. worksheets. See forms


230

[PAGE 249]

MORE BOOKS from
NEW HARBINGER PUBLICATIONS
An Easy-to-Read Primer
on Acceptance and
Commitment Therapy
The ACT Practitioner’s Guide

Science of
A Compassion
made simple

Tools for Fostering
A quick-start guide to ACT basics and beyond Psychological E lexibility
own
+ Understand & apply the six core processes of ACT * Create your
DENNIS TIRCH


SHERI VAN DIJK, MSW


ACT MADE SIMPLE THE ACT
DBT MADE SIMPLE PRACTITIONER'S GUID E
A Step-by-Step Guide to An Easy-To-Read Primer TO THE SCIENCE
Dialectical Behavior Therapy on Acceptance & OF COMPASSION
Commitment Therapy
ISBN: 978-1608821648 / US $39.95 Tools for Fostering
ISBN: 978-1572247055 / US $39.95
Psychological Flexibility
ISBN: 978-1626250550 / US $49.95


MINDFUL
COMPASSION
Mindfulness
Meditation
= in Psychotherapy
THE COMPASSIONATE MIND ás ==
An Integrated Model for Clinicians
Fi

Pr

h ‚cience of compassion can help you
d your emotions, live in the present,
and connect deeply with others

PAUL GILBERT, PHD Steven A. Alper, MSW, LCSW
PAUL GILBERT, PH.D. and CHODEN


THE COMPASSIONATE MIND MINDFUL COMPASSION MINDFULNESS
A New Approach to How the Science of Compa ssion MEDITATION IN
Life’s Challenges Can Help You Understand Your PSYCHOTHERAPY
Emotions, Live in the Present, and An Integrated Model for Clinicians
ISBN: 978-1572248403 / US $24.95 Connect Deeply with Others ISBN: 978-1626252752 / US $39.95
CONTEXT PRESS
ISBN: 978-1626250611 / US $18.95 An Imprint of New Harbinger Publications


> newharbingerpublications
€ 1-800-748-6273 / newharbinger.com
(VISA, MC, AMEX / prices subject to change without notice)
sz Don't miss out on new books in the subjec ts that interest you.
Follow Us Ej |» | ® arbinger.com/bookalerts
Sign up for our Book Alerts at newh
Sign up to receive Quick Tips for Therapists—
fast and free solutions to commo n client situatio ns mental health professionals encounter.
Written by New Harbinger authors, some ofthe most promin ent names in psychology today,
Quick Tips for Therap ists are short, helpful emails that will help enhance your client sessions.
Sign up online at newharbinger.com/quicktips

[PAGE 250]

Register your NeW harbinger titles for additional
benefits!

When you register your new ha rbing er title—
purchased in any format, from any source—you get access
to benefits like the following:

e Downloadable accessories like printable worksheets
and extra content

e = Instructional videos and audio files

e Information about updates, corrections, and new
editions


Not every title has accessories, but were adding new material
all the time.

Access free accessories in 3 easy steps:


1. Sign in at NewHarbinger.com (or register to create an
account).

2. Click on register a book. Search for your title and click
the register button when it appears.

3. Click on the book cover or title to go to its details
page. Click on accessories to view and access files.


That’s all there is to it!

If you need help, visit: new harbinger
NewHarbinger / i CELEBRATING
ewrlarbinger.com/accessories 4.@© AS
