[PAGE 001]

Edited by Pierre Joris SLAOd


and Jerome Rothenberg

303


SBHi


André Breton: Selections. Edited and with an Introduction by Mark Polizzotti


Maria Sabina: Selections. Edited by Jerome Rothenberg, with Texts and

Commentaries by Alvaro Estrada and Others
NNINN3TI N

[PAGE 002]

The publisher gratefully acknowledges the generous contribution

to this book provided by the General Endowment Fund

ofthe Associates ofthe University of California Press.

[PAGE 003]

SELECTIONS SABINA: MARIA

[PAGE 005]

SELECTIONS


MARIA SABINA


EDITED BY JEROME ROTHENBERG


With Texts and Commentaries


by Alvaro Estrada and Others


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS


Berkeley Los Angeles London

[PAGE 006]

University of California Press

Berkeley and Los Angeles, California


University of California Press, Ltd.

London, England


© 2003 by the Regents of the University of California


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Maria Sabina, 1894—
Marfa Sabina : Selections / Maria Sabina ; edited by Jerome Rothenberg;

with texts and commentaries by Alvaro Estrada and others.
p. cm. — (Poets for the millennium; 2)
Includes bibliographical references.

ISBN 0-520-23360-3 (cloth : alk. paper) —

ISBN 0-520-23953-9 (pbk : alk. paper)

1. María Sabina, 1894—. 2. Mazatec Indians—Biography.

3. Mazatec poetry. 4. Mazatec Indians—Medicine. 5. Mazatec Indians—

Rites and ceremonies. 6. Mushrooms, Hallucinogenic—Mexico.

I. Rothenberg, Jerome, 1931—. II. Titles. IH. Series.

F1121.M35M3772 2003


299786 —dcz1 [a] 2003042605


Manufactured in the United States of America

10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03

10987654321


The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements

of ANS1/NISO 239.48- 1992 (R 1997) (Permanence of Paper).


FRONTISPIECE: María Sabina humming at the start ofthe velada.

Photograph by Allan Richardson. Courtesy R. Gordon Wasson

Archives, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

[PAGE 007]

CONTENTS


Editors Preface... ............


THE LIFE


Written with Álvaro Estrada o.


THE CHANTS


The Folkways Chant...

The 1970 Session: Three Excerpts ............

The Mushroom Velada: Three Excerpts. .


COMMENTARIES € DERIVATIONS


Introduction to The Life of María Sabina

ÁLVARO ESTRADA 0.0

FROM Teo-Nanácatl: The Mushroom Agape

VALENTINA PAVLOVNA WASSON AND


R. GORDON WASSON. . 2.222222.


The Uniqueness ofMaria Sabina

HENRY MUNN.............. . 140

[PAGE 008]

Maria Sabina in Mexico City

HOMERO ARIDJIS......
2... oo 164


FROM Fast Speaking Woman

ANNE WALDMAN ...........0....2.248. 171


Fast Speaking Woman & the Dakini Principle

ANNE WALDMAN o 174


The Little Saint ofHuautla

JEROME ROTHENBERG......... 22... 183


The Poet Speaks, the Mountain Sings...

JUAN GREGORIO REGINO........ 22.0.0191


The Song Begıns

JUAN GREGORIO REGINO . . . . . .. .2..194


n a “


Selected Bibliography... ooo... 201

Source Notes and Acknowledgments . . . 222.208

[PAGE 009]

EDITOR'S PRE-FACE


In Mazatec, Marfa Sabina’s calling was, literally, that of “wise woman”

—a term that we may choose to translate as “shaman” or, by a further
twist, as “poet.” But that's to bring it and her into our own generalized
kind of reckoning and naming. In much the same way, the book containing her oral autobiography, or vida, which first appeared in Spanish in 1977 and which makes up a large part of the present volume,
translated her from the particularities of local Mazatec culture to the
generalities of a book and media technology that can travel almost
anywhere. (Or so we like to think.)

WhenI visited Mexico in the summer of 1979 to arrange for publication and translation of her Vida into English, the film María Sabina:
Muyer Espíritu, a documentary by Nicolás Echevarria, was playing under government sponsorship at the large Cine Régis in downtown
Mexico City. María Sabina herself had been brought to Mexico City
the previous month—a small, elderly Indian woman, dressed in the
traditional bird and flower huipil, and with only a touch of Spanish at

her service—and had been much patronized (even lionized, J think
the word is) before her return to her native Huautla, a small and remote hill town in the mountains of Oaxaca. (All this in contrast to the

attempt, a dozen years before, to arrest her for practice of the sacred
mushroom ceremonies that existed in the Mazatecan sierras long before the first conquerors set foot there.)

[PAGE 010]

I hope, in calling attention to the degree of fame she has, that I don’t
frustrate the reader’s enthusiasm for things Indian and remote. She
was certainly aware of being famous (“the judge knows me, the government knows me,” she sings), though by our standards it had little

effect on her life per se. She continued to live in her old tin-roofed
house—even while a new prefabricated home supplied by the govern-

ment was going up nearby. She continued to walk barefoot up the hillside, to speak Mazatec, not Spanish, to cure and to shamanize, to
smoke cigarettes and drink beer from the bottle, to celebrate her own
life of labor and her ability to make a clean bed, along with those other

powers, language foremost among them, that had won her local and
international repute. A poet, in short, with a sense of both a real phys-

ical world and a world beyond what the mind may sense, or the mouth

proclaim.

Before her name reached us clearly, her image and words had already come into our world. By the late 1950s, R. Gordon Wasson’s recording, The Mushroom Ceremony of the Mazatec Indians of Mexico,
was in circulation, and even before, Life magazine had run a feature

(part of a “Great Adventures Series”) on Wasson’s “discovery of
mushrooms that cause strange visions.”' Soon thereafter one heard
from travelers in Mexico of side trips to see and be illumined by

the “mushroom woman” of Oaxaca. (Her own view of these matters
awaits the reader, within.) And in the strange way in which ideas

about language may travel in advance of the language itself, the Spanish Nobel poet Camilo José Cela constructed, early along, a highly
fantastical opera about her, María Sabina y el carro de heno, o el inven-

tor de la guillotina—a takeoff in part on what he took, from what was

1. May 13, 1957. The cover, which mentions the Wasson piece as one of its headlines, also shows a photo of comedian Bert Lahr (“as a bumbling lover”) peering
through tropical fronds—a curious example, so to speak, of cultural synchronism.


X \ EDITOR'S PRE-FACE

[PAGE 011]

Maria Sabina incensing the mushrooms. Photograph by Allan Richardson.
Courtesy R. Gordon Wasson Archives, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

[PAGE 012]

then available, to be her style of languaging.? In Mexico she became
the subject of at least one comic book and of other forms of popular
diffusion, and the American poet Anne Waldman, having come
across the liner notes to Wasson’s Ceremony, circa 1970, used them to
model a work called Fast Speaking Woman that she performed in poetry readings and even, if memory doesn’t fail me, as part of Bob Dylan’s short-lived Rolling Thunder Review or of his film Renaldo and
Clara:

Pm a shouting woman
m a speech woman
V


I’m an atmosphere woman
I’m an airtight woman


in distinct reflection of the other’s:

lam a spirit woman, says
I am a lord eagle woman, says


—which the North American poet acknowledges formally as her “indebtedness to the Mazatec Indian Shamaness in Mexico.” Yet she fails
at that point to name her—with a sense, one guesses, that the “shamaness” is of the anonymous tribal/oral sort. But Marfa Sabina was
already in “the world” by then—beyond the boundaries of her own
place, to be given a measure of fame and the Western trappings of
immortality-through-written-language that she herself could hardly
have sought.

The confusion, as such, is easy enough to understand. Marfa Sabina
is Mazatec without question, and the mode of her chants (the way the


2. “I’ma woman who cries / 'm a woman who spits / I’m a woman who pisses /I’m
a woman who gives milk no longer / Pm a woman who speaks / I’m a woman who
shouts / I’m a woman who vomits /I’m an unrefined woman but I know how to
fight against death and the grass that brought forth its venom” (C. J. Cela).


XtL \ EDITOR'S PRE-FACE

[PAGE 013]

words go, etc.) is not merely personal but common to other Mazatec

shamans. Among them she stands out—not alone but sharing a language with the other great ones, including those “tiger shamans” we
hear of in the hills, who rarely make themselves visible in the town environs of Huautla.
This book, then, is centrally hers.
But it is as well a book of transmissions, of which Waldman’s (like
my own) is a curious and distant instance. The songs, the words, come
to Maria Sabina through the agency of what Henry Munn has elsewhere called “the mushrooms of language.” (Her qualification of each
line with the word tso, “says,” is a testimony to that: that it is not María
Sabina but the unspoken he/she/it whose words these are.) Then,

sometime past the middle of her life, R. Gordon Wasson begins the
other transmission that carries her words over great distances: an offshoot of his studies of mushroom history and lore but one that continued to affect him for the rest of his life.
The transmission most crucial to this book is that between Maria
Sabina and Alvaro Estrada. A Mazatec speaker and fellow townsman, Estrada engaged her in a series of recorded conversations, which
he translated into Spanish and made the basis of her “oral autobiography.” To this he added a new translation of Wasson’s 1956 recording
anda series of footnotes and commentaries, not as an outside observer

but with a native feel for Mazatec particulars and with testimony
from older members of his own family and from other Mazatecs, lo-

cal shamans among them, still deeply involved in the native religion.

He is in that sense no innocent Carlos Castaneda nor is Maria Sabina
a shadowy Don Juan, but both stand open before us. The poetry and

the vision are nonetheless intense.

On the basis of Estrada’s work, I was able to arrange for the publication, in 1981, of Maria Sabina: Her Life and Chants. That book was


EDITOR'S PRE-FACE / XII!

[PAGE 014]

Alvaro Estrada and Maria Sabina. Photo courtesy ofAlvaro Estrada.


part of an unrealized series of books, New Wilderness Poetics, that I
had intended as a bringing together of ethnopoetic and experimental
poetries under the imprint of Ross-Erikson Publishers in Santa Barbara, California. With the death of publisher Buzz Erikson and the
suspension of the press, the book, while published, had only a very
limited circulation.
In the Ross-Erikson version, the active translator and commentator was Henry Munn, who was also my own contact to Maria Sabina
and the Mazatec ritual world. Continuing the process begun by
Estrada, Munn added a second chanting session (the sole recorded one
in which only Mazatecs were present), along with additional observations from both “inside” and “outside” points of view. Munn’s connec-


XIV \ EDITOR'S PRE-FACE

[PAGE 015]

tion was itself a part of the recent history of Huautla. His entry there,
circa 1965, was as one of those “oddballs”—-visitors to Huautla in the
1960s—<cited by Wasson in an accompanying “retrospective essay”;

but Munn was a genuine seeker as well, and after the “great bust of
1967, he returned to Huautla, married into the Estrada family, and

has since become his own witness and a devoted student of Mazatec

culture. An early essay of his, “The Mushrooms of Language,” is a
brilliant introduction to the verbal side of Mazatec shamanism: a first

recognition of the shaman's work as an essentially poetic act and, in

the Surrealist master André Breton's definition of poesis quoted

therein, “a sacred action.” Munn’s translations (drawing on both Ma-

zatec and Spanish) are equally attentive, and his commentaries there
and elsewhere direct us to a range of mythopoetic connections (local

and universal) informing the Mazatec chants.

The presence, alongside María Sabina, of Estrada, Munn, and
Wasson made of this work a multileveled book of testimony—and
something more: a book of exiles and losses. This will seem surprising

only if one sentimentalizes or primitivizes the Mazatec present, for
the present is perennially a time of loss and change. Viewed in this
way, Estrada may appear as the acculturated Mazatec, whose adoles-

cence coincided with the arrival in Huautla of anonymous hippies and

world-famous superstars in search of God, and who early on with-

drew to work in Mexico as a writer and engineer. However, Estrada's
yearning here (as it came across to me in conversation with him) is for

something that draws him backward, that fascinates and troubles
him, and that he cannot possess; he honors it, but mostly he lives apart
from it. With Munn, the stance—of exile and escape —seemed different from the start: a flight-from-time in search of mysteries/illuminations that brought him to the place left vacant by Estrada: the town,
the family, and so on.


EDITOR'S PRE-FACE / KV

[PAGE 016]

But overshadowing them both is the culturally authentic, strangely
marginal figure of Maria Sabina, whose personal history (never

“erased” in the Castanedan sense) is always precarious and whose
spiritual universe begins to change (she tells us) with the coming of the

blond strangers, a few at first, then in great waves in the 1960s. With
a sense of what was at stake and of his own role in the subsequent
engulfment of Mazatec culture, Wasson, accused, responded as poi-

gnant witness: “[Her] words make me wince. I, Gordon Wasson, am

held responsible for the end of a religious practice in Mesoamerica
that goes back far, for millennia. “The little mushrooms won’t work
anymore. There is no helping it.’ I fear she spoke the truth, exemplifying her sabiduria.” And, still more strikingly, the words of another

shaman count the losses for Estrada: “What is terrible, listen, is that
the divine mushroom no longer belongs to us. Its sacred language has
been profaned. The language has been spoiled and it is indecipherable
for us.”

The word “language” hits here with tremendous force; for this is
crucially a book of language, a reflection of the great Book of Language that Maria Sabina saw in her initiatory vision:

On the Principal Ones’ table a book appeared, an open book that

went on growing until it was the size of a person. In its pages there
were letters. It was a white book, so white it was resplendent.
One of the Principal Ones spoke to me and said: “María Sabina,
this is the Book of Wisdom. It is the Book of Language. Everything
that is written in it is for you. The Book is yours, take it so that you
can work.” I exclaimed with emotion: “That is for me. I receive it.”


And she did and was thereafter a woman of language—what we

would dare to translate, by a comparison to those most deeply into it
among us, as “poet.”

Her own words and her highly tuned chants (the improvised and


XVI N EDITOR'S PRE-FACE

[PAGE 017]

collaged “sessions” that function like long, driving poems) make this

clear. Wasson’s account of her actual performance and its impact on
the first enthralled outsiders brings the message home, as do the appraisals by poets (Homero Aridjis, Waldman) from outside her time
and place. And hearing her voice on tape or reading her here in trans-

lation, we catch the presence of a great oral poet, one whom we can

now see working and changing over the course of time—in three
recorded sessions, 1956, 1958, and 1970. The Language revealed is

awesome, not because it allows her to control the world around her (it

doesn’t) but because it lets her survive the sufferings of a world in

which the spirit of Language itself has been “profaned,” in which “it

wanders without direction in the atmosphere ... not only the divine
spirit... but our own spirit, the spirit of the Mazatecs, as well.”

A devastatingly human book and testimony, hers is an appropriate

inclusion for a series on millennial poetics over a broad human range.

This broadening and expansion was the motive for those of us who

entered some years ago into the pursuit of an actual “ethnopoetics”—
a term the poet David Antin expanded still further to mean “Human
Poetics ... People’s Poetics or the poetics of natural language.” And

other-than-human as well, if we take her word for it: “Language belongs to the saint children”—the sacred mushrooms— “They speak
and I have the power to translate.” Or Antin further: “What I take the
‘poetics’ part of ETHNOPOETICS to be is the structure of those

linguistic acts of invention and discovery through which the mind ex-

plores the transformational power of language and discovers and in-

vents the world and itself.”

In that sense we aren't dealing with something merely alien/exotic,

but we are all potential witnesses and transmitters, all suffering exiles
and losses, all in an encounter with language and vision. María Sa-

bina's Language bears the traces of such an encounter and presents


EDITOR'S PRE-FACE / XVII

[PAGE 018]

them in a form in no way incomplete: a language-centered poetics and
a guide that encompasses even that writing which we would still

speak of, in our arrogance, as the final instrument of language that
separates her and us. But she has seen the book as well—the Book of
Language—and that makes of her own work and Estrada’s a Book
about the Book. And, if we let it, it is also a book of healing: a language
directed against that sparagmos—that classic split in consciousness—
that tears us all asunder. The wounds are deep and probably irremediable, but the dream, while we’re alive, is that of wholeness. Here is
language as a medicine, its ancient function; for, as she puts it elsewhere, “with words we live and grow,” and (again speaking of the

mushrooms with a familiar Mazatec word) “I cured them with the

Language of the children.”


ADDENDUM TO A PRE-FACE


The series of books for which this volume serves as a crucial anchor/

pivot aims to present a range of poets whose work, taken ensemble,

will give a sense of the changes that have affected our ideas of poetry
over the preceding century and the beginnings of the present century

and millennium. To bring María Sabina into such an ensemble is to

question the boundaries of poetry as a matter of literature, at least in

the way in which those words—“poetry” and “literature”—-are com-

monly understood. That questioning, of course, is precisely the point
of her inclusion here—an experiment in definition that attempts to

see what happens when we place beside the experimental poets of our
time one whom Henry Munn calls “a genius [who] emerges from the
soil of the communal, religious-therapeutic folk poetry of a native
Mexican campesino people.” Or going a step further, 1t is an attempt
to explore what the Mexican poet Homero Aridjis means when he


XVII N EDITOR'S PRE-FACE

[PAGE 019]

speaks of her, unequivocally, as “la más grande poeta visionaria de
América Latina en el siglo XX” (“Lo indígena es bello,” in La Re-

forma, March 18, 2001), or elsewhere as “one of the best poets, not only
of Mexico but of the entire American continent” (See page 164.)

In constructing the present gathering, I have tried to avoid the impression that María Sabina is being presented here as herself a kind of
experimentalist. (Henry Munn's new essay, below, makes her traditionalism, however different from our own, abundantly clear.) Nor is

she a poet in her own terms but a Wise One and a healer—functions

to which some poets of our own (and not the least among them) have
aspired in a culture foreign to the values and assumptions of her religion and her shamanism. At the same time it’s clear that she was a

contemporary of ours in many fundamental ways—supported and

abused by the same powers that have impinged on all our lives and
works. So a balance has had to be struck between our differences and

similarities, even while recognizing that most readers will come to the
work with their own presuppositions and that little can be done as editor (also with presuppositions) to counteract them.

The principal intention of this book, then, is to present Maria
Sabina as a poet—more precisely, to present her Language—both as
structure and as vision—as a kind of poetry. It is a context in which

she has rarely been presented or considered, except by a relatively
small number of active contemporary poets. Her works, as written

down by others, take up most of the pages that follow; they are the
heart of the book, far more intrinsic than the commentaries about
them. The first work and the key to all the others is her Vida—a construction by Alvaro Estrada based on a long series of disconnected interviews that he carried on with her in the Mazatec language. This
leads in turn to a full translation—by Henry Munn and others—of

the earliest of her recorded chants (her “poetry” as such), transcribed


EDITOR'S PRE-FACE / XIX

[PAGE 020]

by Wasson in 1956 and disseminated not long thereafter by Folkways
Records. With Wasson’s “mushroom velada”® recording of 1958 and

the 1970 recording (attended only by fellow Mazatecs), this constitutes
the body of her surviving work. And because the three chants vary
and supplement each other in a number of ways, I have included not
only the full Folkways chant but also excerpts from the other two
(the “mushroom velada” one in a differently inflected translation by

George M. and Florence H. Cowan) as a way of filling out—enriching—the work presented here.

As with the other books in the series, the rest is (largely) commentary—an effort in this case to provide a context for the Vida and the

Chants, along with a sense of how Marfa Sabina’s words and life have

affected poets over a wider human range. In a section designated as
“Commentaries and Derivations,” the opening voice is that of Alvaro
Estrada, who provides an introduction both to her Vida and to his own

seminal role in its composition. The three accounts that follow are

from observers who have been close to her: the description by Wasson

and his wife, Valentina Pavlovna Wasson, of an early performance

session and of their responses to it; a detailed discussion by Henry
Munn comparing Maria Sabina’s chants to those of other Mazatec

shamans; and Homero Aridjis’s description of his interchange with
her in the last years of her life.

Aridjis's short essay is the first of several excerpts from contemporary poets who have responded to her as a woman of language, whose

work has a meaning outside of its place and moment of origin. At a

still greater remove Anne Waldman is represented with both an excerpt from Fast Speaking Woman and an essay on how that work de-


3. The Spanish word velada (“vigil” or “soirée”) was Wasson’s choice as the general
term for the the all-night shamanic sessions. It was also, he tells us, customarily used
by Spanish-speaking Mazatecs.


XX \ EDITOR'S PRE-FACE

[PAGE 021]

veloped from a first sighting of Maria Sabina’s chants and how the

chants themselves fit into the framework (North American and Buddhist) of Waldman’s poetry and world. My own poem, “The Little
Saint of Huautla,” is a meditation, more or less, on a 1979 meeting
with Maria Sabina. And the final derivation is, by contrast, that of

Juan Gregorio Regino, a younger Mazatec poet writing in the native

language and with an awareness of his own relation to—and divergence from—the workings of the older Mazatec shaman-poets: the

chjinie, as he names them in the work translated below, beginning
with some lines by Maria Sabina. To the extent that poetry and lan-

guage are communal activities—“made by all and not by one,” as the

Surrealists once had it—Regino’s work brings the lengua mazateca
that he shares with her into a dynamic, always changing present.

That much I think is understood by all those who have contributed

to this book. For me the two key figures here were Munn, who was my
personal guide, and Estrada, without whom Maria Sabina would
have remained in the anonymous condition imposed on indigenous

peoples by the external dominant cultures. If Estrada is the de facto

author of this book, in a sense Munn is the de facto co-editor—a
knowledgeable and passionate observer and participant, who for
more than thirty years has worked on the intellectual and poetic di-

mensions of the Mazatec and Mesoamerican experience. I would be

remiss not to call attention to his patient and persistent work, and if

this book were to have a dedication, it would surely be to him.


Jerome Rothenberg, 1980/2003


EDITOR’S PRE-FACE / XX!

[PAGE 023]

Estrada Alvaro with Written LIFE THE

[PAGE 025]

I don’t know in what year I was born, but my mother, Maria Concepción, told me that it was in the morning of the day they celebrate the
Virgin Magdalene, there in Río Santiago, an agencia of the municipality of Huautla. None of my ancestors knew their age.'
My mother was born and raised in a place near Huautla on the way
to San Andrés Hidalgo. My father, Crisanto Feliciano, was born and
raised in Rio Santiago. When they started to live together—they
didn’t get married—she was around fourteen and he twenty. My
mother had lived three years with her man when I was born. I was
baptized right away. My baptismal godparents were Juan Manuel and
Maria Sebastiana, a campesino couple who felt a lot of affection for my
father. My mother gave birth to Maria Ana, my sister, when I was two
years old. We were the only two children born to them. J didn’t know

my father very well, since he died when I was three years old. I know
that he was a very hard worker. He planted maize and beans on land
he had succeeded in buying with his work. He sold what he harvested
at the market in Huautla or in neighboring towns. Our home in Río
Santiago was a little hut with walls of mud plastered over a bamboo


1. On August 25, 1976, the parish priest Arturo García issued a baptismal certificate
for María Sabina, based on the original facts recorded in the archive of the Huautla
church. One can see that the names of the baptismal godparents registered in the
document don’t coincide with those given by Maria Sabina. Nevertheless it should
be pointed out that even today it is difficult to know the exact name of some Mazatecs because of their deficient pronunciation of Spanish names.

[PAGE 026]

framework, and a thatched roof of sugarcane leaves. My mother made
the tortillas and put the pot of beans, which she later served to each of
us, on the fire. With our meals, we drank pinole water sweetened with
cane sugar. It was drunk hot. At that time there was no coffee; few
people grew it. We went to bed before it got dark. My father left to
work the land very early, a little after the first rooster crowed. We slept
on the ground, on mats, with our clothes on. That’s how we all slept.
At the birth of my sister, Maria Ana, my father was already sick.
There was no remedy for his sickness because the origin of his illness
wasn’t a matter of this world, but a punishment of the powerful Lord
of Thunder who takes care of and gives fertility to what is sown. The

thing is that my father, when he was still single, had aroused the anger
of this great and powerful Lord. The story is as follows:
One dawn the young Crisanto Feliciano started for his field to clear
it; it was necessary to get rid of the leaves and bushes on the land. He
took his hoe and his machete. Like all the men of his time, he wore

white pants and shirt of pure cotton. On festival days he put on a poncho that reached to his knees and was tied with a silk belt at the waist.
For two days Crisanto Feliciano worked on his land to gather together the leaves and weeds and all the garbage that impeded a good

planting; then he formed a pile with it all in a place near someone else’s

field. Finally he set the pile on fire. The sticks, the dry leaves, and the
weeds burned easily. It was late afternoon and the end of the day was
near. The wind blew strong, the day had been very hot, and one could
feel the dryness. But the flames of the pile got lively, and the wind
played with them until they got near the neighboring field; so much
so that they burned some corn plants. Seeing that, Crisanto rushed
to put out the flames burning in the other's cornfield. Not much was

burned, but Crisanto knew that to have damaged the field, even
though the damage was slight, could cause his death. He knew that all


4 XX THE LIFE

[PAGE 027]

the crops were protected by the Lord of Thunder: if somebody robbed

ears of corn he would die. If a donkey ate in a cornfield, it too would

die. Where land was protected like that, neither rats, moles, nor birds
hurt it. A crop protected by the Lord of Thunder grows pretty and

abundant. Crisanto was condemned to death: he had burned a sacred
cornfield. Only some plants, but it was enough to receive the curse of
the Lord of Thunder. People who deliberately or imprudently harm
a sacred crop suffer from lumps that come out on the chest and neck.
The lumps burst when they’ve matured and turn into purulent and
repugnant pimples. Then the people die. The damage that is done to

a sacred crop can’t be paid for with anything: neither by replacing the
destroyed plants, nor by paying the damage in money to the owner.

Crisanto knew that he was lost but he had one hope. His grandfa-

ther and his father were Wise Ones:? they used saint children? to speak

with the Lords of the Mountains. The Wise Ones can speak with the

beings who are the masters of all the things in the world. And they
could speak with the Lord of Thunder. They could ask him to pardon


2. This term is used frequently in the text. It is the name that is given to the Mazatec shaman. The native words are chota chjine (wise person). Among the Mazatecs
are found three categories of curers. On the lowest level is the Sorcerer (tji?e), who
is said to be able to transform himself into an animal (ragual) at night. He has a
great capacity for doing evil and for turning other people into naguales. On the intermediate level is the Curer (chotaxi v?e’nta), properly speaking, who uses massage,
potions, and devices such as his own language in which he invokes the Lords of
different places, mountains, and springs. These two categories are well known in
rural Mexico, but in Huautla there is a third and still superior one: that of Wise One
and doctor (chota chjine), who doesn't do evil or use potions to cure. His therapy—
or hers—involves the ingestion of the mushroom, through which he acquires the
power to diagnose and cure the sick person, whom he also gives several pairs of
mushrooms to eat. [The phonetic symbol ? indicates a glottal stop.]
3. “Saint children,” “Little-One-Who-Springs-Forth,” “little saints,” and “little
things” are four euphemistic terms for the mushrooms in Mazatec. Maria Sabina
generally calls them saint children or simply children.


THE LIFE / 5

[PAGE 028]

Crisanto who from imprudence had burned the plants of a protected

cornfield.

So thought Crisanto and that gave him hope for his life. Meanwhile he didn’t want to alarm his family. He preferred for the mo-

ment to keep quiet about his pain. “Later I'll tell them ...” he said to
himself.
Months passed and young Crisanto went on hiding his pain.

But on a certain occasion, his father, Pedro Feliciano, stayed awake

to eat the saint children. There, during the night, the Wise One saw
that his son would soon die from the pimples. The following morning, he said: “Crisanto, my son, I’ve had a terrible vision. I’ve seen you

turned into a turkey. The Liztle-One-Who-Springs-Forth has revealed

to me that you are condemned to die. I know the reason as well, the

Little-One-Who-Springs-Forth himself has told me...”
In that way, Crisanto found himself obliged to tell his father about

the burned cornfield.
His father consoled him, saying: “We will fight against the force

of the Lord of Thunder. We will stay awake with Little-One-WhoSprings-Forth. We will ask the Lords that you be pardoned.” Later the

Wise Man, Pedro Feliciano, accompanied by his father, Juan Feliciano, stayed awake several times with the saint children, but they

didn’t obtain anything. They also called in Sorcerers and Sucking
Doctors without achieving anything.

Later, one night, as Crisanto tried to sleep, he passed a hand over
his chest, and his fingers stopped at the feel of little bumps above his
nipples. “What can that be?” he asked himself. With a shock, he real-

ized everything: they were the lumps from the curse that were beginning to break out. He felt fear and deep worry. That night he thought

about his life. He thought that he was very young (he would have been
around twenty years old), and worry didn’t let him sleep for the rest

of the night.


6 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 029]

The following morning, Crisanto said decisively to his father: “I
desire a woman for myself. I’ve seen a girl on the way to Huautla. She
lives with her parents just beyond San Andrés. You could ask for her
to come and live with me.”
With time the parents asked for the girl, and one day Crisanto went

for his woman, María Concepción. He took her to live in Rio Santiago.


My father suffered from his illness and my mother understood
him. The first lumps burst, forming purulent pimples that later covered his neck and part of his chest.
With the passing years, my father got worse. When I was around
three years old, | imagine, and my sister, María Ana, barely four or five
months old, he died. Neither the Sorcerers nor the Curers nor the
Wise Ones could heal him. Poor man, he died, turned into a turkey.
Because the mortal curse of the Lord of Thunder makes one sick little by little. The cursed person lasts years suffering: it can be four, five,
six, or seven, in which time the lumps turn into purulent pimples.
Some persons condemned to suffer like that resign themselves to die,
others fight against the curse of the Lord of Thunder. The Sorcerers
speak to where the echo is, to the mountains and the slopes. There
they ask for help from the Lord of the Holy Mountain. But little can
be done against the curse of the Lord of Thunder. The neck of the sick
person looks like that of a turkey. Exactly like that of a turkey. And
that is because the Lord of Thunder has at his service a sacred turkey.
This turkey is the one who is charged with punishing the persons and
animals who dare to damage the crops. The turkey turns the people

or animals into turkeys. That’s why they die with pimples on their
neck. The Sorcerers sacrifice hens, they give money (cacao beans) and
turkey eggs to Chicon Nindó.


THE LIFE / 7

[PAGE 030]

2


My mother, upon being left a widow, seeing that there was nothing
to hope for from her in-laws, decided to return to her parents. She

had lived with Crisanto Feliciano for six years. At that time she was
still young, somewhere around twenty. My father must have died at
twenty-five or twenty-six; I don’t know the exact age at which he died.
My maternal grandparents were very poor. My mother brought us
to live with them and forgot Rio Santiago completely.
My grandfather, Manuel Cosme, already quite an old man, worked

as a peon for the landholders. My grandmother, María Estefanía, did
the tasks of the house and took care of the land around the little hut,
where corn and beans were planted. Gourds and chayotes grew there

as well. The place where we came to live—and where I’m still living
—is called Fortress Mountain, above the Mixtec section of town, very
near Nindó Tocosho. My grandparents had abandoned the hut along
the path to San Andrés to which, one day, Crisanto Feliciano went for
his wife. Now they lived on this high place from where one could see,
down there below, the little town of Huautla. There were only a few
houses of thatch and shingle at that time. Trees and bushes covered
everything, but the church was already built.
My grandparents told me that in their youth they had worked as
servants for the priest, Catarino García. This priest lived many years
in Huautla. He had children by several Indian women. At his death
he asked—and it was granted—to be buried underneath the altar of

the Huautla church.
Life with my grandparents was difficult. By custom we got up at
dawn, when by the light of a burning ocote torch, Grandmother, my
mother, and my aunt Juanita worked wool, silk, or cotton. The grandparents raised silk worms inside the hut; the worms took almost a year


8 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 031]

to raise. First the little butterflies laid their eggs on mats, they laid
them in the month of March. At five months, the little worms came
out of their little eggs and we gave them food, mora leaves that they ate
noisily. We picked out the little worms and separated them from the
bigger ones so that those didn’t do them harm. The worms grew to the
size of a finger. Three months after having opened their eggs, they began to drool [to leave secretions—rN], sticks were fixed up for them
against the wall of the house, and on that bed of sticks they deposited

the silk. It wasn’t easy to raise silkworms. They required a lot of care.
During the day or during the night, the silk was cleaned, the leavings

of the worms were gotten rid of. They had to be fed well; if not, the
worms didn’t give enough or good enough silk.
Finally the silk was cleaned and gathered together. It was used to
make belts that the men used as part of their clothing. From the wool
and cotton, fabrics were made with which we dressed. Our life was
invariable. We would wake up when the light of day was still far
off. When the first rooster of the morning crowed, we were already
sipping our pinole water sweetened with cane sugar to alleviate our

hunger and cold. From time to time we drank tea made from lemon
or orange leaves and only rarely coffee. My mother made the tortillas
and embroidered. My grandmother and aunt worked at the primitive

loom. Grandfather always hired himself out as a fieldworker, the
same as an uncle of ours named Emilio Cristino.
As my sister and I grew up, our chores in the house went on growing. We took care of the chickens in the woods or gathered sticks that

were used to make the fire on which the food was cooked.
I must have been eleven and my sister nine when Grandfather took
us to plant corn. He made little planting stakes for us, and with those
stakes we opened the hole in the ground in which we clumsily deposited the kernels of corn. The whole family went to the planting.


THE LIFE / 9

[PAGE 032]

Sitting on the ground, María Ana and I dug with difficulty. I think the
kernels fell on the surface of the ground in disorder, we were so little.

In contrast, the adults sowed in a perfect line, leaving the kernels at
the right depth. When the harvest drew near and the corn was tall,

taller than María Ana and I, it made us laugh with joy.
If it wasn’t the time of working in the fields, we were sent to take
care of the chickens in the woods or two or three goats, which were

finally sold. We took advantage of this time to play with our dolls that

we made ourselves. One of my dolls I called Florencia José. She was
a rag doll and I made her a silk huipil. In the house we couldn't play
because my Aunt Juanita and my grandfather were too strict. They
didn’t like to see us playing; everything was work, work, work.
If it was a matter of planting beans, they called us. If it was a matter of planting corn, they took us there. The same at planting as at harvest.

On ordinary days, we ate beans, if there were any, or we made do

with plain tortillas splashed with hot chile sauce, but on the Days of
the Dead one could eat quelite, yerba mora, or guasmole.* On festival
days, Grandfather bought beef or goat meat that Grandmother prepared in a hot stew.
The little food that Grandmother served us at dawn calmed the

hunger that we had held in for a long time. 1 think our will to live was
very great, greater than the will of many men. The will to live kept us
fighting from day to day to finally get some morsel that would allevi-

ate the hunger María Ana and I felt. Aunt Juanita hid the food, and
even if my mother gave us something, hunger soon bothered us again.


4. [Translator's note] Quelite and mora are greens like spinach that are gathered
wild. Guasmole is a semitropical fruit that is cooked in tezmole. It is abundant only
in autumn.


10 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 033]

We made efforts to hold a single mouthful in our stomachs, every
evening, every morning.

Several men knew that my mother had become a widow and arrived to ask for her. They proposed to her properly: as the custom is,
they arrived at dawn with aguardiente and chickens as a gift that they
gave to my grandfather, Manuel Cosme. My mother never accepted.
“My only commitment from here on will be to raise my daughters”
was her reply, despite having been married only six years.
She lived with me, single, for the rest of her life.


3


Once my uncle Emilio Cristino got so sick he couldn't get up. I was a
little girl of five, six, or seven. I didn’t know what his sickness was.

Grandmother Maria Estefania, worried, went in search of a Wise
Man named Juan Manuel to cure Uncle.
The Wise Man Juan Manuel, who was not a very old man, arrived

at our hut after nightfall. He had a bundle wrapped up in banana
leaves that he treated with exaggerated care. I went up close to see
what he had in the bundle, but rapidly the Wise Man Juan Manuel
took it in his hands and prevented me from getting any closer, directing an authoritarian look at me. “Nobody can look at what I have

here. It isn’t good: a curious look could spoil what I have here,” he said.
Curiosity made me stay awake. I saw how the Wise Man Juan Manuel

unwrapped the banana leaves. From there he took out various big
fresh mushrooms the size of a hand. I was accustomed to seeing those
mushrooms in the woods where I took care of the chickens and the
goats. There were many of that kind of mushroom; their brown color
contrasted with the green of the pastures.

The Wise Man Juan Manuel had arrived to cure Uncle Emilio


THE LIFE / 11

[PAGE 034]

Cristino; for the first time I witnessed a vigil with the saint children. I
understood that later. I saw how the Wise Man Juan Manuel lit the
candles and talked to the Lords of the Mountains and the Lords of the
Springs. I saw how he distributed the mushrooms counting them by

pairs and gave them to each of those present, including the sick person. Later, in complete darkness, he talked, talked, and talked. His

language was very pretty. It pleased me. At times the Wise Man sang,

sang, and sang. I didn’t understand his words, but I liked them. It was

a different language from what we speak in the daytime. It was a language that without my comprehending it attracted me. It was a language that spoke of stars, animals, and other things unknown to me.

A long time had gone by since it had gotten dark, and still I didn’t
feel sleepy. Seated very quietly on my mat, I followed the vigil attentively. One thing that I did understand, yes, was that the mushrooms

had made old Juan Manuel sing. After midnight, the Wise Man lit a
candle and stuck it in the ground. I saw that he danced while he said

that he “saw” animals, objects, and people. No, I couldn’t understand

him completely. The Wise Man spoke without rest. He burned in-

cense and rubbed “San Pedro”® on the forearms of the sick person.
By dawn my sick uncle, who didn’t appear so sick anymore, began

to sit up slowly. The Wise Man Juan Manuel animated him with his

strange language. Uncle got to his feet. He hadn’t done that since
some days before because of his illness.
Two weeks later Uncle Emilio Cristino had recovered his health

completely.
Some days after the vigil in which the Wise Man Juan Manuel
cured Uncle, María Ana and I were taking care of our chickens in the

5. The name given to a ground-up tobacco (nicotiana rustica) mixed with lime and
sometimes with garlic as well. Its use is ceremonial, and it is considered to have
power against the evil influences of sorcery.


12 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 035]

woods so that they wouldn't be the victims of hawks or foxes. We were
seated under a tree when suddenly I saw near me, within reach of my
hand, several mushrooms. They were the same mushrooms that the
Wise Man Juan Manuel had eaten. I knew them well. My hands gently tore up one mushroom, then another. I looked at them up close. “If
I eat you, you, and you, I know that you will make me sing beautifully,” I said to them. I remembered that my grandparents spoke of
these mushrooms with great respect. That was why I knew that they
weren’t bad.
Without thinking much about it, I put the mushrooms in my

mouth and chewed them up. Their taste wasn’t pleasant; on the contrary, they were bitter, tasting of roots, of earth. I ate them all up. My
sister Maria Ana, watching me, did the same.

After having eaten the mushrooms, we felt dizzy, as if we were
drunk, and we began to cry; but this dizziness passed and then we became very content. Later we felt good. It was like a new hope in life.
That was howI felt.

In the days that followed, when we felt hungry, we ate the mushrooms. And not only did we feel our stomachs full, but content in
spirit as well. The mushrooms made us ask God not to make us suffer
so much. We told him that we were always hungry, that we felt cold.
We didn’t have anything: only hunger, only cold. I didn’t know in reality whether the mushrooms were good or bad. Nor did I even know
whether they were food or poison. But I felt that they spoke to me. After eating them I heard voices. Voices that came from another world.
It was like the voice of a father who gives advice. Tears rolled down
our cheeks, abundantly, as if we were crying for the poverty in which
we lived.
Another day we ate the mushrooms and I had a vision: a welldressed man appeared; he was as big as a tree. I heard the mysterious


THE LIFE / 13

[PAGE 036]

voice that said: “This is your father, Crisanto Feliciano. ...” My father.

It was years since he had died, now it gave me pleasure to know him.

The immense man, my father, spoke. Pointing at me he said these
words: “María Sabina, kneel down. Kneel and pray...” I kneeled and

prayed. I spoke to God who each time I felt to be more familiar. Closer

to me. I felt as if everything that surrounded me was God. NowI felt
that I spoke a lot and that my words were beautiful.

Maria Ana and I continued to eat the mushrooms. We ate lots,

many times, I don’t remember how many. Sometimes Grandfather

and at other times my mother came to the woods and gathered us up

from the ground where we were sprawled or kneeling. “What have
you done?” they asked. They picked us up bodily and carried us
home. In their arms we continued laughing, singing, or crying. They

never scolded us nor hit us for eating mushrooms. Because they knew

that it isn’t good to scold a person who has eaten the little things because it could cause contrary emotions and it’s possible that one might
feel one was going crazy.

The next rainy season, when the mushrooms had returned, we ate
them again.
Sometime later I knew that the mushrooms were like God. That
they gave wisdom, that they cured illnesses, and that our people, since
a long time ago, had eaten them. That they had power, that they were
the blood of Christ.

Years later, when I became a widow for the second time, I gave my-

self up for always to wisdom, in order to cure the sicknesses of people
and to be myself always close to God. One should respect the little
mushrooms. At bottomI feel they are my family. As if they were my

parents, my blood. In truth I was born with my destiny. To be a Wise

Woman. To be a daughter of the saint children.
And I never went to school where I could have learned to read,


14 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 037]

to write or speak Castilian. My parents spoke only Mazatec. I never
learned another language. What’s more, I didn’t know what school
was, nor did I know it even existed; and if there had been a school I

wouldn’t have gone, because there wasn’t time. In those days, people

worked a lot.

4


By the end of our childhood, the work load had increased for Maria
Ana and me. We had learned to make tortillas, to cook the meals, to
wash, and to sweep.

One dawn, some people arrived who spoke a long time with my

mother and grandparents. The people went and my mother told me
that they had come to ask for me. They wanted me to unite myself
in marriage with a young man. The people came once or twice, but I
didn’t see any marriageable young man among them; nonetheless,
I met the one who was to be my husband the day he came for me.
There wasn’t any wedding. My mother, without consulting me, ordered me to gather my clothes together, saying that from that moment
on I didn’t belong to them anymore. “Now you belong to this young
man who will be your husband. Go with him. Attend him well.
You're a little woman ...” were her words. That is the custom.
I was fourteen. During the first days of my new life, I felt scared because I didn’t know what was happening. Later I resigned myself.
With the passage of time, I loved my husband very much. His name

was Serapio Martinez. He was a young man of twenty. He liked to
dress in clean clothes and didn’t appear to be a wastrel. I found later
that he was good-hearted. He didn’t drink much aguardiente, almost
none, and he didn’t like to work in the fields. With pride I can say that
he knew how to read and write. He dedicated himself to the commerce of the red and black thread that is used to embroider the hui-


THE LIFE / 15

[PAGE 038]

pils that we women wear. He also sold casseroles, plates, and cups. He
traveled to Córdoba, Vera Cruz, to Tehuacán and to Puebla to buy the
merchandise that he sold in Huautla or in the nearby towns. He trav-

eled on foot at the beginning and transported the merchandise on his

back. It took him eight days to go to Puebla and back. With time he
succeeded in buying some pack animals on whose backs he transported what he bought there.

When I told him that I was pregnant, he took it naturally. He
didn’t show any feeling, neither joy nor sorrow; he barely stammered:
“Then prepare yourself to be a mother.” Upon returning from his

travels he talked to me about the conditions of the road or spoke of the
new prices of the threads or casseroles.
One time he didn’t speak as usual. Upon asking him why he was

silent, he answered: “I know that in Huautla they’re getting people

together to fight with guns. Some call themselves Carrancistas and
others Zapatistas. They’re going around with rifles and horses. Soon
they'll come for me. They'll give me my rifle; if they see that 'm good,
they'll give me a horse.”

Serapio’s words were fulfilled. The men of war took him away. I
didn’t put up any resistance.

He went when Catarino, my first child, was hardly ten days old.
“Don’t worry, Sabi,” Serapio told me. “Pll find a way to send you some

money.” I watched him until I lost sight of him along the path. He

went with some men who came for him. I cried a lot. But with the

passing of the days, I comforted myself with the idea that he would
soon return. I stayed with my mother in my little hut. My grandparents had already died; Uncle Emilio and Aunt Juanita had died as
well.

The new soldiers were quartered in Huautla for several days. Afterwards they left. Serapio was named bugler at first. A year later he


16 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 039]

was a major and worked under the orders of General Adolfo Pineda,®
who I know, Alvaro, was your grandfather. During the time that Serapio was at war, money reached me that he sent irregularly. A soldier
went from house to house, leaving verbal notes, letters, and money.

Serapio didn’t write me because I didn’t know how to read. He sent
me a note only once. I looked for a person who knew how to read to
tell me what was written in it. He sent to say that I shouldn’t worry
about him, that he was well. But on other occasions, there was neither
note nor money, only the cruel news: “Serapio has died in combat.” I

cried. I cried on the little body of my recently born son, Catarino.
In that time the town lived in fear. We who had relatives in the war
were in constant dread. A man arrived and said: “Sabi, don’t afflict yourself anymore. Serapio is alive.” In a little while the version
changed: “Serapio is lost, nobody knows anything about him. We’re
confident he will appear soon.” Later a hope: “Serapio has appeared.”
And then another disillusion: “No. He’s dead.” In the end I accustomed myself to this life of upsets, and there were moments when it
didn’t matter to me if Serapio was still alive or already dead. The rumors that arrived at my door only received a cold thank you.

But I felt my heart become big with joy when, after six months,
Serapio appeared before me. At first sight I didn’t recognize him. He
had cartridge belts, a heavy rifle, and a military cap. He spoke very little to me about his life as a soldier, only that they had chosen him for a
bugler and that when his superior died in combat, he had left the
trumpet to take up the rifle of the dead soldier. What’s more, they saw
that he was agile. To test him they once made him run next toa horse,
and they saw that he had a lot of stamina. The agile had more oppor-


6. Of Mazatec origin, Pineda was one of the leaders of the Carrancista movement
in Huautla during the Mexican Revolution.


THE LIFE / 17

[PAGE 040]

tunity to go up in rank. The agile and the valiant. Bravery came first.
And Serapio was brave, his youth helped him.
Serapio went back to the war again and I didn’t worry so much. He

returned eight months later, not to go again. By that time my son Cat-

arino was beginning to walk.
It’s true that Serapio drank little aguardiente and that he worked a
lot, but he liked women. He brought several loose women to my
house. There were three of us under the same roof when that happened. The loose women left my house fifteen or thirty days after they
arrived. I wasn’t jealous because I felt myself to be Serapio’s true wife.
With him I had three children: Catarino, Viviana, and Apolonia.
Each one of my children was born at intervals of a year and a half.
My husband’s liking for women made our relations not as good as
I would have liked. I loved him and it hurt me to know that he was in
love with a girl in the Hot Country. He became more and more distant from me because he preferred the other.
Serapio caught the sickness of the wind [bronchial pneumonia] in

the Hot Country and died after three days of agony. His pack animals
and money stayed in the hands of the other woman.
Thus my marital life ended. I had a husband for six years, the same

number of years that my father lived with my mother. The same as
her, I became a widow at twenty.


5


I never ate the saint children while I lived with Serapio, since in accordance with our beliefs the woman who takes mushrooms should not
have relations with men. Those who are going to stay up shouldn’t
have sexual relations for four days before and four days after the vigil.


18 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 041]

Those who want to can complete five and five. I didn’t take the saint
children because I was afraid that my man wouldn’t understand it.
The condition should be fulfilled faithfully.
During my first years of widowhood, I felt pains from my deliver-

ies. My waist and hips hurt me. I sent for a woman to massage me
who alleviated me only a little. I also gave myself steam baths without

much result. I called in a Curer and a Sucking Doctor as well but they
didn’t alleviate me at all. Finally I decided to take the saint children

again. I took them alone, without recourse to any Wise One.

Those little things worked in my body, but I remember that the

words I spoke weren't particularly good. I took them only to press my
waist with my hands gently once or twice. I massaged myself in all the

parts of my body where it hurt. Days went by and I got better. And I

had decided to take them because I was clean. I didn’t have a husband.

At bottom I knew that I was a doctor woman. I knew what my des-

tiny was. I felt it deep within me. I felt that I had a great power, a
power that awakened in me in the vigils.
But in the house there was hunger. So I began to work to support

my mother and my three children. Arduous constant work didn’t
scare me. I knew how to furrow the earth and split kindling with an

axe, I knew how to plant and pick ears of corn. 1 worked like a strong

man; sometimesI traveled to Teotitlán, where I bought pots which I
resold in the market of Huautla. The raising of silkworms and the
difficult work of joining wool and cotton together diminished when
the merchants of Huautla began to bring cloth from the city. Since

then we know muslin and colored fabrics.
In those years of my widowhood, I planted corn and beans. I also

harvested coffee. On the days when I worked in the fields, I dug
trenches where I deposited my little children so that they wouldn't


THE LIFE / 19

[PAGE 042]

bother me. At other times, I sold bread and candles in the ranches and
the neighboring towns roundabout like San Miguel, Tenango, or Río
Santiago.


6


Some years, I don’t know how many, after I became a widow for the

first time, my sister Marfa Ana got sick. She felt pains in her stomach;
they were sharp stabs that made her double up and groan from pain.
Each time I saw her she was worse. If she felt more or less well, she began her housework; but, without her being able to control herself,

there came a moment when she fainted in the path.
Her fainting spells occurred more frequently later,
With great fear for her health, I contracted Curers to heal her, but
I could see with anxiety that her illness got worse. One morning she
didn’t get up from her bed; she trembled and groaned. I felt preoccupied as never before. I called various Curers but it was useless; they

couldn’t cure my sister.
That afternoon, seeing my sister stretched out, I imagined her

dead. My only sister. No, that couldn’t be. She couldn’t die. I knew
that the saint children had the power. I had eaten them as a little girl
and remembered that they didn’t do harm. I knew that our people ate
them to heal their sicknesses. So I made a decision; that same night

I would take the holy mushrooms. I did it. To her I gave three pairs.

I ate many in order for them to give me immense power. I can't lie: I

must have eaten thirty pairs of the “landslide” variety.
When the children were working inside my body, I prayed and

asked God to help me cure Marfa Ana. Little by little I felt that I could
speak with more and more facility. I went close to the sick woman.

The saint children guided my hands to press her hips. Softly I mas-


20 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 043]

saged her where she said it hurt. I spoke and sang. I felt that I sang

beautifully. I said what those children obliged me to say.
I went on pressing my sister, her stomach and her hips. Finally a

lot of blood came out. Water and blood as if she were giving birth. I

didn’t get frightened because I knew that the Little-One-Who-SpringsForth was curing her through me. Those saint children gave me advice

and I carried it out. I attended my sister until the bleeding stopped.

Afterward she left off groaning and slept. My mother sat down next

to her to attend to her.
I couldn’t sleep. The little saınts continued working in my body.
I remember that I had a vision: some people appeared who inspired

me with respect. I knew they were the Principal Ones of whom my

ancestors spoke. They were seated behind a table on which there were

many written papers. I knew that they were important papers. There
were a number of Principal Ones, six or eight of them. Some looked

at me, others read the papers on the table, others appeared to be
searching for something among the same papers. I knew that they

weren’t of flesh and bone. I knew that they weren’t beings of water or

tortilla. I knew that it was a revelation that the saint children were giv-

ing me. Right away I heard a voice. A voice that was sweet but authoritarian at the same time. Like the voice of a father who loves his chil-

dren but raises them strictly. A wise voice that said: “These are the
Principal Ones.” I understood that the mushrooms were speaking to
me. I felt an infinite happiness. On the Principal Ones’ table a book

appeared, an open book that went on growing until it was the size of
a person. In its pages there were letters. It was a white book, so white

it was resplendent.
One of the Principal Ones spoke to me and said: “María Sabina,

this is the Book of Wisdom. It is the Book of Language. Everything


THE LIFE / 21

[PAGE 044]

that is written in itis for you. The Book is yours, take it so that you can

work.” I exclaimed with emotion: “That is for me. I receive it.”
The Principal Ones disappeared and left me alone in front of the
immense Book. I knew that it was the Book of Wisdom.

The Book was before me, I could see it but not touch it. I tried to
caress it but my hands didn’t touch anything. I limited myself to contemplating it and, at that moment, I began to speak. Then I realized
that I was reading the Sacred Book of Language. My Book. The Book
of the Principal Ones.
I had attained perfection. I was no longer a simple apprentice. For
that, as a prize, as a nomination, the Book had been granted me. When

one takes the saint children, one can see the Principal Ones.’ Otherwise
not. And it’s because the mushrooms are saints; they give wisdom.
Wisdom is Language. Language is in the Book. The Book is granted

by the Principal Ones. The Principal Ones appear through the great
power of the children.

I learned the wisdom of the Book. Afterward, in my later visions,
the Book no longer appeared because I already had its contents in my

memory.


The vigil in which I cured my sister Maria Ana I conducted as the
ancient Mazatecs did. I used candles of pure wax; flowers, white lilies

and gladiolas (all kinds of flowers can be used as long as they have
scent and color); copal and San Pedro as well.
In a brazier I burned the copal and with the smoke incensed the
saint children that I held in my hands. Before eating them, I spoke to


7. According to the explanations that old people in Huautla have given me, the
Principal Ones are persons who head a municipal office or else it is the title that is
given to persons who have important posts. With respect to the visions of María
Sabina, the Principal Ones are the personification of the mushrooms she has eaten.
The mushrooms turn into people who handle important papers.


22 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 045]

them. I asked them for favor. That they bless us, that they teach us the
way, the truth, the cure. That they give us the power to follow the

tracks of evil in order to be done with it. I said to the mushrooms: “I
will take your blood. I will take your heart. Because my conscience is

pure, it is clean like yours. Give me truth. May Saint Peter and Saint

Paul be with me.” WhenI felt dizzy, I blew out the candles. The dark-

ness serves as a background for what is seen.
In that same vigil, after the Book disappeared,I had another vision:

I saw the Supreme Lord of the Mountains, Chicon Nindó. I saw a man

on horseback come toward my hut. I knew—the voice told me—that

that being was an important person. His mount was beautiful: a white

horse, white as foam. A beautiful horse.

The personage reined up his mount at the door of my hut. I could
see him through the walls. I was inside the house but my eyes had the
power to see through any obstacle. The personage waited for me to go

out.

With decision I went out to meet him. I stood next to him.
Yes, it was Chicon Nindó, he who lives on Nindó Tocosho, he who
is the Lord of the Mountains. He who has the power to enchant spir-

its. He who himself cures the sick. To whom turkeys are sacrificed, to

whom the Curers give cacao in order for him to cure.

I stood next to him and went closer. I saw that he didn’t have a face
though he wore a white sombrero. His face, yes, his face was like a
shadow.

The night was black; the clouds covered the sky but Chicon Nindó

was like a being covered by a halo. I became mute.
Chicon Nindó didn't say a word. All of a sudden he set his mount
into motion to continue on his way. He disappeared along the path,
in the direction of his dwelling place: the enormous Mountain of the

Adoration, Nindó Tocosho. He lives there, while I live on Fortress


THE LIFE / 23

[PAGE 046]

Mountain, the closest one to Nindó Tocosho. That makes us neighbors. Chicon Nindó had come because in my wise Language I had

called him.
I entered the house and had another vision: I saw that something

fell from the sky with a great roar, like a lightning bolt. It was a luminous object that blinded. I saw that it fell through a hole in one of the
walls. The fallen object turned into a kind of vegetal being, covered by

a halo like Chicon Nindó's. It was like a bush with flowers of many colors; in its head it had a great radiance. Its body was covered with leaves
and stalks. There it stood, in the center of the hut. I looked straight at

it. Its arms and legs were like branches and it was soaked with fresh-

ness and behind it appeared a red background. The vegetal being lost
itself in this red background until it disappeared completely. When

the vision vanished, I was sweating, sweating. My sweat wasn’t warm
but cool. I realized that I was crying and that my tears were crystals
that tinkled when they fell on the ground. I went on crying butI whistled and clapped, sounded and danced. I danced because I knew that I

was the great Clown woman and the Lord clown woman. At dawn I

slept placidly. I slept, but it wasn’t a deep sleep; rather I felt that I was

rocking in a reverie ... as if my body were swaying in a gigantic ham-

mock, suspended from the sky, which swung between the mountains.

I woke up when the world was already in sunlight. It was morn-

ing, I touched my body and the ground to make sure that I had returned to the world of humans. I was no longer near the Principal
Ones. Seeing what surrounded me, I looked for my sister María Ana.

She was asleep. I didn’t want to wake her. I also saw that a part of the
walls of the hut had fallen down, that another was about to fall. Now
I believe that while the saint children worked in my body, I myself

knocked over the wall with the weight of my body. I suppose that
when I danced I hit against the wall and toppled it over. In the fol-


24 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 047]

lowing days the people who passed asked what had happened to the

house. I limited myself to telling them that the rains and winds of the
last few days had weakened the mud-wattled walls and finally overthrown them.
And Maria Ana got better. She was healed once and for all. To this

day she lives in good health with her husband and her children near

Santa Cruz de Juárez.

From that cure on I had faith in the saint children. People realized

how difficult it was to cure my sister. Many people learned of it and in
a few days they came in search of me. They brought their sick. They
came from places far away. I cured them with the Language of the
children. The people came from Tenango, Rio Santiago, or San Juan

Coatzospan. The sick arrived looking pale, but the mushrooms told

me what the remedy was. They advised me what to do to cure them.

People have continued to seek me. And since I received the Book I
have become one of the Principal Ones. If they appear, I sit down with

them and we drink beer or aguardiente. I have been among them since
the time when, gathered together behind a table with important pa-

pers, they gave me wisdom, the perfect word: the Language of God.

Language makes the dying return to life. The sick recover their
health when they hear the words taught by the saint children. There is
no mortal who can teach this Language.
After I had cured my sister Marfa Ana, I understood that I had
found my path. The people knew it and came to me to cure their sick.
In search of a cure came those who had been enchanted by elves, those

who had lost their spirit from fright in the woods, at the river, or along

the path. For some there was no remedy and they died. I cure with
Language, the Language of the saint children. When they advise me to
sacrifice chickens, they are placed on the parts where it hurts. The rest

is Language. But my path to wisdom was soon to be cut off.


THE LIFE / 25

[PAGE 048]

Y


Twelve years after I became a widow, a man named Marcial Carrera
began to woo me. Really, I didn't have any need for a man because I

knew how to support myself. 1 knew how to work; my family, at least,

didn’t suffer as much as I had. There was hunger, yes, but it wasn’t as
burning as what María Ana and I had experienced. My work helped

each one have something to eat and something to wear.
Marcial Carrera insisted. In accordance with the custom, he
brought his parents to speak with my mother. My mother persuaded

me to accept that man. She said that a man in the house would help to

make my work less heavy. The days passed and I thought about it because my suitor didn’t appear to be a worker. What’s more, he had the

reputation of being irresponsible and a drunk.

But in the end I gave in. I stated my conditions: if Marcial wanted
a woman, he would have to come to live in my house because I wasn’t
going to move my mother, my children, my mat, my pots, my hoes,
and my machetes to his. It seemed to me that my house was better than

poor Marcial’s.

Marcial accepted my conditions and he came to live in my house.

With time, I found that Marcial drank a lot of aguardiente. He wasa

Curer. He used turkey eggs and macaw feathers to do sorcery.
He hit me frequently and made me cry. He didn’t like to work in

the fields and didn’t even know how to use a hoe with dexterity.

As I saw that Marcial earned little money, that it wasn’t enough to
cover the small expenses of the house, I was forced to return to work.

I went back to retailing bread and candles.
In the thirteen years that I lived with Marcial I had six children.

They died, all of them; only my daughter Aurora survived. My children died from sickness or were murdered. While I lived with Mar-


26 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 049]

cial I never took the saint children. 1 feared that he wouldn't understand me and would spoil my Wise Woman’s bodily cleanliness.
Marcial, the same as my first husband, Serapio, liked other women.

The sons of a lady with whom he had relations beat him up and
wounded him with a machete. Bleeding, he died sprawled in the path.


8


The fact of having become a widow for the second time made it easier, in a way, for me to decide to give myself up to my destiny. The
destiny that had been fixed for me from before I was born: to be a

Wise Woman. My destiny was to cure. To cure with the Language of

the saint children. | determined to do this even though I had to go on
working hard to support my family—now not as much, though, be-

cause my son Catarino was already beginning to work. He dealt in
thread that he resold in the Hot Country, following in the footsteps of
his deceased father.
I’m not sure, but I believe I was then more than forty years old. I

didn’t feel in a condition to travel to sell bread and candles in the
ranches. During the time that I lived with my husband Marcial,

I saved up enough to build a house seven arm-lengths long, with
wooden walls and a thatched roof of sugarcane leaves. The house was

alongside the path to San Miguel. In it I set up a store in which I sold
aguardiente and cigarettes. Afterward I sold meals there to travelers.

In the days after my second widowhood, I wanted to practice cur-

ing as Marcial had done. I felt that I should cure and that I should cure
with the saint children, but something made me hold back. As if it was

fear to give oneself up to what has been given one, to what has been
destined.

I tried being a Curer, yes, but it didn’t satisfy me.


THE LIFE / 27

[PAGE 050]

My feelings were that I was doing what I shouldn’t do. I thought
that the clean woman, the woman of Christ, the Morning Star
woman, shouldn't practice being a Curer. I was destined to something
superior. In curing I buried eggs as an offering to the Lords of the

Mountains. I buried them at the corners of the house or inside, but I

saw that worms came out where I buried them, and that caused me
disgust and horror. I thought that this was not my destined path. I remembered my ancestors. My great-grandfather Juan Feliciano, my
grandfather Pedro Feliciano, my great-aunt Maria Ana Jestis, and my

great-uncle Antonio Justo had all been Wise Ones of great prestige.


9


For me sorcery and curing are inferior tasks. The Sorcerers and Cur-

ers have their Language as well, but it is different from mine. They
ask favors from Chicon Nindó. I ask them from God the Christ, from

Saint Peter, from Magdalene and Guadalupe.
It's that in me there is no sorcery, there is no anger, there are no lies.
Because I don't have garbage, I don’t have dust. The sickness comes
out if the sick vomit. They vomit the sickness. They vomit because the

mushrooms want them to. If the sick don’t vomit, I vomit. I vomit for

them and in that way the malady is expelled. The mushrooms have

power because they are the flesh of God. And those that believe are
healed. Those that do not believe are not healed.
The people who realized that I cured Maria Ana brought their sick
children. One, two, ten, many. I have cured many children. Sometimes I give the childrena little bit of Liztle-One-Who-Springs-Forth. 1
vomit for the children if they don’t. Before beginning the vigil I ask
the name of the sick person. In that way I search for the sickness and
in that way I cure. If the sick person doesn’t tell me the cause of his or


28 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 051]

her malady I divine it. When the sick person sweats, that reveals that

he or she is going to be healed. Sweat gets rid of the fever that comes

from the sickness. My words oblige the evil to leave.
For a strong toothache seven or eight pairs are eaten, that is

enough. The children are taken at night; the vigil is celebrated in front
of images of the saints of the Church. The saint children cure the sores,
the wounds of the spirit. The spirit is what gets sick. The Curers don’t
know that the visions the children show reveal the origin of the malady. The Curers don’t know how to use them. The Sorcerers don’t
either. The Sorcerers are afraid of Wise Ones like me because they
know that I can discover if they have caused an enchantment, if they
have surreptitiously robbed the spirit of a child, of a man, or of a

woman. The mushrooms give me the power of universal contemplation. I can see from the origin. I can arrive where the world is born.
The sick person gets well and the relatives come to visit me afterward to tell me that there has been an alleviation. They thank me with
aguardiente, cigarettes, or some coins. I am not a Curer because I do

not use eggs to cure. I don’t ask for powers from the Lords of the
Mountains. I am not a Curer because I do not give potions of strange

herbs to drink. I cure with Language. Nothing else. I am not a Sorcer-

ess because I don’t do evil. lam a Wise Woman. Nothing else.

Men come as well to ask me to help their women give birth. lam a

midwife, but that is not my work. I am the one who speaks with God
and with Benito Juárez. I am wise even from within the womb of my

mother. I am the woman of the winds, of the water, of the paths, because I am known in heaven, because I am a doctor woman.
I take Little-One-Who-Springs-Forth and 1 see God. I see him
sprout from the earth. He grows and grows, big as a tree, as a mountain. His face is placid, beautiful, serene as in the temples. At other

times, God is not like a man: he is the Book. A Book that is born from


THE LIFE / 29

[PAGE 052]

the earth, a sacred Book whose birth makes the world shake. It is the
Book of God that speaks to me in order for me to speak. It counsels me,
it teaches me, it tells me what I have to say to men, to the sick, to life.

The Book appears and I learn new words.
I am the daughter of God and elected to be wise. On the altar that I
have in my house is the image of Our Lady of Guadalupe. I have her
in a niche. And I also have Saint Mark, Saint Martin Horseman, and
Saint Magdalene. They help me to cure and to speak. In the vigils I clap
and whistle; at that time I am transformed into God.


10


One day a couple came to my house. I was inside near the hearth, heating my tortillas. A dog barked and I went out to see what it was. I in-

vited the visitors to come in. I interrupted my meal and attended to
them.

“We're family of old Francisco García,” said the man.

“The Francisco who lives in Backbone-of-a-Dog?” I asked. “What
brings you here?”
“Yes. There is something, that’s why we’ve come to see you,” said the

woman. “Probably you know that my father Francisco is sick.”
“What caused his illness?”
“We don’t know,” the man went on. “We can only say that he left for
his field one morning, but he soon returned before it was completely
daylight. His right shinbone was hurt. He said that he was hoeing
when he felt a terrible pain in the shinbone that made him fall and lose

consciousness. When he came to, he returned painfully to his house.
He supposes that he hit himself with the hoe. To heal him we've contracted the young doctor who has just arrived in Huautla from the city.

He is a Wise-One-In-Medicine who cures bloody wounds. He’s been


30 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 053]

treating old Francisco for days, but Francisco doesn’t appear to be getting better. We've decided that you, yes, would know how to heal him;
you would contribute a lot together with the medicine from the young

doctor. The little things will give strength to old Francisco and he will
get well quickly.... You are a woman who knows, María Sabina.”
“When do you want to do the vigil?” I asked.
“As soon as possible,” the man ended by saying.
The couple went. I said that that same night I would go to old

Francisco Garcia.

At nightfall I arrived at their hut. They treated me with great respect. They took me to the bed of old Francisco who lay on a mat and
groaned from pain. The old man saw me and made an effort to smile.
He had circles under his eyes. I examined the supposed wound in the

shinbone. It looked more like a bruise without serious complications.
I began the ceremony in front of the images of the saints that the

family had. I gave old Francisco six pairs of mushrooms. I took thirteen pairs. Other people who were present also took their pairs. I let
myself be carried away. I didn’t offer any resistance and I fell into a
deep, interminable well. I felta kind of vertigo. Gradually the discomfort disappeared. I had a vision: I saw a tiger about to attack one of several cattle in a corral. It was night. The animal, crouched, chest to the

ground, prepared to spring and pounce on its prey, when the strong

blow of a stone in its right leg stopped it. The stone had been thrown
by aman ina nearby tree. The tiger fled without having accomplished
its purpose, wounded and frightened.
Next a woman appeared who covered her face with her forearm so
that it wouldn’t be seen that she was smiling. It was a smile of satis-

faction. I recognized the woman. She was the wife of Faustino Méndez, asorceress. The voice of the mushrooms said: “She bewitched old
Francisco: she turned his spirit into a tiger. It is her.”


THE LIFE / 31

[PAGE 054]

Past midnight old Francisco started to sit up little by little. By himself, without help. Finally he got completely to his feet. Erect, he stood
next to the altar where the images of the saints were. He made movements as if to relax. I asked, then, that they bring him clean clothes.

What he had on was contaminated. He should change because the
cure was approaching, and everything dirty should be shed.

I ordered old Francisco to sit down on the chair and I asked him:
“The day that you hurt yourself, where was it? What happened?

Didn’t you feel that your body didn’t have a spirit? That your body
was empty? What places do you go to in your dreams?”

“Yes, Señora,” he answered, looking at the ground as if he felt
ashamed. “For some time now, my dreams are regularly the same. No
sooner do I goto sleep than I dream that I’m coming to a corral where

I see bulls. I want to attack the animals to eat them.”

“What places have you arrived at?”

“I dream that I’m in Ojitlán. It’s there I want to attack the cattle.”
“Don’t be ashamed,” I told him. “There's definitely nothing wrong
with that. It’s not a lie. When we sleep the spirit leaves the body and

wanders. It goes where it wants to go. The spirit returns if we wake
up. But some people are born with their ‘fate.’ Their spirit turns into

an opossum, a tiger, or a buzzard. Transformed into animals they
travel to distant places. If you have a ‘fate’ don’t worry. It is not a sin

nor anything to be ashamed of. There are people who are born like
that; others can get to have a ‘fate’ by the artifices of sorcery.”®


8. Here María Sabina uses her own word soerte (a deformation of the Spanish word
suerte, “luck”) for what students of pre-Hispanic and colonial Mexico call nagual (or
a phenomenon related to nagualism: the tona). For Maria Sabina the soerte, translated here as “fate,” is the spirit of a person, capable of leaving the human body to
turn itself into an animal, usually a tiger.


32 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 055]

“Yes,” he continued, “I dream that I prowl around the cattle. I hear

their bellows. It happens to me every night.”
The Zittle things ordered me to light a candle. I took a little San Pe-

dro with my fingers and ordered old Francisco to chew it. He did. He
swallowed the San Pedro. I asked the people around me to bring a
basin. They brought it. Then I asked them to press old Francisco’s
stomach so that he would vomit. He vomited. San Pedro made him do
it. The tobacco is called San Pedro because that saint created it.

I ordered old Francisco to change his clothes when he finished

vomiting.

At dawn the sick man spoke: “I thank you for your cure, Maria
Sabina. I feel better. 'm hungry. Very ...” They served him coffee, a

little bit of roasted meat, beans, and chile sauce. He ate well and abundantly.

I spoke to him once more:

“The saint children have revealed that a sorceress has turned your
spirit into a tiger. At night, while you sleep, your ‘fate’ goes to attack

the bulls of Ojitlan. Don’t be worried anymore. The mushrooms have
already cured you. You’ve vomited.”
Although I knew that the young Wise-One-In-Medicine contin-

ued to see the patient, I was sure that the mushrooms would remedy
his malady. Within a month they let me know that old Francisco was
completely recovered.
The wife of Faustino Méndez, the sorceress, began to go crazy the

moment Francisco vomited. That way the “fate” came out and Fran-

cisco recaptured his spirit. The sorceress, crazed, would take off all
her clothes and go out into the street naked. Her husband and her
children left her from shame and fear. The family fell into misfortune.
Finally the lady died of insanity. Her evil turned against her.


THE LIFE / 33

[PAGE 056]

11


The following year a daughter of old Francisco came to see me. Once

inside my house she said: “All my family send you greetings. The peo-

ple who visit my father ask who cured him. He tells them he has a doc-

tor, insignificant in appearance, named Marfa Sabina.”

“Is something the matter now?” I asked.
“Señora, you know how life is. Sicknesses come and go. A child
gets sick just as well as an adult. It’s always happening. I’ve come because my nephew, Rodrigo, is sick. The young Wise-One-In-Medi-

cine from the city has been giving him medicine, but he isn’t getting

any better. We’re agreed that you, Sefiora, should cure him once and

for all.”

“What's the matter with him?” I asked.

“The priest Alfonso asked for him to be an apostle last Holy Week.
Ezequiel, his father, accepted, because it pleased him that his son Rod-

rigo should be an apostle. In Holy Week the people and the apostles

went in procession, but Rodrigo tripped at the door of the church and
fell. It’s been two months already that the child can’t get up. The Sorcerers have gone with cacao and eggs to pay the places where the child

was accustomed to play. We believe that he was enchanted by the master of some sacred place and that now there’s no cure.”

“Don’t worry, woman,” I told her. “I'll go tomorrow.”
The following night I presented myself at the house of Ezequiel,
taking enough saint children for six people.

I probed the body of the child with my fingers in the light of a candle. He didn’t have any wound, but in a little while I’d know the true
sickness.

The people of the house accompanied me in taking Liztle-OneWho-Springs-Forth ... and when it was working, I had a vision: I saw


34 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 057]

Rodrigo walking in the midst of a crowd. He had a robe on. A purple
robe like the one the apostles wear. The child walked solemnly. But
his spirit wasn’t with him, it was somewhere else; that’s what the voice

told me, and in that way I learned that a spirit who carried a rifle fired
a shot and accidentally hit the spirit of Rodrigo. At that instant the
child fell at the door of the church. His spirit was wounded, but his

body wasn’t.

When the vision had passedI lit a taper, lifted up the little shirt of

the boy and saw in his chest, around the region of the heart, a hole the
size of a fist. It was a wound without blood even though it was deep.
When I looked at Rodrigo’s face, he looked dead. So I asked for thir-

teen cacao beans, ground up and mixed with water.

I asked for thirteen cacao beans because my thought ordered me to.
I asked as well for a recently born chick and a cloth to use as a bandage. I sacrificed the chick and bathed its still warm body in chocolate
water and put it on Rodrigo’s chest. On top of it I put the bandage,

wrapping it around Rodrigo's body. The child didn’t take Little-One-

Who-Springs-Forth. By dawn the effect had worn off, and I took off the

bandage together with the chick in the light of day. I didn’t see the

wound that I had seen in the sick one’s chest while the saint children
worked inside me.

The chick was buried near the house so that it wouldn’t be eaten
by birds of prey or by dogs. What is used in a vigil is sacred and
shouldn’t be spoiled by being eaten by an animal.

I slept in the house. When I awoke, they gave me food and I started
to talk with the mother of the sick child. Someone came in and an-

nounced that the young Wise-One-In-Medicine, the same one who
had tried to cure old Francisco, the grandfather of Rodrigo, was wait-

ing outside to be received and to see his patient.

I saw the Wise-One-In-Medicine enter. I was seated on the ground


THE LIFE / 35

[PAGE 058]

with my legs drawn up underneath me, leaning against the wall. He
was dressed in white, clean clothes. He said the Mazatec greeting
to everyone: Nina’tt’?ntali (“In the name of God good day”). We re-

sponded in the same way.
We all kept silent while he went over the sick child with his met-

als. Nobody told him that that same night there had been a vigil in order for me to cure the child. He spoke in Castilian with Ezequiel, the
father of Rodrigo. I didn’t understand anything. He gave him some
little boxes and a paper.
The young Wise Man had a white face and blue eyes. He took leave

of everyone: “Xr?alanca’,” he said to each one. He had learned to shake
hands like the Mazatecs: he just grazed his fingers against the other
person’s palm like we do.

At bottom I didn’t know what to think about the efficacy of his

medicines. What I was sure of, though, was that he, with all his wisdom, ignored the true cause of the child Rodrigo’s sickness.
I took leave of the sick one’s parents. I told them that their child was

cured ... that by the end of several days the child would be completely
healthy. As payment they gave me a pack of cigarettes, a little aguar-

diente, and five pesos.

A Wise One like me should not charge for her services. She should
not profit from her wisdom. The one who charges is a liar. The Wise

One is born to cure, not to do business with her knowledge. ... One re-

ceives with humility the two or three pesos that are put in one’s hand.

Yes... one should not make money from the little things.
Time went by. One day I went down to the market in Huautla. I

went by to say hello to Rodrigo’s father. He greeted me, smiling. Very
contented.
“How is the child?” I asked Ezequiel.
“He’s all better. He’s already playing with his little friends again.


36 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 059]

Thank y you for curing 8 him. Because y you know,»y you can. Thank y you.
Take two pesos to buy bread.”
“Don’t say that, Ezequiel,” I answered, “because the one who has
healed your son is God who is raising all of us.”
From then on, old Francisco and Ezequiel, his son, > had a lot of
q

faith in me, , and whenever there was someone sick in their house the y
called me to cure them.


12


During my vigils I speak to the saints: to Lord Santiago, to Saint
Joseph, and to Mary. I say the name of each one as they appear.
I know that God is formed by all the saints. Just as we, together,
form humanity, God is formed by all the saints. That is why I don’t
have a preference for any one saint. All the saints are equal, one has
the same force as the other, none has more power than another.
I know of other Wise Ones who use the saint children as 1 do. J remember Toribio Garcia, a man of this same section, who lived along
the path down below. He searched for light in the children, but he also
sought the answer in thirteen kernels of corn that he threw on the
ground. The final position of each kernel has a meaning. Like that he
divined what he desired. I don’t practice that type of thing: I only trust
in what the children tell me. For me that is sufficient; my only force is
my Language. Toribio was another type of Wise One. He cast kernels
of corn during the vigil. At dawn he repeated the throw of chance.
During the time that I was married I didn’t utilize the services of
Toribio. The children of my first marriage grew up healthy.
And if] get sick now, I cure myself. The children cure me. I’ve been
able to live many years ... many ... 1 don’t know how many.
In my vigils I can see how our little Christ is. I contemplate him. I


THE LIFE / 37

[PAGE 060]

can have him very close to me, but I can’t touch him. There are times
when I want to catch what I see with my hands, but there is nothing
there and on occasions that makes me laugh. I enter another world
different from the one we know in the daylight. It is a beautiful world
but an unattainable one. It is like watching the movies. I know the
movies because one day a man came and took me to the center of
Huautla to see a film in which I appear. In the movies one can see from
a distance, but if one tries one can’t touch anything that one is seeing.
Asin the movies, after one image comes another. Then something else
comes out and afterward still something else. That is howI feel the
effect of the little things.
In that way I see the saints. One appears and I pronounce his name;
if another appears, I pronounce his name. If Benito Juárez appears, I
pronounce his name. Sometimes the Principal Ones appear, then I see
myself drinking beer with them; at other times we drink aguardiente.
I see animals such as gigantic serpents, but I don’t fear them. I don’t

fear them because they are also creatures of God. Strange animals
appear such as have never been seen in this world. Nothing that the
mushrooms show should be feared.
And all my Language is in the Book® that was given to me. Iam she
who reads, the interpreter. That is my privilege. Although the Language is not the same for different cases. If I’m curing a sick person, I

use one type of Language. If the only aim in taking the little things 15
to encounter God, then I use another Language. Now, sober, I can remember something of my Language:


l am a woman who was born alone, says
Iam a woman who fell out by herself, says


9. In speaking of the Book she uses the Spanish word Libro.


38 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 061]

Because your Book exists, says
Your Book of Wisdom, says
Your sacred Language, says
Your communion wafer that is given me, says
Your communion wafer that I share, says


In what number do you rest, beloved Father?
Father full of life
Father full of freshness


I am a woman of battles
Because I am a woman general, says
Because I am a woman corporal, says
I am a sergeant woman, says
I am a commander woman, says


You Jesus Christ
You Mary

You Holy Father
Woman saint

Woman saintess

Spirit woman

l am a woman who waits, says
I am a daylight woman
lam a Moon woman, says
I am a Morning Star woman
I am a God Star woman


I am the Constellation of the Sandal woman, says
I am the Staff Constellation woman, says
Here I bring my dew
My freshness
Here I bring my dew
My transparent dew, says


THE LIFE / 39

[PAGE 062]

Because I ama fresh dew woman, says
Iam a moist dew woman, says
l am the woman of the dawn, says
Tam the woman of the day, says
I am the saint woman, says
I am the spirit woman, says

I am the woman who works, says
I am the woman beneath the dripping tree, says
Iam the woman of the twilight, says
I am the woman of the pristine huipil, says
I am the whirlpool woman, says
I am the woman who looks into the insides of things, says
Because I can speak with Benito Juárez
Because our beautiful Virgin accompanies me
Because we can go up to heaven
I am the woman who sees Benito Juárez
Because I am the lawyer woman
Because I am the pure woman
I am the woman of goodness
Because I can go in and out of the realm of death
Because I come searching beneath the water from the opposite shore
Because I am the woman who springs forth
I am the woman who can be torn up, says
I am the doctor woman, says
I am the herb woman, says
And our beautiful Virgin Guadalupe
And our Mother Magdalene

Because I am the daughter of God
I am the daughter of Christ
I am the daughter of Mary
I am the daughter of Saint Joseph and of the Candelaria


That is part of my Language. The ignorant could never sing like
the wise. The saint children dictate to me, I am the interpreter. The


40 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 063]

Book appears and there I begin to read. I read without stammering.
The Book doesn’t always appear because I keep in memory what is
written in it.

For the sick there is one type of Language, for those who search for

God there is another. For the sick, the Language appears when I am
near them. I am always next to the sick one, attentive to whether the
person vomits or to whatever happens. The sick get well quickly if
they chew San Pedro. If the sick chew San Pedro, I say:


I am a Saint Peter woman, says
I am a Saint Paul woman, says
I am a woman who searches beneath the water, says
Iam a woman who cleans with herbs, says
I am the woman who cleans, says
I am the woman who fixes things, says
I am the woman who swims, says
Iam the sacred swimmer, says
I am the Lord swimmer, says
I am the greatest swimmer, says
I am the launch woman, says

I am the Morning Star woman, says


The little things are the ones who speak. If I say: “I am a woman
who fell out by herself, 1 am a woman who was born alone,” the saint
children are the ones who speak. And they say that because they spring

up by themselves. Nobody plants them. They spring up because God

wants them to. For that reason I say: “I am the woman who can be torn

up, because the children can be torn up and taken. They should be
taken just as they are picked. They shouldn’t be boiled or anything.
It’s not necessary to do anything more to them. As they are pulled up

from the ground they should be eaten, dirt and all. They should be
eaten completely, because if a piece is thrown away from carelessness,


THE LIFE / 41

[PAGE 064]

the children ask when they are working: “Where are my feet? Why
didn’t you eat me all up?” And they order: “Look for the rest of my
body and take me.” The words of the children should be obeyed. One

has to look for the bits that weren’t eaten before beginning the vigil
and take them.

13


Marcial, my second husband, died, and I dedicated myself to work. I

sold food in my house of seven arm-lengths situated at the side of the

path. I went to San Miguel or to Tenango to sell candles and bread on
market days and festival days. I lived tranquilly with my children. Although already married, my daughters Viviana and Apolonia visited
me frequently.

One month after Marcial died, I began to take the little things. As

Pve already said, it isn't good to use the children when one has a husband. When one goes to bed with a man their cleanliness is spoiled. If

a man takes them and two or three days afterwards he uses a woman,
his testicles rot. If a woman does the same, she goes crazy.
Problems have not been lacking. One day a drunk entered my little store. He came on horseback. He entered with his horse. Inside

he dismounted and asked for a beer. I served him the beer. My son
Catarino, already a man, was inside the house. The drunk saw him.

“Ah, are you here, Catarino?” he asked.
“Yes, Crescencio,” said my son. “I brought some merchandise for

my mother to sell in her little store. I’ve just come from the Hot Country, from the town of Rio Sapo. I brought two ninety-two-pound sacks

of dried fish and some beans.”
“Would you like to have a drink?” asked the drunk.
“I accept,” answered Catarino. “We know how to drink.”


42 THE LIFE

[PAGE 065]

“Serve us, Señora,” the drunk ordered me. “Serve Catarino a glass

of aguardiente.”
Before I could serve, Catarino spoke:
“No, Crescencio, I won't drink aguardiente. If there weren’t any

beers, Pd drink aguardiente, but there are beers. I won't drink the
aguardiente you're inviting me to. Open two beers, Mamá,” ordered
my son.


At that moment the drunk pulled a pistol out of his belt. I was

afraid for my son. The drunk spoke:

“Is it true what you're saying, Catarino?” he asked, pistol in hand.
With apparent rage, he went up to my son.
“God knows whether you're a bandit or not,” he added.

“Don’t blaspheme, Crescencio,” said my son, keeping calm. “Pm a
working man. I earn my living bringing merchandise from Puebla

and Mexico. It seems to me you're the bandit.”
They went on talking, challenging each other.
The drunk staggered, pistol in hand. Behind him I glimpsed a

crucifix; at that I got brave and interposed myself between the drunk
and my son who was on my left. I went up cautiously; the drunk con-

tinued cursing. In a careless moment on the man’s part, I wrested the
pistol from him.

“Why have you come to fight here?” I asked. “You shouldn’t do it
here, because God is present here in my house.”
The drunk didn’t say anything more. I put the pistol in a drawer

underneath the table on which I put the beers. Angry, I went up to the

drunk and shoved him out. But with a push he threw me to the
ground and took the opportunity to run to the drawer and grab hold

of the pistol. I ran and got between them to protect my son. Determined, the drunk came up to me.


THE LIFE / 43

[PAGE 066]

“Stop, the Sacred Heart is in my hands,” I shouted at him. In a moment I felt myself sprawled on the ground bleeding at the waist: two

shots had hit me in the right buttock and another in the hip on the
same side.

They took me on a stretcher to the center of Huautla. They took
me to the young Wise-One-In-Medicine. I learned that his name was
Salvador Guerra. He took out the bullets. On that occasion the doctor

met me. For the first time in my life I was cured by a Wise-One-In-

Medicine. I was amazed. Before operating he injected a substance in
the region where I was wounded and my pains disappeared. While he
cured me I didn’t feel any pain; after he finished he showed me the

bullets. Thankful and amazed, I told him: “Doctor, you are great like

I am. You make pain disappear. You took the bullets out of me and I
didn’t feel anything.”

Three days later I returned to my house. I wanted to drink coffee,
to eat tortillas and chile sauce. I wanted to savor my own cooking. The

food that the Wise-Man-In-Medicine’s helpers gave me, it was hard

for me to get down.
One afternoon, while I was in my house, a man arrived to tell me

that that same night Salvador Guerra himself would arrive with a foreign lady who wanted to meet me. I prepared myself for a vigil.

At night, the young Wise Man arrived in his metal [jeep] with a
blonde lady. A translator told me that only the lady would take the /ittle saints. Y didn’t pay any attention, I prepared several pairs of little

birds for the Wise-Man-In-Medicine. When the time came, I spoke to

him in Mazatec telling him to eat the children with me. I stretched out
my hand to give them to him. With brusque gestures he refused to

take them. So I said to him: “You gave me the medicine with which
you cure the wounded. You healed me. You took out my bullets. Now


44 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 067]

I offer you my medicine. Take these pairs as payment for your services.” The blonde woman backed up my words. Finally the young
Wise Man took his pairs of the “landslide” variety.

From then on, Salvador Guerra and I were good friends. Later our

friendship became firmer and the day he left Huautla [in 1960] the
priest, Alfonso Aragón, gave a mass to ask for a long life for all of us.
Salvador Guerra and I kneeled in front of the altar.

When the mass was over, I offered him my hand and said to him,

“Doctor!” He reciprocated by giving me his hand, saying: “Doctor!”
And now, when I see that drunk who wounded me cross my path,

I greet him. Poor fellow, he’s fallen apart ... he’s a useless man. His

drunkenness has finished him off.


14


A few years before the first foreigners I met arrived in Huautla, a

neighbor, Guadalupe, the wife of [the sindico]'° Cayetano Garcia,

came to my house.

“T’ve had an ugly dream,” she said. “I want you to come to the house

to see about us. I don’t feel well. I’m asking you as a favor. It’s possible

that problems are approaching for my husband because his office as
síndico is difficult. You know, Señora, that there is violence in the
town. There are envies. For nothing at all people hurt and kill each

other. There are discords.”
“Pl go with you right now,” I told her.

Upon arriving at their house, Cayetano invited me to sit down. He


10. In Mexican town government, the síndico is the representative of the district attorney (Ministerio Público) wherever, as in Huautla, there is no district attorney's
office. Cayetano Garcia was sindico from 1953 to 1955.


THE LIFE / 45

[PAGE 068]

took another chair. His wife did the same. In a discreet voice, the
sindico spoke:

“I know who you are, Maria Sabina. That's why I’ve sent for you.
We have faith in you. You've cured those who have been ill here in the
house, but now I’m going to ask you something special. I want you to
be my adviser. The town has elected me to municipal office. You know
that to be one of the authorities is a big responsibility. You have to
make decisions and you can make mistakes. So I ask you to advise me
and guide me, because you have power; you know, you can know the
truth no matter how hidden it is because the little things teach you. If
there are any problems of litigation in the municipality, you will tell
me where the guilt lies and I, as sindico, will say what should be done.”
“Don’t worry,’ I answered him. “We'll do what you ask. I can’t
say no because we're old friends and because I obey the authorities.
What's more I know that you're a good man. 1 don’t doubt it. I will be
your adviser. We'll consult the saint children as many times as it’s necessary.”

Cayetano Garcia was sindico for three years; in that time there were
no serious problems or situations that the town government could
lament.

But I should tell the incident that preceded the arrival of the first
foreigners who came to me. More or less fifteen days after the drunk
wounded me, Guadalupe, the wife of Cayetano, some other people,
and I took the little things. This time I saw strange beings. They appeared to be people but they weren’t familiar; they didn’t even appear
to be fellow Mazatecs.
“I don't know whats happening. I see strange people,” I told
Guadalupe.

I asked her to pray because I felt a certain uneasiness at that vision.
Guadalupe prayed to help me. She prayed to God the Christ.


46 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 069]

I received the explanation of that vision I had in a few days when

Cayetano arrived at my house in the course of the morning. His words
didn’t fail to astonish me:
“Maria Sabina,” he said, still breathing hard from the walk, “some

blonde men have arrived at the Municipal Building to see me. They’ve

come from a faraway place with the aim of finding a Wise One. They
come in search of Little-One-Who-Springs-Forth. Y don’t know whether
it displeases you to know it, but I promised to bring them to meet you.

I told them that I knew a true Wise Woman. The thing is that one of

them, looking very serious, put his head up close to my ear and said:

Tm looking for ?ntixitjo.”'' I couldn't believe what I was hearing. For

a moment I doubted it, but the blonde man appeared to know a lot
about the matter. That was the impression I got. The man seems sincere and good. Finally I promised to bring them to your house.”

“If you want to, I can’t say no. You are an official and we are friends,”
I replied.

The following day, somebody brought three blonde men to my
house. One of them was Mr. Wasson. I told the foreigners that I was
sick though not precisely that a drunk had wounded me witha pistol.
One of the visitors listened to my chest. He put his head on my chest to
hear my heartbeat, held my temples between his hands, and put his
head against my back. The man nodded while he touched me. Finally
he said some words that I didn’t understand; they spoke another lan-

guage that wasn’t Castilian. I don’t even understand Castilian.


11. [TRANSLATOR's NOTE] In the transcription of Mazatec words, here as elsewhere, the x is pronounced sA in English, the modified question mark is a glottal
stop (as noted earlier), and the y is the Spanish jota pronounced like the English A.
Superinscribed numbers used in more technical transliterations to indicate tones
have been omitted throughout in order to make the words more accessible to nonMazatec readers.


THE LIFE / 47

[PAGE 070]

One night soon after, the foreigners witnessed my vigil. Afterward
I found out that Wasson had been left marveling, and that he went so

far as to say that another person in Huautla who claimed to be a Wise
One was nothing but a liar. In reality he meant the sorcerer Vanegas.
When the foreigners took the saint children with me, I didn’t feel
anything bad. The vigil was fine. I had different visions than usual. I
saw places I had never imagined existed. I reached the place of origin
of the foreigners. I saw cities. Big cities. Many houses, big ones.
Wasson came other times. He brought his wife and his daughter.
Different people came with him as well.
One day Wasson arrived with a group of people. Among them

were some fellow Mazatecs who brought a sick person wrapped up in

amat. They told me that he was an orphan, Perfecto by name, and that
he had been raised by Aurelio-Path. This Aurelio was a Wise One as

well, and he had tried to cure the sick boy.

But there was no remedy for the sick one. His death was near. After I saw Perfecto’s appearance, I said to Aurelio, “This child is in a

very grave condition. He requires a lot of care.”

I took the children and began to work. In the trance I found out that
Perfecto’s spirit had been frightened. His spirit had been trapped by a
malevolent being.
I let myself be carried away by the Language that sprang from me,
and though Perfecto didn’t take the little mushrooms, my words made
him get up and succeed in standing. He related, then, that while resting in the shade of some coffee trees in Cafiada Mamey he “felt something” in back of him.

“I had the feeling that there was something behind me,” he said,
“like an animal, like a donkey. I heard him lick his chops very clearly.
I turned around rapidly, but I didn’t see anything. That frightened me


48 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 071]

a lot and since then I’ve felt sick. It’s true, Papa Aurelio, if you take
care of me, I’ll get well. María Sabina says so.”

In the course of the vigil, the sick one got to his feet because the
Language gave him strength. I also rubbed some San Pedro on his
arms.


Weeks went by and somebody informed me that Perfecto had
died. They didn’t take care of him as they should have. If they had
done several vigils he would certainly have gotten well. They didn’t

do it.
Wasson, his family and friends went and didn’t come back any-

more. It’s been years since I’ve seen them; but I know that his wife
died. Only Wasson returned once not many years ago. The last time I
saw him he told me: “Maria Sabina, you and I will still live for many
years.”

After those first visits of Wasson, many foreign people came to ask
me to do vigils for them. I asked them if they were sick, but they said

no ... that they had only come “to know God.” They brought innu-

merable objects with which they took what they call photographs and
recorded my voice. Later they brought papers [newspapers and mag-

azines] in which I appeared. I’ve kept some papers I’m in. I keep them

even though I don’t know what they say about me.

It’s true that Wasson and his friends were the first foreigners who

came to our town in search of the saint children and that they didn’t
take them because they suffered from any illness. Their reason was

that they came to find God.

Before Wasson nobody took the mushrooms only to find God. The
little mushrooms were always taken for the sick to get well.


THE LIFE / 49

[PAGE 072]

15


I’ve belonged to the sisterhoods for thirty years. NowI belong to the
Sisterhood of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. The sisterhood is composed
of ten women. If the society is composed of men it is called a mayor-

domia (stewardhood). Each member is also called mother. Our task
consists of making candles and gathering money to pay for the mass

that is given monthly in thanks to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. Each
member gives the principal mother fifty centavos. Between all of us
we get together five pesos; but if the mass is for the day of the festival

of the Sacred Heart, or some other saint, then we give three pesos. We
get together a total of thirty pesos. We give three pesos for the day of

the Virgin of the Nativity which is the eighth of September; we also
give three pesos the third Friday in March—those are our festival

days. In Holy Week, when our Father is crucified, we give three pesos
as well.
The priest has a list on which the name and contribution of each
member is noted. The Bishop is also aware of it.
Fifteen days before the Festival of the Patron, the stewards and the
members of the sisterhood go for a crucifix lent by the church. The
principal steward carries the crucifix in his hand.
With flowers donated by the members of the sisterhood, an altar is

decorated in the house of the principal steward; and in the path to the
house, an arch of bamboo is made, adorned with flowers. The com-

mittee that went for the crucifix is received beneath the arch. Rockets
are fired and flowers are strewn in the path of the crucifix. The committee of mothers and stewards is accompanied by music. The mothers go along incensing the crucifix committee with copal, and each one
carries candles and flowers. At the head of the procession, a steward
goes along ringinga bell.


50 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 073]

Upon arriving at the house of the principal steward, each member

of the sisterhood should hand in a pound of pure wax. Each pound of
wax is melted and worked in the presence of the crucifix. The candles

that are made are adorned with paper and a bow the same color as the

patron saint’s clothing. After the wax has been worked, the members
of the sisterhood give three pesos each to pay for the mass. This is a festival day. The musicians play and people drink aguardiente, smoke,
and fire rockets. The candles are blessed in that way. Those candles

are sacred from then on and shouldn’t be lit except in religious ceremonies. They are not for giving light in the dark.

The day before the fiesta, the stewards go to neighbors’ houses to
ask for monetary aid. After noon the musicians arrive at the house of
the principal mother. There aguardiente is drunk and cigarettes are

passed out. A goat is killed and eaten in a stew together with bitter
tamales. The stewards arrive with their wives, each of whom brings

thirteen candles of a half pound each. The members of the sisterhood

bring flowers of all kinds.

The musicians play the Orange Flower, and then the principal

mother dances with the principal steward. The second mother dances
with the second steward, the third mother dances with the third stew-

ard.
In the evening, the mothers and stewards take the thirteen candles
to the church to light them at the altar of the patron saint, while the

priest says the rosary.

The next morning, on the festival day of the patron, the stewards

and the mothers leave the house of the principal steward and in pro-

cession head for the church to hear the mass in which the candles

are lighted again, held by the mothers in their hands. Once the mass

is over, the candles are put out and the mothers take them with
them. The mothers and the stewards gather again in the house of the


THE LIFE / 51

[PAGE 074]

principal steward where music is played on guitars and the salterio

[plucked dulcimer]. There stew is again eaten together with bitter

tamales, and people smoke and dance. The stewards and some of the
mothers drink aguardiente.

When the festival is finished, the stewards go to the Municipal
Building and return the money to the authorities that they borrowed
at the start for the expenses of the festival.

Every two, four, or six years, the members of the sisterhood rotate,
so that each one is the principal mother once.
One never ceases to be a mother. When one dies, the sacred candles

that are her property and that were not used are put in the coffin next
to the corpse.
It is nearly thirty years since I learned of the sisterhoods. It came

from the church, I think. From the start I participated in the sister-

hoods with enthusiasm because I’ve always had respect for everything that has to do with God. I obey the priests. I am also obedient
to the words of the municipal authorities. They are the heads. They
govern us.


When the sisterhoods were begun, thirty years ago, I met Apolonio
Terán in church. The two of us, as a couple, went to the houses of the

neighbors to invite them to form the first sisterhood and the first mayordomía. 1 knew that Apolonio was a great Wise Man, that he had

the power to cure. That he knew how to speak with the Lords of
the Mountains. The two Wise Ones, he and I, joined together in this

task without ever speaking of our own wisdom. We only spoke about
questions pertaining to the sisterhoods and mayordomías. At that
time I didn’t make myself known. The wise shouldn’t go around advertising what they are, because it is a delicate matter. Apolonio was
an active man, he formed the sisterhoods and the mayordomias. He

gave people’s names to the municipal authorities who took it upon


52 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 075]

themselves to communicate, in writing, with the elected people. The
written paper was the nomination that was given to people who were
asked to appear on a certain day. Once the society was formed, the au-

thorities themselves lent money to begin the activities of the mothers
and the stewards. The money was used to buy the wax with which the
candles are made. Later the borrowed money was returned.
Apolonio and I considered the opinion of the husband, the parents,

the brothers and sisters, or the children of the person who was going

to become a member of the sisterhood or the mayordomia.


16


I have suffered. And I go on suffering. Here, below the right hip, in
the place where I was hit by the bullet the drunk shot at me, a tumor

has come out. It has grown little by little and hurts me if it’s cold. It
will be five years since some people from the city came and wanted to
take me there. They said that Wise-Ones-In-Medicine from those
parts would cut out the tumor. Before deciding, I consulted the mu-

nicipal president, Valeriano Garcia; he opposed my going to Mexico

City for them to cure me.

“You might die in the moment that they are cutting out the tumor,”
he said. “We could be left without María Sabina, and that would make
us very sad.”
Since I obey the authorities, I refused to accompany those people.

I have suffered from poverty. My hands became callous from hard

work. My feet are covered with calluses as well. I’ve never used shoes
but I know the paths. The muddy, dusty, rocky paths have made the

soles of my feet hard.
Never has evil come from me, nor lies either. [ have always been
poor: poor I have lived and poor I will die. I have suffered. My two


THE LIFE / 53

[PAGE 076]

husbands died. Several of my children died from sickness or in tragedies. Some children died when they were very small; others were

born without life. I didn’t cure the little ones with my power, because
at that time I had a husband: relations with men invalidate the power

of the children.
There has been sadness in my heart. I have had to raise some of my
orphaned grandchildren. One of my grandsons died recently with a
swollen face. He worked as a laborer opening roads where the metal

contraptions go but he dranka lot of aguardiente, poor thing, he was
hardly twenty years old. Now I’m raising another little one. [like children. I like to caress them and talk with them. ... It’s necessary to take
good care of children. They should be baptized as soon as they’re
born, because children who aren't baptized die if a storm occurs. The
lightning bolts of the storm carry away the spirit of the children who

haven’t been baptized. Just last night I heard the noise produced by a
lightning bolt that fell nearby here, and today they notified me that a
baby had died in the house of a neighbor.
Catarino, Viviana, and Apolonia, the children of my first husband,
are alive and each of them has children. They
’ve withdrawn from me.
Family tasks keep them busy, surely. Of my second husband, only my

daughter Aurora is alive.
One of my sons, the brother of Aurora, named Aurelio, was murdered. Before the tragedy happened, the saint children warned me of

it. Those were the days when Wasson came to Huautla. It was a

Thursday, during a vigil, when I had a vision: a spotted cattle skin appeared, stretched on the ground to the right of where I was kneeling.
I stopped talking once I saw it, but I wasn’t intimidated despite the
fact that it was a putrid animal hide. It stunk. Afterward a man appeared near the skin, dressed like a fellow Mazatec, and he shouted:


54 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 077]

“I’m the one. I’m the one. With this one it will be five. With this one it
will be five I’ve murdered.”
A neighbor named Augustin had taken the mushrooms with me to
cure himself of pains he felt in the waist. I turned to him to ask:

“Did you see that man? Did you hear what he said?” Augustin answered:

“Yes, I saw him. He's the son of Señora Dolores.”
I remained very puzzled; I didn’t understand the words of the man

who had appeared in my vision. The following day I went on think-

ing about it without finding an explanation.

My son Aurelio was in Teotitlán del Camino Thursday night.

Three days after having seen the spotted skin, precisely Sunday at

noon, three men arrived at my little store; one of them asked for my
nineteen-year-old son Aurelio. My son had just arrived from Teoti-

tlán and was in the next room playing the guitar that he had recently

bought. One of the men, the son of the neighbor, Dolores, was the

same one who had appeared in my vision the Thursday before. My
son Aurelio invited them in to where he was and offered them aguar-

diente.

Later the visitors and my son, under the effect of the aguardiente,
sang, accompanying themselves with the guitar.
After they had sung several songs, there was a brief pause, and suddenly the son of Dolores insulted my son. When I looked in I saw that
man lift up his shirt and take a knife out of his belt which he immedi-

ately stuck in my son's throat.
I shouted desperately, seeing Aurelio fall on all fours near the door-

way to the store.

The killer, taking his knife, fled up the path in the direction of San
Miguel, followed by his companions.


THE LIFE / &5

[PAGE 078]

I threw myself, crazed from pain and anguish, onto the bloody

body of my son, while another of my sons and some friends went off
in pursuit of the killer whom they didn’t succeed in catching.
My poor Aurelio died right there where he fell. The following day

we buried him. The neighbors came to the wake. They drank aguardiente and played cards. I gave them coffee, bread, and cigarettes.
They put money next to the corpse; with that I paid the expenses of the
funeral. We buried him with music as the custom is.

As my son was being buried, I remembered the horrible vision of
that previous Thursday. Then I understood what the little things had

tried to warn me about: the skin, the son of Dolores shouting: “With
this one it will be five...” They were warnings ofthe pain that was ap-

proaching.

The men who murdered my Aurelio are now all dead as well.
They were bad people. The violence with which they acted turned
against them. One by one they were murdered by people who could
defend their lives in time. They must have had their reason for mur-

dering my son. I never found out what it was. My Aurelio drank
aguardiente but he wasn’t a violent man. For several months I cried
over the death of my son.

And even though I’m the clean woman, the principal clown
woman, evil has been done to me. Once they burned my house of

seven arm-lengths. It was built of wood with a thatched roof of dried
sugarcane leaves. I don’t know the reason why they did it. Some people thought it was because I had revealed the ancestral secret of our
native medicine to foreigners.

It’s true that before Wasson nobody spoke so openly about the children. No Mazatec revealed what he knew about this matter. But I
obeyed the síndico; nevertheless, I think now that if the foreigners had


S6 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 079]

arrived without any recommendation, I would still have shown them
my wisdom, because there is nothing bad in that. The children are the

blood of Christ. When we Mazatecs speak of the vigils we do it in a

low voice, and in order not to pronounce the name that they have in
Mazatec (?ntixitjo) we call them little things or little saints. That is what

our ancestors called them.

Other people believed that the motive for burning my house was
that the arsonist thought he was bewitched by me. I’ve already said,
I’m nota Sorceress. !’’m a Wise Woman. Still others said that it was the
envy malevolent people felt for my power. I never found out the true

motive that impelled them to do me harm. I don’t even know the
name of the arsonist, because I wasn’t interested in consulting the /it-

tle things about it.

Along with the house, my little store burned together with the

corn, beer, aguardiente, the toasted seeds, and cigarettes I sold, my
huipils and shawls. ... Christ! Everything. That day I wasn't at home.

It was empty. My children and I had gone to San Miguel to the fiesta

of Saint Michael to sell bread and candles. Upon returning we found
nothing but ashes. Without knowing who to turn to, I went into the

woods with my children. We ate wild tubers to subsist. In order not to
feel so cold we made tea from lemon and orange leaves. Dofia Rosaura
Garcia, a neighbor in Huautla whom I met in one of the visits of Mr.
Wasson, gave me a metal cup. Another person, I don’t remember

who, gave me a gourd bowl. That was of use to me.

Finally we went to live in the house of some relatives. And it was

necessary to begin anew. I worked a lot to build another house. This

one of adobe with a corrugated iron roof and I live in it to this day.

But not all has been suffering. I become content listening to music

on the salterio. I like music. The Principal Ones like it too. Now I re-


THE LIFE / 97

[PAGE 080]

member that when they gave me the Book, there was music. The
drum sounded, the trumpet, the violin, and the salterio. It’s because of
that I sing:


Lam the drummer woman
I am the trumpet woman
I am the woman violinist ...


I even had a salterio myself. I bought it and kept it in my house. I
bought it because in a vigil the children asked me: “Do you have a
salterio?” and I said, “No, no, I don’t have one.” After I bought my
salterio I answered them, “Yes, yes, I have a salterio.”
Those who knew how to play the salterio came to my house to play
it. At times I lent it, but one day suffering from lack of money, I sold
it. Now I know that the salterio is in Santa Cruz de Juárez.

And I like to dance the Mazatecjarabe. I dance it in my visions with
the Principal Ones. A Principal One is my partner. Afterward we

drink beer and we talk. But I also dance at the festivals of the stewards.
On one occasion I danced for the young Wise Man (Dr. Guerra) the
Orange Flower, the Mazatecjarabe, in the house of Doña Rosaura García, for them to see that I’m a woman who likes to enjoy herself. But I

don't only dance, I also cook. Once I prepared edible mushrooms for
the foreigners. I think that it was in the house of the teacher Herlinda
Martinez. In a big pot we cooked tyaincoa (white mushrooms), those
that grow on balsa trees. We made a hotzezmole seasoned with onions.
The foreigners ate until their stomachs were full.


17


The blonde people, men and women, arrive at my door. They call me
“grandma” or “Sabinita” from outside, so I go out and invite them in.


58 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 081]

To those who would like some, I give coffee; I don’t have anything
more to offer them. I think that some of the blonde ones feel good in

my house, as if it was theirs, because they spread their blankets or mats
on the ground and rest there. At this time of year the foreigners visit

me, but not all of them want vigils; they come as well in the dry season, when the children don’t grow. The foreigners take photographs
of me wherever I happen to be. They take photographs of me going

along the path with my load of corn on my back or resting on a rock
in the marketplace. I’ve become accustomed to all that. That reminds
me that somewhere in Oaxaca City, there’s an enormous photograph
of me working the earth with a hoe. The people who took that picture

of me bought my hoe and took it with them. I like people to give me
photographs of myself.

A lot of people come to visit me. Some say they are lawyers, others

say they have important posts in the city; they take my picture with
their objects, standing next to me themselves, and give me some coins
when they go. The people who make papers come; they bring their
Mazatec interpreters and ask questions about my life. I’m sorry I don’t
know Castilian or how to write; otherwise, I myself would say what I

know in the papers.
I know that Mr. Wasson has made records and books of my Language.


Some years ago, I was in Tehuacán for a month. Herlinda, a
teacher here in Huautla, accompanied me. My stay in Tehuacán was
to correct the translation that two foreign missionaries—named Florencia and George—had made of my Language. These missionaries

spoke our Mazatec language well, but I couldn't know if they exactly
understood my Language. If I could read what they wrote, I would
know. I realized that they had some difficulty understanding me.

With the priest, Alfonso Aragón, who was in Huautla for many


THE LIFE / 59

[PAGE 082]

years, I had a great friendship. This priest had a record on which my
Language was recorded; I found that out one day when he invited me

to listen to it. He told me that that record was wortha lot, that it was
priceless. I thanked him for his words. I had that record myself. I

imagine that it was Wasson himself who sent it to me so that I could
listen to it. He also gave me a record player. But some people came
from the city who said they were officials and took everything.
In the rainy season, when the little saints grow in our damp earth,
more foreigners come to my house. They continue to seek me but I
don’t give vigils for them any longer, because I’m too old. My body

gets weaker every day; I breathe with difficulty, I don’t go down to the
market in Huautla very often because I get very tired. There are times
when my body is so weak that I fall down on the path or inside the
house. I slip easily on the trails; I can’t lift the axe any longer with

whichI used to split kindling.
Now, whenI get together some money, I buy kindling and sell it to
the neighbors. My biggest dream these last years has been to have a little store where I could once again sell soap, cigarettes, and soda to the

passersby; but I’ve never had sufficient money.
More or less seven years ago, a Bishop came who wanted to take the

saint children. Y would have given them to the Bishop because I know
that Bishops are great too, but it wasn’t the season. It was March, and

the children grow in June, July, August, and September, although in

some cold zones they can be found during November and December,
but they can only rarely be obtained in April or March. If I have a pa-

tient in the season when the mushrooms can't be found, I resort to the
Leaves of the Shepherdess. Ground up and taken, they work like the
children. Of course the Shepherdess doesn’t have as much strength.
Other plants exist called Seeds of the Virgin. These seeds were created
by the Virgin. I don’t use the seeds, although some Wise Ones do.


60 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 083]

The Bishop advised me to initiate my children into the Wisdom I
have. I told him that the color of the skin or the eyes can be inherited,
including the manner of crying or of smiling, but the same can’t be

done with wisdom. Wisdom can’t be inherited. Wisdom is brought
with one from birth. My wisdom can’t be taught; that’s why I say that

nobody taught me my Language, because it is the Language the saint

children speak upon entering my body. Whoever isn’t born to be wise
can’t attain the Language although they do many vigils. Who could

teach a Language like that? My daughter Apolonia just helps me to

pray or to repeat my Language during the vigils. She speaks and says

what I ask her to, but she isn’t a Wise Woman; she wasn’t born with
that destiny. Apolonia is devoted to raising her children and attending
to her husband. She has grown children who live in Mexico City; they
work there and send some money to their mother. Apolonia and Viviana, my two daughters, will never be Wise Women. They will not

receive the Book from the hands of the Principal Ones. I, on the other

hand, am known in Heaven, and even the holy Pope knowsI exist.
Important people know that I have been born. In the vigils I hear
them say that I am the little aquatic Woman of the Book, that I am the

Woman of the Flowing Water. It’s true, that’s why I’m humble, but
I'm also “the woman who ascends.”

Not anyone can be wise. I make that clear to people. One day I got
angry with a school teacher. I got angry with her because she didn’t

want to give me some money that she should have given me. She as-

sured me that she didn’t have any money for me. I told her:

“You're a teacher and supposedly you teach children, but you want
to make fun of me; you think you’re superior because you know how
to read and write. You should know that I don’t feel insignificant before anyone. You know how to read and write thanks to the fact that

your parents sent you to school to learn. You had to go to school many


THE LIFE / 61

[PAGE 084]

days to know what you know; but you should understand that I
didn’t have to go to any school to be wise. We Wise Ones don’t need to
learn what we know in a school. Wisdom comes from birth. It comes

together with one when one is being born—like the placenta.”
The mushrooms have revealed to me how I was in the days when
I was in the womb of my mother: it’s a vision in which I see myself

turned into a fetus. An illuminated fetus. And I know that at the mo-

ment I was born, the Principal Ones were present. Also the heart of

Christ was there.
The foreigners brought me a foreigner with a big fat body. He
looked stupid. He didn’t say a word. I did a vigil because those people
who accompanied him wanted to see if the children could cure the

sick in the city where they live. The vigil was done in the house of
Cayetano Garcia.

The reaction of the stupid foreigner was that, past midnight, he
roared like a lion. Ay! it frightened me for a moment, but the Language gave me courage. When Guadalupe, Cayetano’s wife, heard the

roar, she took her newborn baby away. She got it out of there so that

the foreigner who roared wouldn’t catch the little baby’s spirit. It

sometimes happens that if the “luck” of a person goes out, that “luck,”
on becoming free, can enter into the body of another person nearby.
One gets better and the other gets sick. The man who roared could
have transferred his “luck” to the recently born baby. The stupid foreigner went back to his country, and I don’t know what’s become of
him since.

On a more recent occasion, a foreign couple asked me to give them
the little things because they had a five-year-old son who was suffering

from pimples on his head. The mother of the child and I both took the
children. In the course of the vigil, the child began to cry. He cried a lot.
Then it was revealed to me that the mother of the child was herself the


62 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 085]

cause of the child’s sickness. Christ! It scared me to be near that lady,
but I armed myself with courage and took a hold of her hair:
“Give me the spirit of the child,” I told her in Mazatec. “Give it to
me, give it to me,” I repeated, shouting in the lady’s ears while I pulled

hard on her hair.
Little by little the child stopped crying as the lady gave me back his

spirit. The truth was that she had a malevolent being inside her who
had enchanted the spirit of her own son.

At dawn the couple took their child. They said that they were
grateful for the cure. Although the pimples hadn’t disappeared from
the child’s head, his appearance was better now than the day before
the vigil. The lady said good-bye to me nicely ... but she never knew
that she herself had trapped her son’s spirit, causing the pimples on his
head.

18


For a time there came young people of one and the other sex, longhaired, with strange clothes. They wore shirts of many colors and

used necklaces. A lot came. Some of these young people sought me out

for me to stay up with the Little-One-Who-Springs-Forth. “We come in
search of God,” they said. It was difficult for me to explain to them that

the vigils weren’t done from the simple desire to find God, but were

done with the sole purpose of curing the sicknesses that our people
suffer from.
Later I found out that the young people with long hair didn’t need
me to eat the little things. Fellow Mazatecs weren’t lacking who, to get
a few centavos for food, sold the saint children to the young people. In

their turn, the young people ate them wherever they liked: it was the
same to them if they chewed them up seated in the shade of coffee
trees or on a cliff along some trail in the woods.


THE LIFE / 63

[PAGE 086]

These young people, blonde and dark-skinned, didn’t respect our
customs. Never, as far as I remember, were the saint children eaten

with such a lack of respect. For me it is not fun to do vigils. Whoever
does it simply to feel the effects can go crazy and stay that way temporarily. Our ancestors always took the saint children at a vigil presided over by a Wise One.
The improper use that the young people made of the little things
was scandalous. They obliged the authorities in Oaxaca City to intervene in Huautla ... though not all the foreigners are bad, it’s true. In
those days, some people arrived at my house who spoke Castilian and
dressed like people from the city. A Mazatec interpreter came with

them.

They entered my house without my inviting them in. Their eyes
fell on some saint children that I had ona little table. Pointing at them,
one of them asked:
“If I asked you for mushrooms, would you give them to me?”
“Yes, because I believe you've come in search of God,” I told him.
Another one, with an authoritarian voice, ordered me:
“You're coming with us to San Andrés Hidalgo. We're going there

in search of another person who, like you, dedicates himself to making people crazy.”

Meanwhile the other people who came in the group searched my
house everywhere. One of them pointed out to the rest of them a bottle that contained San Pedro. I said to them decisively:
“It’s ground tobacco mixed with lime and garlic. We call it San Pedro. It serves as a protection against evil spirits.”
“Is it smoked?” asked one of the men in a loud voice.
“No,” [ replied. “It’s a tobacco that’s rubbed on the arms of the sick,
and a little can also be placed inside the mouth.... Our ancestors used


64 THE LIFE

[PAGE 087]

it and they called it San Pedro. San Pedro has a lot of force. It helps to

get rid of sickness.”
Another one of them brought the papers that spoke about me. He

also showed the others the record and the record player that Wasson
had given me. They all turned around to look at me, and I said to myself: “I can’t talk Castilian with them, but they can see in those papers

who I am.” Afterwards, with a touch of gentleness, they helped me up
into a truck. I obeyed without offering resistance. I sat between the
man who drove and another one who sat next to the door. That sec-

ond one continued leafing through the papers in which photographs

of me appeared. I realized that from time to time he looked at me out
of the corner of his eye.

At no time did fear seize me although I understood that these peo-

ple were authorities and were trying to do me harm. We arrived at
San Andrés and there they arrested the municipal agent. Finally I
found out that they accused this man and me of selling a tobacco that
drove the young people crazy.
Afterward they took us to the town president’s office. A doctor

from the Instituto Indigenista spoke with the men. They talked a long

while. At the end the doctor told me:

“Don't worry, María Sabina, nothing will happen to you. We're

here to defend you.”
The men who arrested me also said:
“Forgive us. Go home and rest.”

But they took my San Pedro tobacco, the papers, my record, and
the object that made it sound. They set the municipal agent of San Andrés at liberty too.
Genaro Terán was the municipal president of Huautla. He told me

that a fellow Mazatec, whom the police were after originally, had ac-


THE LIFE / 65

[PAGE 088]

cused me of selling the young people a tobacco that drove them crazy
when they smoked it. The president revealed to me the name of my
accuser.


“President,” I said to Genaro Terán, “you know that our people

don't use the tobacco that this unfortunate claims I sell. They accuse
me of bringing gringos to my house. It’s the gringos who come in
search of me. They take photographs of me, they talk with me, they

ask me questions, the same I’ve answered many times before, and they
go after taking part in a vigil. None of these young people has gone
crazy in my house. But what is this all about? What harm have I done

to this man who accuses me? In all my life ’ve never had anything to
do with him. I know him, he’s the son of the late Josefina, our fellow

townswoman, but I’ve never done any harm to this individual. This
situation makes me mad. I’m ready to get into a fistfight with the

man. And if he wants to fight with a knife, I have mine. And if he
wants to fight with a pistol, I’ll see how I can get a hold of one. If af-

terward the judge sentences me to several years in jail, it won’t matter

in the least. Pll have sated my fury. I don’t like people to make fun
of me.”
“Don’t worry,” said Genaro Terán, “the case has been settled. You

aren’t guilty of anything. Go home, Maria Sabina.”
It was an infamy. In vain the man wears pants. His lie hurt me.

That's why I was ready to go to jail or die to prove I wasn’t guilty. That
man, maybe to get some money, sold the saint children and the tobacco

that drove the young people crazy.

Finally the authorities took that man to jail because his guilt was
proven.


The Huautla authorities explained to me that some foreigners
were bad, that they came to spoil our customs....

Two years later, Sefior Felicitos Pineda, the new municipal presi-


66 Y THE LIFE

[PAGE 089]

dent, sent me an official paper in which I was asked to present myself

before the public attorney in Teotitlán del Camino. It was then, Álvaro, that you took me to Mexico City. I lived in the house of some of

your relatives. And you took me toa man who writes in the papers and

who, like so many others, asked me questions in order to later ask the
authorities to leave me in peace. Also you took me to a very big house
where there were objects made by our ancestors, stones that indigenous hands carved hundreds of years ago. There were photographs

of Mazatecs there. What I liked the most was to listen to my voice
there, sounding incessantly. My wise Language in that place—I could

hardly believe it. | remember people came up to me to greet me. They
recognized me. I also remember a picture on the wall in which 1

seemed to see malignant beings. Beings with black wings. I think that
the demons are like that, but we Mazatecs don’t have an image of the

devil; for us he doesn’t have a face or form.
WhenI returned to Huautla, Felfcitos Pineda insisted thatI should

go before the Principal Ones in Oaxaca because they kept demanding
that I appear. A few days later I presented myself in that city. I was accompanied by one of the municipal authorities of Huautla, who ex-

plained to me that he would take me to a person, a Principal of great
authority in Oaxaca. With courage, without fear of anything, I let myself be conducted to the appointed place. The moment the person saw

me, he shouted my name and stood up. Smiling, he came up to me.
His attitude was the contrary of what I expected. He embraced me,
caressed my hair, and said:

“I wanted you to come to tell you that there is nothing against you.”
We talked a moment. On taking leave of him I thanked the person

for his words and right away returned to Huautla.

NowI have gone to the city on various occasions. In the first week
of July, the municipal authorities of Huautla themselves take me to


THE LIFE / 67

[PAGE 090]

the Guelaguetza festival in Oaxaca. I put on my best huipil and sit

there next to the Principal Ones. The nuns who are established in Hu-

autla once took me to Mexico City, and I went with them to various
churches. Among them we visited the Shrine where our Virgin Gua-

dalupe is.


19


During the vigil, the candles of beeswax that are used in the vigils

should be put out; the darkness serves as a background for the images
that one is seeing. It isn’t necessary to close one’s eyes, it’s enough to

look toward the infinite background of the darkness. There the Principal Ones appear seated around the table on which are all the things

of this world. The table displays the clock, the eagle, and the opossum....


There are different classes of children: those that grow in the detritus of sugarcane; those that grow in cattle excrement (called San

Isidro); those that grow on rotten trees (called “birds”); and those that

grow in the damp ground (called “landslide”). Those of the sugarcane
and the “landslide” varieties are stronger than the “birds” and San

Isidro.
The day that I did a vigil for the first time in front of foreigners, I

didn’t think anything bad would happen, since the order to give a vigil

for the blonde ones came directly from the municipal authorities at

the recommendation of the síndico, my friend Cayetano García. But

what was the result? Well, that many people have come in search of
God, people of all colors and all ages. The young people are the ones
who have been the most disrespectful. They take the children at any
time and in any place. They don't do it during the night or under the

direction of the Wise Ones, and they don't use them to cure any sickness either.


68 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 091]

But from the moment the foreigners arrived to search for God, the
saint children \ost their purity. They lost their force; they spoiled them.

From now on they won't be of any use. There's no remedy for it.

Before Wasson, I felt that the saınt children elevated me. I don’t feel
like that anymore. The force has diminished. If Cayetano hadn’t

brought the foreigners ... the saint children would have kept their
power. Many years ago when I was a child, they grew everywhere.
They grew around the house; those weren't used in the vigils, because

if human eyes see them they invalidate their purity and strength. One
had to go to distant places to search for them, where they were out of

reach of human sight. The person who was going to gather them had
to observe four days before of sexual abstinence. During those four
days it was prohibited to attend wakes in order to avoid the contaminated air of the dead.
The air that surrounds a corpse is impure; if people have wounds

and get near a wake, they can get gangrene. Another recommenda-

tion to the person sent to gather the saint children was that, preferably,
he or she should do it after taking a bath. These last few years, anyone
looks at the children, and no care is taken in gathering them.
The corpses of animals also produce gangrene. Anything decomposed is impure.
Some foreigners say that they come to cure themselves, and there’s
no lack of those who assure you that they’ve had operations without
being cured. After they’ve participated in a vigil with me, they thank
me and say they feel better. They say they have sugar in their blood. I
don’t know that sickness. I only know that the spirit is what gets sick.
And the spirit is what enriches: people who have made a fortune are
ones whose spirits have journeyed to the spiritual realm of wealth.
This is a place where there is fortune, greatness, and happiness. The
spirit arrives in this realm and robs what it can. If it succeeds in grab-


THE LIFE / 69

[PAGE 092]

bing some wealth, the person will come to have money or will attain
important posts. But the spirit should be careful not to be surprised
by the watchmen of the realm of wealth. If a watchman surprises a
spirit robbing wealth, he wounds him with a pistol. That’s how spirits receive the impact of a bullet. The spirit travels and the person
dreams it.

Tocure people who have fever, I sacrifice a chick, opening its breast
with the thumbs of my hands. I extract the heart and I give it, still

beating, to the sick person to eat. The chick’s corpse can be left in the
highest part of a bush; that way it doesn’t rot, it just dries out.
But I am old and sick. It’s true, life ends. And not only do I try to
cure the illnesses of some foreigners, but they have also tried to cure
my afflictions. They give me medicines, or people who say they are

wise ones in medicine from the city visit me and want to cut out my
tumor. I don’t pay much attention to them. But there’s always one
thing that stops me from taking the medicines or allowing them to cut

out the tumor. The truth is that I don’t want to take the foreigners’
medicine because I have my own damp medicine. One day a doctor
probed my body and left medicines for me to take, but I didn’t do it
because at that time many children were dying here in my section of
town. The cause of those deaths was that the elves, the masters of the
places where they opened the road that goes to San Miguel and that
passes near my house, charged for the profanation done to them in ruining the quietness of their places by taking many children. I didn’t
take the medicines because the sickness of a person who is taking
medicine can get worse if at the same time she goes to a wake or there
is a dead person next door. Those who know that my back hurts and
that it costs me work to swallow give me a massage. First a foreign
man and later a woman have given me massages. I think they were experts because afterward I felt relieved from the pains in my body. Not


TO \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 093]

all the foreigners are bad. Some bring me food or fruit and I thank
them. As for those who use my hearth to prepare a meal for me, I ask
them to pardon me because I don’t have spoons. They know that I’m

poor and that I live alone except for an orphaned grandson who keeps
me company.


The people who arrive at my door always bring me gifts. The governor of Oaxaca, Zárate Aquino, gave me two mattresses. He said that
a soft bed gives more comfort to the body than the hard ground where
mats are spread. To use the mattresses, I bought two wooden beds.
A young foreigner who wore multicolored clothes and sandals
wanted to give me a big, pretty dog. I told him that didn’t wanta dog,
that I didn’t have the money to maintain it. What was the animal going to eat? Shit? The young foreigner understood my situation and

took his dog with him.

] like songbirds. Two years ago I bought a chachalaca from Cañada
Mamey. I bought it for eighty pesos. I knew that a storm was coming
when the chachalaca began to coo; it was like a companion for me but,
Jesus Christ, they robbed it from me. Now I don’t have a chachalaca
to distract me.

20


But I have never seen the demons, although to arrive where I should
I pass through the dominions of death. I submerge myself and walk
down below. I can search in the shadows and in the silence. Thus I ar-

rive where the sicknesses are crouched. Very far down below. Below
the roots and the water, the mud and the rocks. At other times I ascend, very high up, above the mountains and the clouds. Upon arriving where I should, I look at God and at Benito Juárez. There I look
at the good people. There everything is known. About everything and
everyone, because there everything is clear. I hear voices. They speak


THE LIFE / 71

[PAGE 094]

to me. It is the voice of Little-One-Who-Springs-Forth. The God that
lives in them enters my body. I cede my body and my voice to the saint
children. They are the ones who speak; in the vigils they work in my
body andI say:

Because you gave me your clock
Because you gave me your thought
Because I am a clean woman

Because I am a Cross Star woman
Because [ am a woman who flies


I am the sacred eagle woman, says
I am the lord eagle woman, says
Tam the lady who swims, says
Because I can swim in the immense
Because I can swim in all forms
Because I am the launch woman
Because I am the sacred opossum
Because I am the lord opossum


I can be eagle, opossum, or woman clock. If] see them, I pronounce
their names.
The children turn into the Principal Ones. The Principal Ones ap-

pear as well in the visions of the initiates. On their sacred table, they
put clocks, papers, books, communion wafers, stars, dew, or eagles....
The Principal Ones ask the initiates:
“What type of Wise One do you want to be? Do you want the
Lords of the Mountains, the masters of the places, to guide you, or do
you want God the Christ to guide you?”
Then the initiate chooses and tells the Principal Ones what he or
she prefers. At that moment the initiate receives a Book that contains
the Language the person has chosen.
I decided for God the Christ. I made it known to the Principal


72 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 095]

Ones. The realm of the Principal Ones is the realm of abundance.
There, there is beer and music. When I’m in that realm I ask for beers

to be served to everyone. A Principal One serves the beer and then all
together we give a toast. There are times when it isn’t necessary to ask
for beers, they’re within reach of the hand. If music sounds, I dance as

a partner with the Principal Ones; and I also see that words fall, they
come from up above, as if they were little luminous objects falling

from the sky. The Language falls on the sacred table, falls on my body.
Then with my hands I catch word after word. That happens to me

when I don't see the Book.... And I sing:

With the Virgin Magdalene
With the Virgin Guadalupe
With Lord Santiago


Because I am the water that looks, says
Because I] am the woman wise in medicine, says
Because I am the woman herbalist, says
Because I am the woman of the medicine, says

Because I am the woman of the breeze, says

Because I am the woman of the dew, says


If during the vigil the mushrooms order me to suck out the sickness, I apply suction from where I am; it’s not necessary for me to put

my mouth against the sick part. And my Language says:

I come with my thirteen hummingbirds
Because I am the sacred hummingbird, says
Because I am the Lord hummingbird, says
Because I bring my clean sucker, says
Because I bring my healthy sucker, says
Because I bring my bamboo tube, says

My bamboo with dew, says
My fresh bamboo, says


THE LIFE / 73

[PAGE 096]

And it’s that...

Iam the woman Book that is beneath the water, says
I am the woman of the populous town, says
Tam the shepherdess who is beneath the water, says
I am the woman who shepherds the immense, says
I am a shepherdess and I come with my shepherd, says
Because everything has its origin
And I come going from place to place from the origin...


If I put tobacco on the arms of a sick one, then I say:

And I bring my San Pedro
Only with San Pedro
Only with San Pedro
What I work with
What I appreciate
What I work with
What I appreciate


Our Father cumulus cloud
Our Father Arosio'?
My Father! Father of the dew!
Father cultivator
Rich Father


The little saints tell me that I am the wife of the Lord of all the Mountains. That is whyI say:

Iam the Womanof the Flowing Water ...


They tell me that I am the woman of the oceans, that I bring wisdom in my hands. That [am the woman of Saint Peter and of Saint


12. Arosio is an indecipherable word. Maria Sabina says that it is “the name of a
place in the mountains.”


74 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 097]

Paul. ThatI am a child-woman but that I can speak with the heroes.
At times I cry but when I whistle nobody frightens me.

And it’s that in the middle is Language. On this shore, in the middle, and on the other shore is Language. With the mushroomsI see
God, then I sing:

Because I am the God Star Woman
The Cross Star Woman
Because I can swim in the immense
Because I am a well-prepared woman
Because I have my healed people
Because I have my healed priest
And I have my healed Bishop
I have my pure Bishop


Because our people are great
Because our people are excellent
Holy Father

Your house is big
Your house is a house of authority
Our Bishop
People of our heart
Good and clean priest
Good and clean Bishop
Good and clean candle
Good and clean nun
Because your Book exists
Your Book that I bring


Then...

I am the woman of the sacred Sun Stone, says
I am the woman of the lord Sun Stone, says
Tam the shooting star woman, says
I am the shooting star woman beneath the water, says


THE LIFE / 75

[PAGE 098]

I am the lady doll, says
I am the sacred clown, says
I am the lord clown, says
Because I can swim
Because I can fly
Because I can follow tracks...


The saint children cure; they cure fever, chills, yellow skin, or
toothache. They drive the evil spirits out of the body or rescue the
spirit trapped by an enchantment from the masters of the springs or
mountains. They heal those who have a “luck” because of sorcery.
They are taken and later one vomits the malignant spirit.

If I see papers on the rich table of the Principal Ones, I say:

I am the woman who writes ...


Language belongs to the saint children. They speak and I have the
power to translate. If I say that I am the little woman of the Book, that
means that a Little-One-Who-Springs-Forth is a woman and that she is

the little woman of the Book. In that way, during the vigil, I turn into
a mushroom—little woman—of the Book ...

If T am on the aquatic shore, I say:

Iam a woman who is standing in the sand ...


Because wisdom comes from the place where the sand is born.


21


I like to smoke cigarettes and to drink a little aguardiente, but I never
get drunk. I’m already old. I get tired quickly. My back hurts me and
my chest when I swallow my food. I don't talk much because my


76 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 099]

mouth has lost some teeth. I’m ashamed of being toothless, and it
makes it difficult for me to eat tough meat. I prefer to drink liquids.
Since quite a while ago, I live alone, my children have gone their
separate ways. Each one is devoted to his or her family. I’ve been left
by myself. My children hardly visit me. The foreigners who come to
see me distract me andI feel myself kept company by their presence.
My mother, Maria Concepción, died less than ten years ago. She
was ancient. She got sick and I tried to cure her. I did three vigils to
give her strength, but she herself realized that her end was near and
that there was no remedy.

A little before dying, she said to me:
“Resign yourself, Bi,’—that’s what she called me—“] thank you
for what you're doing for me, but it’s time for me to die. I don’t have
anything to reproach you for. On the contrary, I’m content with the attentions that you've given me in life. But I feel bad to leave you. What
will become of you after my death? I have confidence that God will
know how to take care of you...”
And I’m old too. That's why I ask God to bless me. I always ask for
grace each day ... I ask grace for the world and for myself.
I know that soon I’m going to die. But I’m resigned. I will die at the
moment God wills. Meanwhile let life follow its course; let us go on
living our time in this world that is Christ’s. This world of Christians
where there is also evil and discord; in this world where people fight
for anything.
I know the realm of death because I’ve arrived there. It is a place
where there is no noise, because noise, no matter how slight, is bothersome. In the peace of that realm, I see Benito Juárez.
The day that I die, what our custom dictates will be done. They
will twist the neck of a rooster that should die next to my corpse. The


THE LIFE / 77

[PAGE 100]

spirit of the rooster will accompany my spirit. The rooster will crow
four days after I have been buried; then my spirit will wake up and
will go forever to the realm of death. During the wake, my family will
place jars of water next to my lifeless head. It will be the water that I
will have to take with me so that I’m not overcome by thirst while I
journey to the realm of death. Inside my coffin, they will put seven
gourd seeds, greens, and some balls of the dead [a wild fruit from the
Mazatec mountains], all together in a little cloth bag. It will be the
food that I will take so that hunger doesn’t bother me on the way.
The women who go to my wake will make tezmole with the meat

of the sacrificed rooster. The tezmole will be eaten only by the reciter
of prayers and the people who are going to dig my grave. If I have sacred candles left over from my activities as a member of the sisterhood, they will put them next to my corpse. They will dress me in a
clean huipil and my best shawl. Between my hands will be placed a
palm cross that has been blessed.
We Mazatecs respect the dead. On the Days of the Faithful Dead,
in the first days of November, we make offerings of cempastichil flowers placed in arches of bamboo, and we put on the table fruit and food,
tamales with pork, coffee and bread.
A group of people form a band of masqueraders. Each one is called
a Bulging Navel. They disguise themselves with masks and the clothing of men or women, and go around to the music of violins, guitars,
and a loud drum. They visit the houses of the neighbors, singing:

Bulging Navel
Lime fruit
A favor I ask you for
One favor nothing more
Give me a little lemonade


78 \ THE LIFE

[PAGE 101]

In each house they dance in couples and eat tamales, drink coffee or
aguardiente.
And it’s that the Bulging Navels represent the souls who, it is said,
return to eat and to satiate their thirst for the food of this world.
For many years now, the people who want to disguise themselves
as Bulging Navels have come to my house. Here they transform themselves, I lend them the hats with their brims an arm’s length wide, woven from vines, that my grandchildren make for them. The rest of the
year I keep these big hats hanging from the roof of my house.

September 1975-August 1976

Translationfrom Spanish by Henry Munn


THE LIFE / 79

[PAGE 103]

THE CHANTS

[PAGE 105]

THE FOLKWAYS CHANT


This chant was recorded the night ofJuly 21-22, 1956, by V.P and R. Gordon

Wasson in the home of Cayetano Garcia ofHuautla de Jiménez, Oaxaca.


Iam a woman who shouts, says

Iam a woman who whistles, says
I am a woman who thunders, says

Iam a woman who plays music, says
I am a spirit woman, says

Iam a woman who shouts, says

Ah, our Jesus Christ, says

Ah, our Jesus, says

Our Saint Peter woman, says

Our Saint Peter woman, says

Our Apostle woman, says
Our shooting star woman, says

Our shooting star woman, says

Our whirling woman of colors, says
Our woman of the fields, says
Ah, our Jesus Christ, says
Our woman santo, says

Our woman santo, says


83

[PAGE 106]

Our woman santa, says

Our woman of light, says

Our woman santo, says
Our spirit woman, says

Ah, our Jesus Christ, says
Our spirit woman, says

Our woman of light, says

Iam a spirit woman, says

Iam a woman of light, says
Iam a woman of the day, says
Iam a clean woman, says

Tam a lord eagle woman, says

Ah, our Jesus Christ, says

Our respectable woman, says
Our admirable woman, says

Our woman of light, says

Our spirit woman, says

Ah, our Jesus Christ, says

Our woman who takes flight, says
Ah, our Jesus Christ, says

Our diviner woman, says

Our woman bowed down to the ground, says

Ah, our Jesus Christ, says
Our whirling woman of colors, says
Our Jesus Christ, says
She is a clock woman, says

She is a clean woman, says
Ah, Jesus Christ, says

She is a clean woman, says
She is a well-prepared woman, says


84 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 107]

She is a clean soul, says
She is a well-prepared soul, says
She is a well-prepared soul, says
She is a well-prepared soul, says

She is a well-prepared soul, says
Ah, Jesus Christ, says

Ah, Jesus, says
Ah, Jesus Christ, says

Ah, Jesus, says
You holy Father, says
You are the santo, says
You are the santa, says

Ah, it is certain and true

[The expression is hummed rather than spoken out loud.]

You are the santo, says

You are the santa, says
Those that are santo santo, those that are santa, those that are santo santa

santo santa, they are the ones that are called santo and santa, says

Santo they are called, says

Santa they are called, says


I am a woman born
I am a woman fallen into the world
Iam a law woman
J am a woman of thought

l am a woman who gives life

I am a woman who reanimates

I have the heart of Christ, says
I have the heart of the Virgin
I have the heart of Christ


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 85

[PAGE 108]

I have the heart of the Father
I have the heart of the Old One
It’s that I have the same soul, the same heart as the santo,
as the santa, says

You, my Mother Shepherdess, says
You, my Father, says
Living Mother, Mother who sways back and forth, says

Mother of sap, Mother of the dew, says
Mother who gave birth to us, Mother who is present, says
Mother of sap, Mother of milk, says
You, Mother of sap, Mother of milk, says
Green Mother, Mother of clarity, says
Budding Mother, Mother of offshoots, says
Green Mother, Mother of clarity, says
Ah, Jesus Christ, says
Ah, Jesus, says

Our Green Father, says

Our Father of clarity, says

Budding Mother, Mother of offshoots, says
Green Mother, Mother of clarity, says
Ah, Jesus Christ, says
Our woman santo, says

Our woman santa, says

Our spirit woman, says

Our woman of light, says

She is a woman of the day, says
Our woman of light, says
She is a woman of the day, says
She is a woman of light, says
She is a spirit woman, says


88 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 109]

Ah, Jesus, says

She is a woman of the light, says
She is a woman of the day, says
She is a woman who takes flight, says

Iam a woman who looks into the insides of things, says

I am a woman who investigates, says

Iam a woman who shouts, says
Iam a woman who whistles, says

Iam a woman who resounds, says
Iam a woman torn up out of the ground, says
l am a woman torn up out of the ground, says

l am a woman wise in medicine, says
I am a woman wise in herbs, says

Ah, Jesus Christ, says

She is a wolf woman, says

I am a woman wise in medicine, says
I am a woman wise in words, says

I am a woman wise in problems, says

Iam a hummingbird woman, says
Iam a hummingbird woman, says

Tama little colibrí? woman, says

I am a little colibri woman, says

Ah, Jesus Christ, says
Iam a clean woman, says

l am a well-prepared woman, says

Iam a Saint Peter woman, says

I am a Saint Peter woman, says


1. The common Spanish word colibri appears interchangeably with English “hummingbird” to distinguish two words or variants in the Mazatec, tontsin and ntsica.


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 87

[PAGE 110]

Iam an Apostle woman, says
I am an Apostle woman, says
I am a shooting star woman, says

Tam a shooting star woman, says
Cayetano
[He replies, “Yes. Work, work.”]

Iam a clean woman, says

Iam a well-prepared woman, says
I am a woman who looks into the insides of things, says
J am a woman who looks into the insides of things, says
Iam a woman who looks into the insides of things, says

Iam a woman who looks into the insides of things, says
Iam a woman of light, says
Tam a woman of light, says
I am a woman of light, says
Iam a woman of the day, says
I am a woman who resounds, says

I am a woman wise in medicine, says
Iam a woman wise in words, says

I am a Christ woman, says

Ah, Jesus Christ, says
l am a Morning Star woman, says

I am the God Star woman, says
I am the Cross Star woman, says
Tam the Moon woman, says

Iam a woman wolf, says
Father Jesus Christ, says
I am a woman of heaven, says

I am a woman of heaven, says
Ah, Jesus Christ, says


88 Y THE CHANTS

[PAGE 111]

I am the woman who knows how to swim, says
I am the woman who knows how to swim in the ocean, says
Because I can go to heaven, says
Because I can swim over the water of the ocean, says
Calmly, says

Without mishap, says
With sap, says

With dew, says

I am the woman of the great expanse of the waters, says
I am the woman of the expanse of the divine ocean, says
Because I can go up to heaven, says

Because I can go over the great expanse of the waters, says
Because I can go over the expanse of the divine ocean, says

Calmly, says
Without mishap, says

With sap, says

With dew, says


Santa santa santa santa santa santa santa santa santa santa santa

san santa san santa santa santo

ma mai ma ma ma ma ma ma ma ma ma ma

ma ma ma ma mai

Who are, who are, who are in the house of heaven
Christ

You Father, you Christ

Ki so so so SO $0 $000 SO SO si

You my Father, you my Father

You old One
Mother Shepherdess

Mother Conception


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 89

[PAGE 112]

Mother Patroness
Our Mother Mary of Mercy

You my Mary Conception

You my Mary Patroness

My Mother

All the santos, all the santos that exist
Mother of Mazatlan

Mother of the Sanctuary
You my Mother of Mazatlan

You my Father of the Sanctuary

My Mother of Ixcatlán

Our Virgin of Baby Water

All the Virgins

All the Fathers


Pa pa pai

Ki so so so (Papa Jesus)

You Mother, Mother, Mother who are in the house of heaven
You Mother who are in the house of heaven

In your beautiful world, says

In your fresh world, says

In your world of clarity, says

I am going there, says

I am arriving there, says

Because I have my palms, I have my hands, says

Because I have a tongue, I have a mouth, says
Because I have my palms, says

Because I have my hands, says
Because I have my tongue, says


90 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 113]

Because I am speaking poorly and humbly, I speak to you, you are
the only one, my Mother, to whom I can speak with humility,

you my Mother who are in the house of heaven, says
My Father who are in the house of heaven, says

I am going there, says

I am arriving there, says

I go there showing my Book, says
I go there showing my tongue and my mouth, says

I go there holding out my palms, my hands, says
I am a Saint Peter woman, says

Iam a Saint Peter woman, says

Iam an Apostle woman, says

I am a shooting star woman, says


He is the Father, says

He is the santo, says

She is the santa, says
He is the santo

She is the santa

It is certain, says

It is true, says

I look into the insides of things, says

I investigate, says

My clean Book, says

My well-prepared Book, says

My clean quill, says

My well-prepared quill, says
My clean staff, says

My well-prepared staff, says


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 9:

[PAGE 114]

It is true, says

Father, says

Cayetano Garcia, says
Strong people, says

He is a father, says

She is a mother, says

Jesus, says

Strong people, says
Great people, says
They are respectable people, says
They are admirable people, says
He also lightnings forth, says
He shouts, says
Cayetano Garcia, says

It is certain, says

It is true, says


Santo

Jesus, Jesus, Jesus

You Mother, you Mother, you Mother Shepherdess, says
Our Mother Conception
Our Mother Patroness

Our Mother Magdalene
You, doll Mother of the Rosary, says
And you, Father of the Sanctuary

Our Father
Green Father
Father of clarity

You my Mother of Mazatlan

Jesus Christ


92 x THE CHANTS

[PAGE 115]

Mother of Cuicatlán
Mother Patroness

Jesus Christ
Mother Conception
You doll Mother Guadalupe of Mexico and Oaxaca
Jesus Christ

Because it is the paper of the judge
It is the Book of the law
It is the Book of government

I know how to speak with the judge

The judge knows me
The government knows me

The law knows me
God knows me

So it is in reality

fam a justice woman

Jama law woman

It is not anything salted, it is not a lie
Jesus Christ


Ah, Jesu Kri
Iam a woman who shouts

I am a woman who whistles
Iam a woman who lightnings, says

Ah, Jesu Kri

Ah, Jesusi
Ah, Jesusi
Cayetano Garcia

[She calls his name to get his attention. “Yes,” he responds. “Work, work.”]

Ah, Jesusi


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 93

[PAGE 116]

Woman santa, says

Ah, Jesusi

[Here she begins humming and clapping, uttering the meaningless syllables
“so” and “st.” Throughout the entire passage thatfollows she goes on clapping
rhythmically in time to her words.]

hmm hmm hmm

hmm hmm hmm
hmm hmm hmm

hmm hmm hmm
hmm hmm hmm
SO SO SO SI

hmm hmm hmm
hmm hmm hmm

Woman who resounds
Woman torn up out of the ground
Woman who resounds

Woman torn up out of the ground

Woman of the principal berries, says
Woman of the sacred berries, says
Ah, Jesusi

Woman who searches, says
Woman who examines by touch, says
ha ha ha
hmm hmm hmm

hmm hmm hmm

She is of one word, of one face, of one spirit, of one light, of one day
hmm hmm hmm
Cayetano Garcia
[He answers, “Yes...” She says, “Isn't that how?” He responds, “Yes, that’s it.”
She says, “Isn’t that it? Like this. Listen.”]


94 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 117]

Woman who resounds

Woman torn up out of the ground

Ah, Jesusi

Ah, Jesusi

[In the background the man laughs with pleasure.]

Ah, Jesusi
Ah, Jesusi

Ah, Jesusi

hmm hmm hmm
SO SO SO


Justice woman

hmm hmm hmm

[“Thank you,” says the man.]

Saint Peter woman

Saint Paul woman
Ah, Jesusi
Book woman

Book woman

Morning Star woman

Cross Star woman

God Star woman

Ah, Jesusi
Moon woman

Moon woman

Moon woman

hmm hmm hmm
hmm hmm hmm

Sap woman

Dew woman

[The man urges her on. “Work, work,” he says.]


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 95

[PAGE 118]

She is a Book woman
Ah, Jesusi
hmm hmm hmm

hmm hmm hmm
SO SO SO


Lord clown woman
Clown woman beneath the ocean
Clown woman
[The other words are unintelligible.]

Ah, Jesusi

hmm hmm hmm
hmm hmm hmm
so so SO


Woman who resounds

Woman torn up out of the ground
hmm hmm hmm
Because she is a Christ woman
Because she is a Christ woman
ha ha ha
SO SO SO


SO SO SO


so SO SO


Whirling woman of colors

Whirling woman of colors

Big town woman

Big town woman

Lord eagle woman
Lord eagle woman
Clock woman

Clock woman


96 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 119]

ha ha ha

SO $0 SO

so SO SO


so SO SO


[“That’s it. Work, work,” exclaims the man.]

hmm hmm hmm

hmm hmm hmm
so SO SO


hmm hmm hmm

so $0 SO


so so SO


si si si

Si Si si

$1 $1 si

so sa sa


si Si S1

so sa sa sa


hmm hmm hmm
hmm hmm hmm

hmm hmm hmm
.oon.o.


[The end of “so” is drawn out into a long tone. She calls, “Cayetano Garcia.”
“Work, work,” he replies. She goes on humming, clappingfaster andfaster.
“Cayetano García,” she calls again, in between her humming, almost as if
she were animating him, bringing him to himselfwith her clapping. “Work,


You my Father
You Christ
You Christ
Along the path of your soles, along the path of your feet


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 97

[PAGE 120]

Where you triumphed, Christ

Where your saliva is, where your sweat is, Christ
That is why I am searching for the path of your soles,
that is why I am searching for the path of your feet
Where you stopped, Christ

Where you stopped, Father

Where you stopped, Old One

You are a respectable Father, an admirable Father
You are a respectable Mother, an admirable Mother

You are a green Father, a Father of clarity
You are a green Mother, a Mother of clarity

You are a budding Mother, a Mother of offshoots
You are a green Mother, a Mother of clarity


Father Jesus Christ

We go to you speaking poorly and humbly, holding out

our hands to you in supplication
With all of the santos
With all of the santas

Because there are santos, because there are santas

Because there are santos, because there are santas
All the clean spirits

All the good souls
It is a clean soul
It is a well-prepared soul

It is a respectable soul

It is a radiant soul
Greenness and sap
Flower of the dew
Flower in bud


98 Y THE CHANTS

[PAGE 121]

Translucent flower
Flowering flower
Respected flower
Ah, Jesus Christ

It is a flower of fresh water

A flower of clear water
Fresh flower
Translucent flower
Because there are clean flowers where I am going
Because there is clean water where I am going

Clean flower, clean water
Fresh flower
Growing flower
Mine that is increasing

Green mine

Budding mine

There is no wind, there is no spit, there is no garbage, there is no dust
There is no whirlwind, there is no weakness in the air

That is the work of my santos, that is the work of my santas
Ah, Jesus Christ
Ah, Jesusi

Ah, Jesusi

Ah, Jesus Christ
He is the santo

Ah, she is the santa
Ah, he is the santo

Ah, she is the santa

Ah, he is spirit
Ah, he is spirit
Ah, it is light


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 99

[PAGE 122]

Ah, it is dew
Ah, it is sap

Ah, it is sap
Ah, it is greenness

Jesus Christ

Jesus

Jesus Christ
There is no resentment, there is no rancor, there is no insult, there is

no anger


It is not a matter of insults, it is not a matter of lies
It is a matter of life and well-being, of lifting up, of restoring
[“Thank you,” says the man.]


HERE BEGINS THE SECOND SIDE OF THE RECORD.


You are a man of business, a man of recompense, a man born and
fallen into the world, a man of cacao now, you are a man of

money, a man with a green staff, a staff of clarity, a respectable
man, an admirable man
All the santos

All the santas

Lord Saint Peter
Lord Saint Paul
Peter Scepter

Peter Martyr

With all of the santos, with all of the santas
As many santos as there are
Cayetano Garcia

As many santas as there are
I mention them all


100 THE CHANTS

[PAGE 123]

The path of your soles, the path of your feet
Path of sap

Path of dew
Holy Father
In the name of the Son and the Holy Spirit

[“Have the people gone to sleep?” she asks Cayetano, meaning Wasson and his
companions. “What?” he says. “Have the people gone to sleep?” “No, they’re still
awake.” “Ah, they're awake.” She then resumes singing in the background, and
Cayetano asks the visitors in Spanish, “You people are still awake, aren't you?”
“Yes, of course,” someone answers. “And the other one?” asks Cayetano.]

With all the santas, with all the santas, says
I will prepare as many santos and santas as there are

I will prepare thirteen lord eagles
I will prepare thirteen lord opossums

I will prepare thirteen lord whirlwinds of colors
I will prepare thirteen Saint Peters, Saint Pauls

Peter Scepter

Peter Martyr, says

As the Holy Trinity did and disposed

The path you God the Father followed, the path you God the Son
followed, the path the Holy Spirit followed
Thus is the path he formed and traced with his clean thought,

his clean heart
Mountains were formed, ridges were formed

So did he think it out, he examined it, gazing into the heavens and
into the earth, says

We are looking for the path of your palms, the path of your hands,

Christ, says
You my Father

With everything in the world

Virgin Mother Shepherdess


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 101

[PAGE 124]

Mother of the harvest

Rich Mother
Mother who gives well-being

Green Mother
Powerful Mother

Mother Patroness
Mother Conception
Mother Patroness, says
Jesus

Our doll Virgin Water of the Marketplace

Our doll Virgin under the earth
Woman for whom things multiply, woman for whom things multiply
Woman of paper blackened with smoke, woman of paper blackened

with smoke, says

Where the Mother was born
Where the Nun was born, says
Where the good and clean Archbishop was born, says

Where the good, clean Father was born, says
Where the clean ocean is, says
Holy Father, says
There we are arriving, says

If there is any evil dream or nightmare, we are going to get rid of it

In the name of the Son and the Holy Spirit
May this sickness of weakness be gotten rid of
Whether it’s whirlwind, whether it’s wind, says
Whether it’s wind, says

Holy Father, says
May the santo come, says

May the santa come, says


102 THE CHANTS

[PAGE 125]

May Lord Saint Peter come, says
May Lord Saint Paul come, says

May there come thirteen lord eagles, says
May there come thirteen sacred eagles, says

May there come thirteen lord whirlwinds of colors, thirteen sacred
whirlwinds of colors, says

May there come thirteen lord big towns, thirteen sacred big towns, says
Because I have my thirteen women who dive beneath the great waters
Because I have my thirteen women who dive into the divine ocean, says

I have my thirteen children scattered beneath the divine ocean, says

Holy Father

With all the santos, with all the santas, says
As did the santo wise in medicine, says

As did the santo wise in herbs, says

Holy Father, says
You turned into medicine, says
You turned into herbs, says

You are the one wise in medicine, says
You are the medic, says
When we are sick you doctor us, says

You treat us with herbs, says

There is no resentment, says
There is no rancor, says
There is no insult, there is no anger, says
The path of business, says
The path of recompense, says
The path of work, says

With all the santos, as many santos and santas as there are
As the Father of the harvest did, rich Father


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 103

[PAGE 126]

Father of the harvest, rich Father, says

I supplicated him, I begged him, searching for the medicinal flower,
searching for the herbal flower


SO SO SO SO SO SOOO


SO SO SO SO SO SO $000


ki so so so

ma ma ma mai

ma ma mai
kikikikikikokai

ko ka ko ko ko ko ka ki ki ki ki Kristo
siempre siempre falways, always]

sien sien sien sien sien siempre

sien sien sien sien siempre

sien sien sien sien sien siempre

alalal

ma ma mai

ki ki ki

ma ma mai

ma ma mai

ki so so soi

I am asking for blessing, for the blessing oflife and well-being
What I am asking about is the vine, the root, the offshoots, the buds
Is all the babies and the children
It is for them that I ask blessing
Receive my words, my Mother who are in the house of heaven
Mother Shepherdess

What I ask for is goodness, Mother Shepherdess
You my Mother Shepherdess
Mother of sap, Mother of the dew


104 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 127]

Mother of sap, Mother of milk

Mother of the Harvest, rich Mother
Mother who gives well-being, Mother who is present
Christ

You Father Christ
Jesus Christ

Let us go with freshness and clarity
Let us go with light and in the light of day
I think one can live poorly, that one can live humbly, I think one can

speak, I think one can speak, I think one can dress poorly


Mother of good palms

Mother of good hands

Your words are medicine

Your breath is medicine

That is the work of our flower with sap, our flower of the dew

Our budding children, our sprouting children
Holy Father

You my Father and you Mother who are in heaven

You Christ and you my Father
We are going to doctor, we are going to treat with herbs

That is the work of our budding children, our sprouting children
That is the work of our flower of sap, our flower of the dew
That is the work of the little lord colibri, the little sacred colibri
That is the work of our hummingbird children

That is the work of our hummingbird
That is the work of our little colibri, our little lord colibri, little
sacred colibri

It is the same as the mountain of medicine, the mountain of herbs
Cold herbs, herbs of clarity


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 105

[PAGE 128]

Medicinal herbs, sacred herbs
I bring with me thirteen medics beneath the water
I bring with me thirteen medics beneath the ocean
They are children who resound, children torn up out of the ground

Holy Father
You Santo

You Santa

Ah, Jesus Christ
You Santo

[Massage her” she tells Cayetano.]

Dew woman, says

Fresh woman

Woman of clarity, says
Woman who prays to heaven
Moon woman

Woman of the day, says

With all the santos, says
With all the santas, says
Holy Father, says

Mother Shepherdess, says

Mother Conception, says
Now that you are in your place and present

Woman of sap, woman of the dew, says

Our doll Mother of the Rosary, says
With all the santos, says
Lord of the Sanctuary, says
Our doll Virgin of Cuicatlán, says
Our doll Virgin of Mazatlán, says

With all the santos

Lord Saint Matthew, says


108 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 129]

You who hold the paper in your hands, you who at this moment
hold the Book in your hands, says
With as many santos, with as many santas as there are santos

With as many santos, as many santas as there are

Now we bow ourselves down before you, speaking with humility
beneath your shadow, speaking with clarity, says
We speak with tenderness, we speak with clarity, says

We speak with humility, we speak with offshoots, says

We speak with freshness, we speak with clarity, says

Fresh are our words, fresh our breath, fresh our saliva

Words are medicine
Medicine is the breath

Clean saliva, well-prepared saliva, says

Illumination of life, illumination from on high, says

Illumination of the sap, illumination of the dew, says
Holy Father, says

God the Son, says

God the Holy Spirit

Lord Saint Peter

Lord Saint Paul
Peter Scepter
Peter Martyr, says

[“Isn’t it so?” she asks Cayetano. “It is,” he says.]

Our doll, our Virgin

My Father

Christ
It is your fresh flower, your flower of clarity, my Father

It is your flower of light, your flower of the day, my Father

Your poor flower, your humble flower, my Father
Why are you so poor and humble?


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 107

[PAGE 130]

It is not in vain that you bowed down and inclined yourself

We, too, will go on being poor and humble
You, my Father

You, Christ

You, Lord Saint Peter
Our Apostle beneath the water
Our Apostle beneath the ocean
Our Saint Peter

Our Saint Paul
I will go on being poor, my Father

I will go on being humble, Christ

It is your blood that I want you to give me, my Father, your heart is
what I want you to give me
Give me your words, Christ, your saliva, my Father who are in the
house of heaven

I will follow the path of your hands, I will follow the path of your feet,
my Father
Where you stopped, my Father

Where you stopped, Christ

There I am going to leave my Saint Peter woman, my Saint Peter man

Accompany me, Lord Saint Peter, Lord Saint Paul


Mother Patroness

You Heart of Jesus

Jesus Christ
I have your staff of sap, your staff of the dew
I have your good and clean Bishop

I have paper
I have my Book

I am known in the house of heaven


108 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 131]

You know me, my Mother
God, my Father, knows me
Jesus Christ, you will always, always reign in the house of heaven
Jesus

Heavenly Mother

I bring your medicinal herbs, your sacred herbs in my palms, in my
hands

There is no resentment, there is no rancor in what I have in my

palms, in my hands
It is tenderness and clarity

It is life and well-being

It is buds and sprouts, may they grow, that is what I ask you for,

Jesus Christ

The path of the years, the path of the days, that is what I ask you for,
my Father

[Thank you,” says the man.]

Mother Patroness
Jesus

My Mother Mary

Jesus

I go along the path of your palms, the path of your hands, the path of

your soles, the path of your feet
I am going there, I am arriving there
There is no resentment, there is no rancor; there is no insult, there is
no anger; there is no garbage, no dust; there is no whirlwind,
there is no wind

That is the work of the santo santo santo santo santo santai
That is the work of the santo santa santo santa santo santa santo

santo santo santo

San santo santo santa santo


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 109

[PAGE 132]

Santo santai

Ah, María

Ah, Jesus
Jesus, Jesus

Father
Ma ma ma Mother Mary
Jesus

Jesus Christ, Christ, Mother Mary, Jesus
You, Mother Mary
Santo santo santo santo

Tam going to receive there in the path
I am going to receive the enchantment
I am going to receive his light, his day
The path of his soles, the path of his feet
Jesus

Santo santo santo

san san santo

Lord Saint Peter
Lord Saint Paul
Santo santo santo santo

Christ
Mother Shepherdess
Mother Conception
Mother Patroness
Jesus Christ
You Mother Patroness
You Mother Shepherdess

Mother of the harvest, rich Mother
She is a green Mother, a Mother of clarity
Christ


110 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 133]

Mother Conception

Mother Patroness
You, Jesus Christ

Mother Shepherdess
Mother Conception

Mother Patroness

Only you, Mother
Santo

You, Christ
You, Holy Child of Atocha

You, Holy Isidro

Father of the harvest, rich Father

He is a green Father, a Father of clarity
Santo santo santo

All the santos, all the santas
Christ
You, Mother Conception

Mother Patroness
Our Mother Mary of Mercy

Our Mother Mary of Mercy
Holy Child of Atocha
You, Moon

You, Cross Star woman, Principal Star woman
You, Moon

You, Morning Star woman, Principal Star woman, Cross Star woman

All the santos
You, my Father

You, Old One
You come here, you come to arrange things, my Father Christ
As you took breath, my Father


THE FOLKWAYS CHANT / 111

[PAGE 134]

As you rested, my Father

So we are going to rest, to take breath

With freshness, with clarity, with light, with the day
Christ
Mother Guadalupe

Mother Conception
Mother Patroness

Mother Nativity

Mother Conception


I am a diviner woman, says

I am a woman who searches, says

Ah, Jesus Christ

Tam a lord eagle woman, says

I am an opossum woman, says

I am a woman who sees, says

Ah, Jesus Christ

I am a clean woman, says

She is a woman who resounds, says
She is a woman torn up out of the ground, says
I am an Apostle woman beneath the water, says
I am an Apostle woman beneath the ocean, says

I am a shooting star woman, says

I am a woman like a wolf, says

[“You see?” she says to Cayetano. “Yes,” he answers. “Isn't that how?” “Yes,
it is.” Then after a pause she says, “What's so difficult about doing that?”]


Translationfrom Mazatec into Spanish by Alvaro Estrada
and Eloina Estrada de Gonzdlez. English translation by

Henry Munn with the assistance of Nati Estrada.


112 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 135]

THE 1970 SESSION


THREE EXCERPTS


This session was given by Maria Sabina and her niece Maria Aurora in July 1970

in the house of Celerino Cerqueda and his wife Julia ofHuautla de Jiménez, Oaxaca.

The chants were recorded by the host, and no foreigners were present.


[am a saint woman, says

[am a trumpet woman, says

Iam a drum woman, says
Iam a woman born, says
Tam a woman fallen into the world, says
That is your Book, says
That is your Book, says
Book of sap, says
Book of dew, says
Fresh Book, says
Book of clarity, says
Woman of sap, says
Lord of good will, says
Father of the dew, says
Father of the harvest, says

[PAGE 136]

Rich Father, says
Green Father, says

All powerful Father, says
God the Son and Holy Spirit
There is no problem
Her children are crying, her babies are crying, says
Iam a woman who looks into the insides of things and investigates, says

I am a woman of sap, says
Iam a woman of the dew, says
Iam a green woman, says

I am a woman of clarity, says
There is nobody who frightens us, says

There is nobody hovering around, says
Tam a woman who cleans, says
That is your Book, says
That is your paper and your Book, says
One and only Father, says

Reasonable Father, says
Father of the dew, says
Fresh Father, says

Father of clarity, says

Holy Father

Beneath the gaze of our Father, says
Beneath the gaze of the person with the staff and the baton of authority,
says


Yes it’s certain, says

It’s true, says

Iam a woman who looks into the insides of things and investigates, says

The tracks of his hands and his feet, says
The path of sap and dew


114 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 137]

The path of freshness and clarity

The path of goodness and the day

I am the one who examines the tracks of the feet and the hands, says
Holy Father, says

It is nothing bad, says

It is with good will, says

It is only in order to enliven and renew life
These are my babies, says

These are my children, says
They are my buds, says

They are my offshoots, says
I am only asking, examining, says

About his business as well

I begin in the depths of the water

I begin where the principal sounds forth, where the sacred sounds forth
I feel very good, says

Healthy
My race is very good, says

What is of value is the ceremony, what is of value is gold, says

Father, says

Santo, says

Santa, says

Santa, says

Tam a woman who looks into the insides of things and investigates, says
The tracks of the feet, says
The path of sap and dew, says

In this way it is taught to the children, says
In this way it is taught to our people, says
Where their enjoyment is, their well-being, says

It is health and life, says


THE 1970 SESSION / 115

[PAGE 138]

We don’t want anyone to break our bond and our root, says
Root of sap and of dew, says
Root of greenness and clarity, says


I am a little launch woman, says
I am a little shooting star woman, says

I am the Morning Star woman, says
I am the First Star woman, says

Iam a woman who goes through the water, says
Iam a woman who goes through the ocean, says
I am the great Woman of the Flowing Water, says

I am the sacred Woman of the Flowing Water, says
Where our people are, our powerful people, our important people, says
Our people of reason, says

Holy Father, says

Our Archbishop of Clean Water, says
Our Nun of Clean Water, says
Our Member of the Sisterhood of Clean Water, says
Where you were strewn, Sainted Pope, says
All powerful, one and only Father, says
Father of sap and dew, says


I am a shooting star woman, says

I am a trumpet woman, says

I am a drum woman, says

l am a woman violinist, says


116 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 139]

Because I am a woman of letters, says
Because I am a Book woman, says

That is your Book, says

Where our Principal Ones are, says

Our people of reason, says

Beer of value, says
Beer, says

My one and only Father, says

Beer that my friends drink, says

Beer that the Archbishop drinks, says
And my Nun also, says
My member of the Sisterhood, says

Archbishop of Clean Water, says
The sainted Pope, says

There I am, says
That is your paper, says

That is your Book, says

Because we are the children of God, says
We are the children of Christ, says


I am a woman general, says

I am a woman corporal, says

Holy Father, says

I ama woman corporal, says

Iam a lawyer woman, says
A woman of transactions, says
Pm not afraid, says
I’m going to demonstrate my courage, says

Benito Juarez, says

Our Mother Guadalupe, says


THE 1970 SESSION / 11

[PAGE 140]

Our Mother Magdalene, says
Our Holy Father, says

I am a woman general, says
I am a sergeant woman, says

I am a corporal woman, says
I am a woman commander, says

Iam a lawyer woman, says

J am a woman of transactions, says

It comes from the great expanse of the waters, from the expanse
of the divine sea, says
I go up to heaven, says
Beneath the gaze of your glory, says

There is your paper and your Book, says
That is the best quill, says

That is the best Book, says

Translationfrom Mazatec into Spanish by

Eloina Estrada de González.

English translation by Henry Munn.


118 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 141]

THE MUSHROOM VELADA


THREE EXCERPTS


Excerpts here arefrom the curing session performed by Maria Sabina

on the night of July 12-13, 1958, at the house of Cayetano Garcia, sindico

ofHuautla de Jiménez. She was supported on this occasion by her daughter

María Apolonia, herselfa curandera, and by Aurelio Carreras, whom

Wasson describes as “a genuine curandero [but] on a much humbler level.”


Woman who is more than human am I, he says,'

Lawyer woman am I, he says,

Woman of affairs am I, he says, yes, Jesus Christ says,
Yes, Jesus says, I only throw about, I only scatter, he says,

Woman of Puebla am I, he says,
Woman with “balls” am I, he says,

Important eagle woman am I, he says,
Clock woman am I, he says,


1. The repeated “he says” here represents the Mazatec particle -tso, a grammatical
marker indicating direct quotation of another person or being. Elsewhere in these
pages Henry Munn translates it simply as “says,” since there is no indication here of
gender or number. [7.r.]

[PAGE 142]

I am going to show my valor, he says,
I am going to show my valor, he says,
Even before your eyesight, your glory, he says,
Woman who waits am I, he says,

When I shall show my valor, he says,
Iam a woman who is more than human, he says,
Yes Jesus Christ says, yes Jesus says,
No one frightens me, he says,
No one is two-faced to me, he says,
Yes Jesus says, yes Jesus says,

Music woman am I, he says,
And drummer woman am I, he says,

Woman violinist am I, he says,

Yes, Jesus Christ says,

Woman of the principal star am I, he says,
Woman of the star of God am I, he says,

Woman of the star of the [Southern] Cross, he says,
Launch [canoe] woman am I, he says, yes Jesus Christ says,
Woman chief of the “clowns” am I, he says, yes Jesus Christ says,

No one frightens me, he says, no one is two-faced to me, he says,

Woman who is more than human am I, he says,
Lawyer woman am I, he says,

And I am going to the sky, he says, yes Jesus Christ says,
Woman [male] saint am I, he says,

I am going to burn the world, he says, yes Jesus Christ says,

I am going to burn the world, he says, yes Jesus Christ says,
Woman of shooting stars am I, he says,

And Saint Peter woman am I, he says,
Whirling woman of the whirlwind am I, he says,
Woman of a sacred, enchanted place am I, he says, yes Jesus Christ says,


120 Y THE CHANTS

[PAGE 143]

Woman [male] saint am I, he says, spirit woman am I, he says,
Illuminated woman am I, he says, yes Jesus says,
I am going to burn the world, he says


2


for Cayetano Garcia


Head of the house, chief of the shade,

Manager of the wind, chief of the thunder,

With calmness, Cayetano Garcia,
Mother Guadalupe, Mother princess,

Woman admired, brilliant woman,
As with calmness, with care,

Whose name is Cayetano García,

You, little Guadalupe,
Woman of the house, woman of the shade,
Woman who walks with the heel, woman of the patio,
Thus you are head of the house, head of the shade,

Chief of the door, chief of the patio,
Cayetano García ..., little Guadalupe ...,
Father Jesus Christ,
My thoughts are satisfied.

“Little” Cayetano García, “little” Guadalupe ...

As my heart is satisfied,
I am poor, Iam humble, Father,
Iam poor, Iam humble, Christ,
I go with my heel, with my feet,


THE MUSHROOM VELADA / 121

[PAGE 144]

I go on my kneesof sin,

On my knees of tortillas, on my knees of water,
With calmness, with breast milk,
I am going all the way there before stopping, my patron Mother,
Lam going to the sky ... Jesus, Jesus, Father ...
There I go always, there I go always,
He who is called Cayetano García, mother Guadalupe,
Look my hands are placed, look my hands are placed,
Look I go on my knees of tortillas, knees of water,
On my knees of sin, Father,

Look I am praying even before your eyes, Father.


3


A Duet, Mother and Daughter


MARÍA SABINA

Christ! ... before your eyes, before your mouth,
We speak with humility, with beseechings to Christ.

MARÍA APOLONIA

Oh Mary, oh most holy Mary,
We will only thunder, he says, we will only sound, he says,
We will only shout, he says, we will only whistle, he says.

MARÍA SABINA

Saint Peter, Saint Paul.

MARÍA APOLONIA

For there is the medicine flower, he says,
The medicinal leaves, he says.


122 \ THE CHANTS

[PAGE 145]

MARIA SABINA

The flower of breast milk, the dew flower.

MARÍA APOLONIA

Go with thirteen hummingbirds, he says, lord of the birds,

he says, lord of the holy birds, he says.

MARÍA SABINA

Fresh flower, tender flower,

MARÍA APOLONIA

lam going...


MARÍA SABINA

Go with breast milk, with dew,

MARÍA APOLONIA

Even unto the sky, he says, unto glory, he says.


MARÍA SABINA

María Apolonia!


MARÍA APOLONIA

You Father whose the sky is,

You papa whose the world is, oh Mary,
Woman who sounds forth,

Powerful woman who sounds forth.

Translation by George M.

and Florence H. Cowan


HE MUSHROOM VELADA / 123

[PAGE 147]

INTRODUCTION TO THE LIFE


OF MARIA SABINA

ALVARO ESTRADA


It was not only the gold and natural riches of Anáhuac, the culture

and art of Mesoamerica that astonished the Spanish priests and con-

quistadores who arrived in this land in the sixteenth century: the na-

tive medicines (comprising a “marvelous collection” of hallucinogenic
plants) were also the objects of attention, study, and condemnation on
the part of European writers, botanists, and doctors during the colo-

nial epoch in Mexico.

First the repressions exercised by the Tribunal of the Holy Office
against those who resorted to the ingestion of ololiuhqui, peyotl, or teo-

nanácatl (“seeds, cactus, or mushrooms,” all of them hallucinogenic),

and then centuries of condemnations from the pulpit forced native
doctors to shift the rites and worship of the magical plants onto a private, even secret, plane.

In our day, those “demoniacal” practices of the Indians have been
disappearing with the advance of Western culture in Mexico. The

same phenomenon has extinguished similar customs among other
Asiatic and American peoples. Yet in Huautla—a town situated in

the Sierra Mazatec of the Mexican state of Oaxaca—investigators
have found a mine for the study of this type of native practice. There

the mushroom—to which the investigators have added the adjective


127

[PAGE 148]

“hallucinogenic”—is central to the indigenous religion in which it is
said that the ancient teonanácatl —“Flesh of the Gods” in the pre-Hispanic epoch—not only has the power to cure all sicknesses but gives
the mystical force that creates the elevated, esoteric language of the

shaman.
During trance, the Wise One (the name the Mazatecs give to the
shaman) speaks, invoking tribal as well as Christian deities (testimony

to the inescapable syncretism of our time).

Did anyone write about the hallucinogenic plants and their use before their recent rediscovery? The ethnomycologist R. Gordon Wasson writes: “The references that we find in Mexico to the specific use

of teonandcatl by the Mexican Indians are valuable but incomplete. Sahagún, Motolinia, Diego Durán, Father de la Serna, the learned Ruiz
de Alarcón, Tezozomoc, and Don Francisco Hernández, the botanist
and doctor of Philip II, all wrote about the subject. Without doubt the
informants of the chroniclers didn’t tell all they knew about the vari-

ous hallucinogenic plants they were aware of and used, because they

were impeded by the principle of not revealing religious secrets to

anyone from outside the community. Now it is known that the ingestion of such plants was always connected with religion. Every religion
has secrets; even the Christian religion speaks of mysteries” (personal
communication).

In his book Medicine and Magic, Dr. Gonzalo Aguirre Beltran
writes: “The distorted vision displayed by such famous writers as
Hernando Ruiz de Alarcén, Jacinto de la Serna, and Pedro Ponce,
when they touch this fundamental aspect of native medicine, is easy to

explain in individuals whose religious principles prevent them from
seeing anything but the work of the devil—the helpless and maligned

devil—in Indian mysticism.”
In brief, we find that the natives neither revealed all that they knew


128 \ ALVARO ESTRADA

[PAGE 149]

nor were the chroniclers able to divest themselves of their prejudices

sufficiently to leave an impartial, objective testimony to the cult with
which the ancient Mexicans surrounded the Flesh of the Gods.
The motives that prompted my decision to write The Life ofMaria
Sabina were: (1) the intention of leaving a testimony to the thought
and life of the Mazatec Wise Woman whom journalists and writers
from various countries have not known how to appreciate fully; (2)
the hope that it may be a useful document for ethnologists, ethnomycologists, students of folklore, and other specialists; and (3) to give
the general public a better idea of the native customs, and encourage
young people in particular to treat the elements of the native religion
with more respect. It is my hope, too, that this work may stimulate
young writers—above all, Indians—to study such native customs in

order to rescue them from their approaching definitive extinction.
The present manuscript is the result of a series of interviews that I
conducted sporadically from September 1975 to August 1976. During
this time my professional duties as an engineer, which made it necessary for me to live in Mexico City, alternated with visits to Huautla
to converse with Maria Sabina. Mine has not been an easy task even
though I am a native of Huautla and speak Mazatec.
To make it easier for the reader, I have omitted the questions that
I asked Maria Sabina, although I have kept the tapes on which the
Mazatec Wise Woman’s words were recorded.

In the final writing of the text, as throughout this project, I have

been conscious of the responsibility incurred in writing down the autobiography of a person who, because she can neither read nor write
and does not even speak Spanish, could never herself know with exactitude whether what has been written about her is correct or not.

Mexico, D.F, September 4, 1976


INTRODUCTION TO THE LIFE / 129

[PAGE 150]

ADDENDUM: THE PROCESS OF WRITING

THE LIFE OF MARIA SABINA


I met Maria Sabina in Huautla in 1967 at the house of a sister of mine.
She was seated on the floor, leaning against the inside partition of
boards of a typical Mazatec hut that served as a kitchen. I’m not exag-

gerating if I say that when I greeted her I felt her look charged with
mystery and light. Afterwards I grew accustomed to perceiving this

strange look.
On one occasion in 1970 when I visited her, she showed me an
official paper from the town hall notifying her that she was being sum-

moned for a judicial investigation because, according to what she told
me, a local troublemaker had accused her of selling marijuana, a story
he had made up to distract the authorities since in reality it was he who
was involved in that business. I brought her to Mexico City where
I was studying engineering. I hid her with some relatives for more
than a month. Finally, I decided to take her to a reporter for the theninfluential magazine ¡Siempre! The interview attracted the attention

of the government of the state of Oaxaca, and she was exonerated of
all guilt.
The magazine reporter was impressed by the way in which I talked

directly to Marfa Sabina in our native language, for which reason he

suggested to me that I write her biography. At that time I was contributing articles and reports to the same magazine, ¡Siempre! The

idea of writing the life of the señora appeared to me a difficult task, especially since the writer Fernando Benitez had already published a
brief biography, in which he identified her as a shaman, and Gordon
Wasson had also published his Mazatec Mushroom Velada. Neverthe-

less, I decided to write the biography of the sefiora, seeing that she had
not been completely understood by those who made her known to the


130 \ ALVARO ESTRADA

[PAGE 151]

world. Even some names of her relatives weren’t exact. I had to go to

the town church to obtain her baptism certificate.
I began my interviews with María Sabina by means of a question-

naire that I went on enriching and amplifying in the course of eleven
months (September 1975 to August 1976). As I moved ahead on the

manuscript I arranged the biography chronologically. I turned to
other people, old people mostly, in order for them to explain to me
more fully what the shaman of Huautla had told me. That happened
in those cases in which I had doubts or which referred to certain ancestral customs—that of the agricultural ceremony, for example.

On finishing the text I polished it various times before sending it

to Gordon Wasson, whom I had met in Mexico City in 1975 and to
whom I had promised to send it. (Our initial meeting was in the house

of Henry Munn.) Wasson then asked the Mexican poet Octavio Paz

for his opinion of the manuscript. Paz expressed his appreciation for

the work: he said it was a document with anthropological and human
value. Notwithstanding, he suggested that the author eliminate terms

and words that didn’t seem in accord with the personality of Maria

Sabina, both in the text and in the translation of the chants. He suggested greater simplicity in the words, and in a letter to Wasson, he

said that one ought to give the literal meaning of the shaman’s words

without it mattering whether the reader understood them or not.
It was the editor of the subsequent book who asked me to translate
the chants on the Folkways record, recorded by Mr. Wasson in 1956.
That was another surprise for me, that the first North American
translators—Protestant missionaries settled in Huautla who had
learned to speak the Mazatec language—had not completely under-

stood the words of María Sabina. The translation by the missionaries
came in the liner notes inserted in the record jacket. I found that for
the most part the actual chants of Maria Sabina were far removed


INTRODUCTION TO THE LIFE / 131

[PAGE 152]

from the version of the missionaries, Eunice V. Pike and Sarah Gudshinsky.
Once the text was finished and corrected in line with Octavio Paz’s

suggestions, I gave the definitive manuscript to the Siglo XXI pub-

lishing company. The essay on Maria Sabina by her discoverer Gordon Wasson was also a valuable contribution.
I never thought that the biography of Maria Sabina would have the

success it has had in being translated into various languages around
the world.
June 2001

Translationfrom Spanish

by Henry Munn


132 x ÁLVARO ESTRADE

[PAGE 153]

from TEO-NANACATL:

THE MUSHROOM AGAPE


VALENTINA PAVLOVNA WASSON

AND R. GORDON WASSON


[1957] Marfa Sabina is a woman in her fifties, grave in demeanor, with
a grave smile, short of stature like all Mazatecs, dressed in the Mazatec huipil. Her daughter is in her thirties and in all respects takes after

her mother. She is following her mother’s vocation. The Señora her-

self is at the peak of her powers, and it is easy to see why Guadalupe
had said to us of her that she was una Señora sin mancha, a lady with-

out blemish, immaculate, one who had never dishonored her calling
by using her powers for evil. She alone, said Guadalupe, had brought
the latter’s children through all the diseases that take a frightful toll in

early childhood in the Mazatec country. After that initial talk we were
to pass two all-night vigils with Dofia Maria and her daughter, and we
can testify that she is a woman of rare moral and spiritual power, ded-

icated in her vocation, an artist in her mastery of the techniques of her

office. It was her example that drove home for us for the first time a
rule that must govern all field anthropologists. In the archaic cultures

as among advanced peoples, there is a hierarchy of excellence when
it comes to the individuals who are the culture-bearers. It is not sufficient to rely on the first informants that present themselves, on any

shaman who is willing to talk. The whole cultural area must be dis-

[PAGE 154]

creetly surveyed and communication must be established with the
finest exponents of the old traditions. None of the formidable difficulties of physical existence in these remote regions nor of communication should be permitted to blunt this obligation.
[x]
There were a few home-made wooden chairs in the room, and in
the beginning Allan [Richardson] and RGW used them. Cayetano’s
brother Genaro and possibly one other remained seated on chairs the
whole night through. The others lay or reclined on mats on the floor,
wrapped in sarapes, except of course for the Señora and her daughter,
who, wearing clean huipiles with identical reddish-yellow birds embroidered on them in front, sat before the altar-table on mats. They sat
with what seemed a half-studied formality, the daughter a little behind her mother and slightly to her mother’s right. Later, in the dark,
we could barely discern their triangular shadows as first one and then
the other lifted her voice in song.
Lene]


134 1 VP WASSON AND R.G. WASSON

[PAGE 155]

After the Sefiora had put out the last vela, a silence of perhaps twenty
minutes followed. The moon was shining brightly outside, and its or-

bit was such that the shaft of moonlight entering above the door fell
squarely on the altar-table, but it did little to relieve the general darkness in the room. Suddenly the Sefiora began to moan, low at first,
then louder. There were silent pauses, and then renewed humming.
Then the humming stopped and she began to articulate isolated syllables, each syllable consisting of a consonant followed by a vowel,

sharply pronounced. The syllables came snapping out in rapid succes-

sion, cutting the darkness like a knife, spoken, not shouted. After a
time the syllables coalesced into what we took for words, and the Señ.-

ora began to chant. The chanting continued intermittently all night,
first by the Señora and then by her daughter, and afterwards alternately by one or the other. The chanting was in Mazatec, and there
was no one to translate the words for us. Neither Allan nor RGW is
instructed musicologically, and we cannot say whether the provenience of the music was European or indigenous. That the chanting
was in Mazatec, and not in Latin or Spanish learned by rote, adds
point to this question. (If the chants are old, the language may be archaic, which would be a discovery of high interest for the handful of
first-rate scholars who have devoted themselves to Mazatec linguistics.) Both women chanted in that distinctive way which seems always to mark the intoning of age-old chants; the singing was soaked
in weary melancholy. Our Señora's voice was not loud, probably not
loud enough to be heard in the village thoroughfare. But there was a
confidence and resonance in her utterance that imposed itself. There
came a moment late in the night when the Señora made her way to the
door on the terrace and went outside, holding her hand on the door.
(To this extent she was free of the prohibition laid on the rest ofus not
to leave the house.) When she re-entered, she left the door slightly


TEO-NANÁCATL / 135

[PAGE 156]

ajar, and we saw her advance on her knees across the open space in the

room, and then turn to the right toward the altar-table. Her hands
were uplifted to shoulder-level, palms exposed. As she slowly progressed, she sang a canticle that seemed like an introit, indescribably
tender and plaintive in its musical phrases. Her daughter sang well
too, but lacked her authority. From time to time, as they sang, the men
who had taken the mushrooms, notably Genaro and young Emilio,

ejaculated words, groans, short sentences, and vocal noises. We know
not what they said, but they seemed to intervene with their voices to
suit the singing, in such a way as to produce a strange, barbaric harmony.


The singing was not continuous. For stretches the Sefiora would

talk, as though invoking the Spirits or as though the Holy Ghost was

speaking through the mushrooms. We heard the names of Christ

(which she pronounced with an intrusive “r,” Khristros), of St. Peter
and St. Paul. We heard her cry out “Pedro” repeatedly in an implor-

ing tone, and knew that the mushrooms were wrestling with the

problem of Peter. Emilio made his way to us and whispered that Pe-

ter was alive and well, and contrite for not having let us hear from
him. We asked for further details, but Emilio said that since we ourselves had eaten the mushrooms, we could expect them to speak to us

directly. Our interpreter Emilio then vanished into the darkness for

the rest of the night.

Unlike the chants, the spoken utterances were fresh and vibrant
and rich in expressiveness. The mushrooms were talking to the point.
We had never suspected how sensitive and poetic an instrument the

Mazatec language could be. The intermittent snatches of the Sefiora’s

monologue seemed quick with subtle feeling, laden with dramatic

import. In our very presence a priestess of the old religion was pronouncing oracular dictates in spurts, hot and firm with authority.


136 \VPWASSON AND RG WASSON

[PAGE 157]

How we regretted that we had no means to record her voice! (At the

time we asked ourselves, and we have repeated the question often
since then, whether our critical faculties were deranged by the effects

of the mushrooms, so that we over-rated the quality of the Sefiora’s
performance. Perhaps so. But if this is an aberration, typical of the

syndrome of mushroomic ecstasy, our account at least serves to docu-

ment it for the record, and to establish that our hallucinations were
auditory as well as visual.)

The chanting and the oracular utterances turned out to be only a

part of what we were to witness. At an early stage we sensed that the
Sefiora was either kneeling or standing before the altar-table gesticu-

lating with her arms. We detected this by ear and confirmed it uncertainly with the aid of the meager moonlight. Then, much later in the

night when her daughter took over the chanting, the Sefiora made her

way to the open space between us and the door, and she embarked on
a kind of dance that must have lasted for two hours or more. We do
not know precisely what she did, because of the darkness, but she was

between us and the aperture above the door, and we could just make

out that she was turning clock-wise, facing in succession each of the
four compass points, at the same time raising and lowering her arms.

Her daughter was singing, but she was not silent. She was engaged in

a lengthy, rhythmic percussive utterance of a kind unfamiliar to us.
There was a differentiation in the pitch of the beats, and at times the
pattern or phrases seemed to us complex. We cannot say for sure how

she made her sounds, but we are almost sure that she clapped her
hands, slapped her knees, smacked her forehead, and whammed her

chest. We were impressed by the cleanness of the utterance. Every clap

or slap or smack or wham was resonant. Remembering the role

played by pitch in the Mazatec language, we asked ourselves whether
the Sefiora was speaking percussively. On each of our two nights with


TEO-NANACATL / 137

[PAGE 158]

her, she rinsed her mouth once with water, and the gargling was also

rhythmic, and perhaps tonally differentiated. Then she would spit out
the water on the ground unrhythmically. On Saturday night, in a moment of illumination by flashlight, we saw and heard her twicking her
long fingernails rhythmically. A remarkable feature of her percussive

utterance on Wednesday night was its ventriloquistic property. For a
long stretch we were in the blackest darkness while the daughter sang

and the Señora was performing her strange dance with percussive ac-

companiment. As she would snap out her resonant claps and smacks,
we seemed to catch them out of the night from various directions. Let
the reader remember that all the while we were seeing our visions and

attending to the auditory sensations served to us by the two women.
There we were, visually suspended in space before the vast panorama

of, say, the Gobi Desert, with a singing accompaniment and with per-

cussive cracks assailing us, now from above, now here, now there, exactly like Hamlet’s ghost hic et ubique, hitting us with a cutting crispness from unpredictable quarters, as though an air-borne choir of
invisible creatures was peopling the dark void around us, perplexing
us with their assorted and shifting cries. Possibly this ventriloquistic

effect was caused by the Señora's turning in different directions as she
performed, so that the sound caromed to us from the ceiling or walls.
And all the while there was the irregular chorus, subdued in volume,

of ecstatic exclamations from the Indians reclining on the ground.
Confined though we were in a room without windows or open door,

at one point we felt a swish of air, just as though we were really suspended in the great outdoors. Was this too an hallucination? If so, all
shared it, for when the wind blew on us, there was general excitement,
flashlights were switched on, and our Indian friends were sitting up,
amazed at being stroked by the Divine Afflatus.

[...]


138 \ VP WASSON AND RG WASSON

[PAGE 159]

At intervals throughout the night, perhaps every forty minutes or
so, there would be what we can only describe as intermissions. After
working up to a powerful climax in utterance, the Sefiora and her

daughter would subside into silence. We recall one such climax when
the Sefiora, half-singing, half-declaiming, spat forth in endless repetition and with barbaric violence the two syllables chung-ha (the first

element rhyming, not with [English] “sung” but with the Chinese
“Sung”); we were never able to learn what this meant. After such climaxes our two votaries and our reclining Indian friends would light
cigarettes (ordinary ones) and smoke and engage in the most animated
conversation. Clearly they were discussing what was happening, but
we had no interpreter. They would light the electric torches. We took
advantage of these moments to study the Sefiora. She was not in a
trance. That is to say, she was one of us, talking and smoking. But she
was in a state of excitement, her eyes flashing, her smile no longer that
grave smile which we had observed before, but now quick with animation and, if we may use the word, caritas. For there is another aspect to

the mushrooms that we must mention. The spirit of an agape of which
we have already spoken was a prelude to a wave of generous or tender

feelings that the mushrooms aroused in everyone. To illustrate this, we

recall how, when nausea first sent one of us into the adjoining room to

vomit, the Sefiora, who had been in full song, immediately stopped the
performance, and she and the others manifested the most embarrassing solicitude about the unhappy episode, which after all was wholly

unimportant. On the two nights that we passed in Cayetano’s house,

we were aware of no erotic stimulation among those present and we
think there was none. But the feeling of brotherly affection was strong

indeed. Twice in the course of that first night the Sefiora reached out
her right hand to RGW and sought contact with his fingers in friendly

greeting, across the chasm of the language barrier.


TEO-NANACATL / 139

[PAGE 160]

THE UNIQUENESS


OF MARIA SABINA


HENRY MUNN


An independent scholar and writer, Henry Munn arrived in Huautla for the

first time in 1965. His essays on Mazatec religion and related subjects have

appeared in anthologies published by Oxford University Press and the University

of California Press and in journals such as Plural (edited by Octavio Paz),

The CoEvolution Quarterly, New Wilderness Letter, and the Journal of
Latin American Lore. He is presently completing a book on Mazatec shamanic

chants, and other works-in-progress include a reading of'some scenes in the

pre-Columbian Mixtec codices and an extensive autobiographical narrative.


Since Maria Sabina is the most renowned Mazatec shaman, people
tend to think she is the only one, not realizing that she is part of a living tradition. A comparison of her chants with those of four other
shamans I recorded in Huautla between 1967 and 1980 (one woman
and three men) shows the similarities between her vocabulary and
theirs and at the same time throws into relief what makes her different from them.
The form of the chant—short enunciations ending with 150, “it
says, like a vocal punctuation mark in the flow of speech, a reference
to the voice speaking through them—is used by all Mazatec shamans,


40

[PAGE 161]

especially when they shift from speech into song. It is a cultural creation: a way of canalizing the energy released.

Shamans also share a vocabulary and a stock of standardized expressions that they draw on in their chants. “Slowly and with care /

with sap, with dew / with greenness, with clarity,” Maria Sabina says
again and again over the sick boy during the Wasson velada. Ho nca

inta, ho nca nangui—slowly and with care,” literally with one’s feet on
the ground—is said to people when they set out on a journey. It is one

of the expressions commonly used as well by the shamans. The cluster
of words—ntsin, “sap,” the milk inside a plant; xofion, “dew”; xcoen,
“green” in the sense of fresh and tender (the color green is sase); and

yova,' “clarity”—expresses the quintessence of the Mazatec shamans’
illuminated sense of nature. They all use these words in different com-

binations in their chants.

Two other words that go together in the chants of Maria Sabina

and those of the other Mazatec curanderos are yo—the buds of a

flower; and chi?nte—tender in the sense of what is young, newborn, a

plant just shooting up. Mrs. Eloina Estrada de Gonzalez, who trans-

lated the recordings for me, translated this couplet as “offshoots and
tenderness.” In the chants of Maria Sabina I render them as “buds and
sprouts.” These words, which refer to the stages of growth of plants,

are used as metaphors for babies and children. This is the view of life
of an agricultural community.

“Grace, goodness” (khoa nta) and “life and well-being” (khoa vihna,

khoa visen) are correlated in the parallel constructions of the shamanic

chants with “sap and dew,” “greenness and clarity.” The opposites of

these four kernel words are “garbage and dust” (¢e, chao), “whirlwind

1. Transliteration from Mazatec. For a note on Mazatec orthography, see page 47,
note 11. [7.R.]


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARÍA SABINA / 141

[PAGE 162]

and wind” (xquin, ntjao)—figures of speech for sickness and disputes.

Maria Sabina frequently asserts that the work of her “saints,” meaning the mushrooms, is to dispel them and clear the air.

Her words go together in couplets. These double expressions in

which the same thing is said twice in different ways are a characteristic of pre-Hispanic Mesoamerican rhetoric. Other common stereotyped expressions that recur from shaman to shaman follow this same

pattern: ngui xcoin, ngui ntso?vai— beneath your eyes, beneath your

mouth”; ma and tao—“poor and humble (or loved)”; tsin khoa?aon,
tsin khoa?nte—“there is no resentment, there is no rancor”; cjain ni,

kishikhoa ni— “it is certain, it is true.”

They all inherit from their culture a repertory of themes and motifs on which each one works his or her own individual variations.

When María Sabina says she is a chjon chjine xki, chjon chjine xca, chjon
chjine en, chjon chjine Rhoa—“a woman wise in medicine, a woman

wise in herbs, a woman wise in words, a woman wise in problems”—
she is stating her culture’s concept of the shaman’s role. The other

Mazatec chota chjine—“wise ones”—all define themselves in exactly
the same terms.

She often says, “I am a woman of the light, I am a woman of the
day.” Here she is playing on the Mazatec word for spirit, sennichi, by
breaking it down into its two component parts: sen—physiognomy or

light, depending on how it is used; and mich i—day, the destiny of a
person determined by the day sign of his or her birth (the Mazatec
equivalent of the Aztec tonalli, which meant light, heat, day, and

spirit). She usually says before or afterwards, “I am a woman espíritu,”
translating the native concept into Spanish. Other shamans do the

same thing. Another wise woman prays, “Bring his appearance, bring
his day” A shaman from Loma de Chapultepec on the slopes of the sacred mountain opposite Huautla speaks of “the path of the cane of


142 \ HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 163]

office, the path of the staff, the path of the light, the path of the day
(ntia ya, ntia nise, ntia sen, ntia nichi) of each of his patients.

She herself says of her host during the Folkways session that he is

a “man with a green staff, a staff of clarity (mise xcoen, nise yova).” The
words of a medicine man from Xochitonalco, a hamlet near Huautla,
recall hers; he says to the old couple he is speaking for, “You should

take your staff of dew, your staff of fragrant leaves. Grace, life, and
well-being. Green staff, staff of clarity (mise xcoen, mise yova).” The

leaves he is referring to are those used in the steam bath to hit the body
so as to make the air circulate.

The path is a common motif in the chants of the Mazatec shamans
who live in a mountain world of footpaths where people leave the

tracks of their bare feet in the brown, squishy mud. The experience

takes the form of a “trip.” One function of the shamanic chant is to

guide the effect of the mushrooms on the participants and lead them
by suggestion along a good path to a healing, cathartic experience. Maria Sabina speaks frequently of following in the footsteps of Christ.

Compare her words with those of the medicine man from Xochitonalco: “It is life and well-being of our Father, says. It is sap and dew,

says. It is buds and tenderness, says. It is the path of the tracks, it is

the path of the feet of our Christ, says.” Sometimes the path is that
of the extravagated spirit of the sick, which has to be followed to where
the person was frightened. The Wise Woman sings, “We are going
looking for the path, the path of his paws, the path of his claws, from
the right side to the left side we are going to work, says.” The shaman
from the Loma de Chapultepec, sitting in a chair before the family al-

tar in the house where he has been called to give a ceremony, states,

“The work I came for is to divine for them, how they are in their door,
their dooryard, the path of the tracks of their feet.” At one moment in

the Folkways session, Marfa Sabina says: “I am going to receive there


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARÍA SABINA / 143

[PAGE 164]

in the path/I am going to receive the enchantment /I am going to receive his light, his day / the path of his soles, the path of his feet.” She
means she is going to reintegrate the person with his or her sennichi-li.
For her the path of the hands and the feet is what one does, where one

goes.


In Huautla people would explain the similarities in vocabulary and
figures of speech between different shamans by saying that it is the
mushrooms speaking through them. I don’t think we can accept that

explanation, which from the scientific point of view is a personification into an imaginary entity of the unconscious powers of lan-

guage. None of the curanderos and curanderas I recorded had heard

each other speak, but they had all at one time or another in the past
heard other shamans give ceremonies, either when they were children
or when they were sick and had to be cured. The uncanny way the
couplets of the shamanic chant imprint themselves on the memory of

ordinary listeners, even when the exact meaning of the words is beyond them, suggests how the liturgy of the mushroom medicine rites
has been transmitted from generation to generation.
When Maria Sabina wasa child, she heard shamans sing, like many

Mazatec children who have lain awake at night listening to the strange

words of medicine men and women singing in the darkness under the
din of the rain on the thatch roof or with the chirp ofthe crickets in the

background. The raw psycho-physiological experience is shaped by
cultural models. When she began to eat the mushrooms, she already
knew the form of the chant and the type of things that are said.
What then distinguishes her from her contemporaries?

First of all, her musicality. Within the traditional framework of the

ritual, developed to utilize the psychoactive medicine for therapeutic

social purposes, each shaman has his or her own magic song, distinctive voice, personal melody, and individual manner of conducting a


144 \ HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 165]

ceremony. Nevertheless, the melodiousness of Maria Sabina’s chants,

their rhythmical transporting effect, is unsurpassed except at moments by other singers.
The effect of the mushrooms she has eaten for the power to cure
makes the body vibrate. Hence her humming—a way of tuning herself
in to the energy flowing through her. When she invokes the Vir-

gins and the Saints, she draws out the endings of their names into reverberant tones. At the same time she marks the intensified pulse beat
of her physical existence by clapping and uttering sequences of vocables: ecstatic phonation, articulatory play, a vocalization of impulses, a

rhythmical syllabification of energy.

So so so si are the component parts ofJesusz, a common exclamation
of Mazatec women. Ki ko ka ka ki form Kristo. Ma ma ma mai become
madre. The syllables are used as beats; meaning is broken down into
pure sounds and recomposed from them. The vocables sometimes
seem to go back to the babble of babies. In her repetition of santo santa
the binary alternation of sounds is what she likes, the contrast of to
and ta. This is a level of vocalization I have heard in no other Mazatec shaman. The large part played by percussion, humming, and the
enunciation of syllables in her ceremonies exemplifies her expressionistic creativity and distinguishes her performances from those of her

contemporaries.

What is not on the printed page is the sensorial condition of heightened sensitivity in which her words are spoken and heard: their reso-

nance. In many passages the lilt of her voice carries a force, conveys a

sense of enthusiasm that is not present in just the words themselves. It
is the music of the shamanic chant, its rhythm and melody, that moves

the listeners as much as the words and cures them by the power of
song to uplift and transport the soul.
María Sabina alone of all the shamans says, “I am a trumpet


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARIA SABINA / 145

[PAGE 166]

woman, I am a drum woman, I am a woman violinist.” Her words

bring to mind the mushroom ceremony pictured at the center of the

Codex Vindobonensis obverse, an ancient Mixtec pictographic book

from an area of what is now the state of Oaxaca not far from the Maza-

tec mountains. In it, g Wind—the Mixtec culture hero who is dressed
in the attributes of the wind deity the Aztecs called Quetzalcoatl—is

shown officiating as a shaman, playing on a rasp with a human skull
for a resonator, the volutes of speech coming out of his mouth.
Wasson describes her dancing as she sings, turning around in the
middle of the dark room, lifting her arms in gestures of adoration and
imploration. Her activity of expression is total: musical and gestural

as well as verbal. The whole body speaks. Listening to her talk in or-

dinary life, without understanding what she was saying, I was struck
by the idiosyncratic gestures she would make with her hands and

fingers. Of all living Mazatec shamans, Maria Sabina was unquestion-

ably the greatest because of her radical, extreme personality.
One of the most distinctive features of her chants is how she as-

sumes the being of the phenomena she names by saying “I am” this or
that. One shaman—by day a shopkeeper in the market—asserted, “I

am he who speaks with the mountains” (a male prerogative; the

women kneel on their mats, imploring), but even though he evoked
eagles and vortices of colors, he did not identify with them. The level

of discourse of the other chota chjine is practical, functional. They
emphasize what they do—cure—and what they want—to get rid of

sickness. In none of the chants of the other shamans I have recorded
does the “I am” have the same importance it does in the words of

María Sabina.

Her identifications are like the masks the Tlingit and Eskimo
shamans put on and took off: bear spirit, deer spirit, moon, kingfisher,
raven, eagle, old woman, cloud spirit, the spirit of the driftwood, even


146 Y HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 167]

bubbles. This is Coleridge’s “Infinite I am” of the “primary imagination,” the “I is an other” of Rimbaud.

She stands out from her contemporaries because of her repertory’s

wide range of images. They have associations for the Mazatec listener

that they don’t have for the foreign reader. Let us consider the cultural
concepts behind some of them.


EAGLE WOMAN


Frederick Starr, an American physical anthropologist who visited

Huautla in 1900, in describing the long dresses of the women, said,
“Their huipils are among the most striking we have seen, being made
of native cotton, decorated with elaborate embroidered patterns of

large size in pink or red. The favorite design is the eagle.” From the
pictures I have seen of these old dresses, the eagle on the breast was often in the form of the eagle sitting on a prickly pear cactus with a snake
in its mouth: the symbol of Mexico. One explanation for Maria Sa-

bina’s constant association of the eagle and the clock in the Wasson velada may be the Mexican national emblem on the Huautla school-

house clocktower in front of the church. Like dream images, her ideas
have multiple determinants. People on the mushrooms often feel

themselves flying through the air, looking down at the earth from high
above. The medicine man from Xochitonalco told me, “The eagle is

the Mother who is in Heaven.” In his chants he spoke of “the jaguar
with spots of our Lord Jesus Christ / the big eagle of our Virgin.”


CLOCK WOMAN


Maria Sabina incorporates the modern world into her chants: she is

a chjon reloj—a clock woman. The association between the eagle and


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARÍA SABINA / 147

[PAGE 168]

the clock is constant throughout the 1958 session. In the 1970 session,
the association shifts to one between the clock and the book, the clock
and God. Once when a man from Huautla (an accountant in Mexico
City) ate the mushrooms with her, she said, “Son, you have watches all

over your body.” He said, “No, I have only one.” “What she means,”

explained his mother, “is that you have plenty of time, you have lots of
luck.”

OPOSSUM WOMAN


The opposite of the eagle, whirling high in the sky, is the opossum

who goes along close to the ground: a nocturnal marsupial, a denizen

of the cornfield and woodpile. The opossum plays an important role
in Mazatec mythology. It stole fire from an old lady who had monopolized it by sticking its tail into the flames and running off with it
ablaze like a torch to distribute fire to the first people—which is why

the furry animal has a hairless tail. The opossum also plays dead, then
jumps up and runs away when nobody is looking. The Huautecans

believe it is impossible to kill one except by burning it. Men sometimes
eat the heart of an opossum to become invulnerable. When Maria
Sabina calls herself an opossum woman, she almost always says next,

Chjon nka cohon nia—“1 am a woman who sees.”


HUMMINGBIRD WOMAN


Hummingbirds, hovering in front of flowers with vibrating wings,

are acommon sight around Mazatec homes, where there are often to-

bacco plants—San Pedro—whose pink trumpet-like flowers are visited by the tiny birds with their long bills. María Sabina is the only
chota chjine whom I have heard invoke hummingbirds. The Mazatec


148 \ HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 169]

name for them, tontsin, emphasizes their vibratory nature, like our
word for them in English, unlike the Spanish chuparrosa, “rosesucker.” Whenever she mentions them, she calls them ntsica nat, ntsica

chikon—“lord ntsica, sacred ntsica”—possibly an onomatopoeic nickname based on their calls or the word for them in a neighboring dialect. We translate it as “colibri” [hummingbird], while Estrada translates it as “sucker,” although the word itself has no relation to the verb

“to suck,” to give the idea that the birds with their long bills suck nectar from the flowers as the shaman sucks illness out of the patient. His
mother once told me that soon after her rheumatism began she ate the
mushrooms with Maria Sabina in hopes of alleviation. At one moment during the night, she saw the curandera far away from her in the

darkness, turning around, her huipil billowing out around her, with
a long, hollow tube of bamboo in her mouth through which she was
sucking the illness out of her. At another moment, she felt that Maria
Sabina was pulling the pains out of her neck and body as she sang, like

a rope she coiled up around her shoulder in time to the measures of

her song. The next morning Estrada’s mother had tobacco between
her teeth that the medicine woman had given her to swallow in order
to make her vomit.

The hummingbirds are among María Sabina’s auxiliary spirits.
She calls them “children.” This simile has a long history in the Mesoamerican imagination. Bernardino de Sahagún says in his Historia
general de las cosas de Nueva Espana that children who died as babies
went to the land of abundance, “where there are all kinds of trees and

flowers and fruits and they go about there like tzintzones that are little

birds of diverse colors that go about sucking the flowers of the trees”

(Book 6, Chapter XXI).


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARIA SABINA / 149

[PAGE 170]

WHIRLING WOMAN OF COLORS


The words I’ve translated as “whirling woman of colors”—chjon ts?o

tyi—literally mean “round (47) huipil (¢s?0) woman (chjon),” but the
term has an esoteric meaning familiar to many Huautecans. Several

men have described to me how, in the early morning, one sometimes
sees along the paths in the mist a whirlwind of colors like a huipil ornamented with ribbons of different colors spinning around. They call

this atmospherical phenomenon the chjon ts?0 41. When I asked the

medicine man from Xochitonalco about it, he said, #570 tjí nai, ts?o ti
chikon, using the same qualitatives that Maria Sabina had: principal or

lord and sacred. “It’s like a rainbow—green, red, white—and it goes
along in front of one like a ferris wheel spinning around. When that

cabrón gets on top of one, the person falls down in an attack. It appears
when the clouds are down to the ground.” He was as familiar with this
optical phenomenon as María Sabina was, but for him it was a malevolent spirit that could cause epileptic attacks—he would never have
introduced it into his chants. She had the audacity to identify herself

with beings other shamans might be afraid to even name.


SHOOTING STAR WOMAN


Sometimes in the clear mountain nights or just before dawn, looking

up at the bright stars, one sees a streak of light that disappears almost
as soon as it appears, leaving one with the impression of being lucky
enough to have seen a rare cosmic event—a meteor. The shooting star,
chihon-li, also has esoteric associations. Some people are believed to
have this “virtue.” They change into shooting stars, dive into moun-

tains, and come back with treasures, but they are usually sickly. Shoot-


150 \ HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 171]

ing stars are connected with the idea of luck and wealth. At one moment in the 1970 session, sung when she was seventy-six, Maria Sa-

bina seems to imagine herself traversing the ocean in her lancha,
“launch,” like a shooting star crossing the starry sky.


THE OCEAN


The Mazatecs call the ocean nta chikon—“the sacred waters”—like
the Aztecs, who called it teo atl—“divine water.” Sahagún explains
that this means “water marvellous in depth and in grandeur,” and he
says they also called it ¿huicaatl —“water that joins the sky” (Book 11,
Chapter XIII). For the Mazatecs, as for their pre-Hispanic ancestors,

heaven is on the other side of the water. A man in the lowland Mazatec region told Carlos Incháustegui, “On the other side of the Ocean is

seated God, the eternal Father.” This explains many of the passages in
María Sabina's chants where she imagines herself going through the

water up to heaven.
The American linguist Eunice V. Pike told R. Gordon Wasson, in
a 1953 letter from Huautla, speaking about the beliefs of the people

with respect to the mushrooms, “Most of them agree that the wise
men frequently see the ocean and for these mountain people that is exciting.” Álvaro Estrada understood from María Sabina that she sometimes saw herself actually swimming through the water, which she
expressed in Mazatec as nta tson: “paddle in the water” For her, the
idea of being under the water seems to have been a metaphor for the

trance from which she spoke her words. In 1970 she says, “I am a
woman wise in words beneath the water, [am a woman wise in words
beneath the ocean.”


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARÍA SABINA / 151

[PAGE 172]

THE WOMAN OF THE FLOWING WATER


During the 1970 session, María Sabina invokes the Chjon Nta Ve—the
“Woman of the Flowing Water”—who is the principal female deity
of Mazatec myth. Depending on the version of the story, she was either the wife or the daughter-in-law of Chikon Tokosho, the lord of

the magnificent symmetrical mountain that stands in front of Huautla like a benevolent presence dwelling above the town. One day she is

sent to the cornfield to pick corn and comes back with a full sack. Her
mother-in-law scolds her for having picked so much. Offended, she
leaves the house. But when they go to the milpa they find she had
picked only one ear in each corner of the field. “She had cut only one
or two ears, but for her they yielded a whole sack full. Probably because she was the chjon cha?a ntsai, chjon cha?a ntsja,” said the shaman

from Loma de Chapultepec on the slopes of the sacred mountain,
who told me her story. He used exactly the same words María Sabina

describes her with when she says in 1970, “She is the Woman of the

Flowing Water / She is a woman whose palms are like spoons / She is

a woman with hands of measure.”
Itis customary in Huautla for a newly married woman to go to live
with her husband's family. The moral of the story is, be careful with
daughters-in-law. They may get angry and leave the house, and then
you'll miss them. What happens to the Chjon Nta Ve on her peregrinations about the mountains gives places their names. Finally she

reaches the Río Santo Domingo, which flows through the mountains
in a deep canyon that separates the Mazatec watershed from the land

of the Cuicatec-speaking people on the other side of the river. There
she settles down at a place called Nta Ve, a ford where the water runs
shallow over the stones. Sometimes her husband, the Lord of the

Mountain, goes to visit her. When he does the corn is abundant. One


162 \ HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 173]

knows he is there because one hears the coyotes—his dogs—howling
at night.
María Sabina calls her chjon cha?a ntsat, chjon cha?a ntsja: literally,
“woman with palms like spoons, woman with hands like spoons.” All
the Mazatec chota chjine refer to her with these same epithets. They
mean a woman who knows exactly the right amount of ingredients to
put into her cooking. No matter how many guests her husband brings
home to eat, she always has enough to go around. This expression is
not an invention of Marfa Sabina; it is a cultural concept.
Her clapping during her shamanic sessions is an extension into
another modality of the everyday action of Huautla women patting
cornmeal between their hands to make tortillas that they lay on the comal, the circular pottery griddle, over the fire. From Allan Richardson’s superb photos of her performing, one can see that she struck the
back of her right hand against the palm of her left—a conventional
gesture of defiance. When she speaks in the Wasson velada of going

on her “knees of tortillas, knees of water (xco nio, xco nanta), her arms
held out in imploration, it is illuminating to remember that she, like
other women of her generation, was accustomed to grinding corn kernels as she knelt on the ground at the metate, pushing the pestle back
and forth in her hands. Chota nio, chota nanta, the medicine man from
Xochitonalco called human beings in his chants: “people of tortilla
and water.”

ROOT WOMAN


After chanting about roots, the medicine man from Xochitonalco
asked me in Spanish if I knew who the Chjon Lucia sen ngui nte is: “the
Woman Lucia under the earth.” He explained that there is a woman

lying under the earth who helps the plants grow. When she changes
position, it causes earthquakes. The words of one shaman illuminate


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARÍA SABINA / 153

[PAGE 174]

those of another. Maria Sabina invokes this same woman in the Folkways session without giving her a Catholic name: Chonai Nataona sen
ngui nte—“Our Doll Virgin Beneath the Earth.” In the Wasson velada

she also associates her with roots. “Father, look, I have your staff of
sap, your staff of the dew / Mother Patroness, look at how poor I am,
at how humble Iam /1 am a poor woman, I am a humble woman /I
am a green woman, I am a woman of clarity /1 am a big root woman,
I am a root woman beneath the water / I am a woman who branches

out, l am a woman like a begonia / I go up to heaven, beneath your
gaze, beneath your glory / There is my paper, there is my book /I am

the Woman Beneath the Earth, I am the chjon chjoa cama.”
In the thought of all, the chota chyine, jts°en—“ offshoot, branch”
goes together with Aama—“root”—and is connected with the idea of
children. The choices of words are determined by constraints inher-

ent in the language, in its linkage of concepts. Different people prof-

fer the same words because it is their language and culture speaking

through them.

In both the Folkways session and the Wasson velada, Maria Sabina gives the Woman-Beneath-the-Earth the epithets chjon cjoa
cama, chjon xon ntijin—appellatives that remain obscure. I have tenta-

tively translated them as “woman for whom things multiply, woman
paper blackened with smoke.” They are old conjurer words nobody
knows the meaning of anymore.
Evaristo G. Estrada, Alvaro’s father and my father-in-law, a man
of great sophistication in his culture, versed in the Mazatec language,
once remarked to me, “Who knows where that little old lady gets her
words from.” She herself was reluctant to explain them. When Alvaro
brought her to visit us one day in Mexico City, I took the opportunity
to ask her through him and his sister what na jncha no means—the
phrase translated as “big town woman,” but which I conjecture is


1684 \ HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 175]

another atmospherical phenomenon used as a metaphor for the networks of light one sees, projected before one’s eyes, on the mushrooms. “It’s at the feet of Christ” is all she would say. In response to

“Why do you speak of the path of the tracks of the feet?” the old
woman replied, “We have our force in our feet,” her toes splayed wide
apart from years of walking barefoot over the earth.


CLOWN WOMAN


Many of the shamans call the mushrooms “clowns.” When Maria
Sabina calls herself a clown woman, it is an expression of her good humor and euphoric exuberance. She is not a funny clown. She is a sase

nat, sase chikon—a “lord clown, sacred clown.” She told Fernando

Benítez, the Mexican writer and influential editor of cultural supplements in Mexico City newspapers, “I see the mushrooms like chil-

dren, like clowns. Children with violins, children with trumpets,
clown children who sing and dance around me.” The idea of clowns

points to the curative power of laughter, which is one of the characteristics of these emotional, cathartic experiences in which people laugh
and cry. During the session, humming and clapping, calling out her
host’s name as if to bring him to himself, even before she calls herself
a clown woman, there is humor in her voice and her listener is laughing with pleasure.

LAW WOMAN


When Maria Sabina says, “I know how to speak with the judge, the
judge knows me,” she is describing her role as an intermediary between the community and the supernatural. Juez, gobierno, licenciada

are all said in Spanish. The lawyer is one who arranges a person's
affairs with the law, and in her society, where sickness is considered to


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARÍA SABINA / 155

[PAGE 176]

have not natural but spiritual causes and can often be the consequence
of transgressions, that is precisely the function of the chota chjine: to
intercede for the patient and argue his or her case with the powers that
govern life.

A chota chjine long since deceased, whose words survive only in the
memories of his listeners (who have also passed away) was remembered to have said, “I went to resolve things, I went to investigate

where the table is, the brilliant table, the table of dew, where the law

is, where the book of the law is. What motive is there? Who placed a
complaint? Who whistled? Who shouted? From where comes this
sickness, this suffering?” The theme of justice and the law in the
chants of Marfa Sabina is therefore not unique to her but a part of the

traditional rhetoric of the Mazatec curers.


WARRIOR WOMAN


In her chants, María Sabina consistently associates the shooting star
with San Pedro, the Mazatec deity of tobacco. Probably the connecting idea is fire. Picietl —“ground tobacco”—is considered a hot herb

(the Maya in Yucatan believe shooting stars are the embers the rain
gods flick from their cigars). From the beginning of the Wasson velada she felt beset by enemies. “Somebody is getting in the way,” she

says and asks for a cigarette to drive away the evil spirits, invoking San

Pedro and San Pablo. That night, treating a sick boy, she clamors for
justice. Over and over she tells her patient, “Don’t be frightened. Perk

up, perk up.” Her enemies become his. “Justice, justice, justice. This

woman of war, hunting dog woman. Lawyer woman. Transactions.

Mexican flag. I'm more than a man.” Itis as if she were waving the flag
in the front lines of battle. She becomes a hunting dog on the heels of
the enemy. “I only throw out and scatter, says. Yes Jesus Christ, says. I


156 \ HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 177]

am a woman general, says. l am a trumpet woman, says. I am a drum

woman, says.” Moments later: “I’m going to burn the world,” she declares vehemently. “Yes Jesus Christ, says. Pm going to burn the

world, says. Yes Jesus Christ, says. l am a shooting star woman, says.
And woman San Pedro, says.” The idea of setting the world on fire is
a belligerent assertion of her devastating power against her enemies.
“Didn’t the woman of war win? Wasn’t it the woman of war who won
the most?” she asks, referring to the boy’s enemies. In many Amer-

indian societies from the Arctic Circle to the Amazon, the shaman
is thought to enter into battle with the forces of evil. “I’m going to

doctor, I’m going to treat with herbs, this Christian. I’m going to lay
my palms, I’m going to lay my hands on this Christian. I’m going to
burn the world. Lawyer. Mexican flag. Benito Juarez. I’m more than
a man.” Her predecessors, the Nahuatl-speaking medicine men, in

their conjurations to cure earache or pain in the jaw, after asking help
from ground tobacco and “the children,” chanted, “I came to destroy

it, Icame to burn it, I the priest, I the man of transformations.” Often

when she says, “I am going to demonstrate my courage,” she invokes
Benito Juárez—an Indian from Oaxaca like herself, the Mexican
president who defeated the French. She alone of all the shamans I

have heard introduces a historical person into her chants. Ironically,
since Benito Juárez expropriated the property of the Catholic clergy

and established a rigorous separation between Church and State, she
gives the secular hero the status of a saint by invoking him together

with the Virgin of Guadalupe and the Magdalene.


BOOK WOMAN


This “woman of good words, good breath, and good saliva,” as she
designates herself in her chants, whose own language is unwritten, is


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARIA SABINA / 157

[PAGE 178]

fascinated, obsessed by the idea of the book. She called herself a “Book
Woman” long before she became the subject of books and articles, as

if she were truly prophetic. The book plays a large part in the imagination of all the Mazatec chota chjine, either as a compendium of

knowledge they receive like a diploma or as the register in which the
destiny of people is written. The medicine man from Xochitonalco
told me he once had a vision of Christ descending with a golden book,
which he gave him. The red marker in the book meant that he was to
be a deliverer of babies. The shaman from the Loma de Chapultepec,
speaking of San Pedro, imagines him saying, “I will leave you a table
and a book on it so that you can cure.” The wise woman I recorded,
whose sons are teachers, calls for a schoolbook in Castilian. But in the
chants of Marfa Sabina the theme of the book has a central place it

does not have in the words ofany of the other shamans.

She stands at the convergence of the religious traditions of Mesoamerica and Christianity. When she says in the velada, “It is your
clean book, it is your clean quill, that I have, Father,” she is probably

thinking of the statue of San Juan Evangelista—the patron saint of
Huautla—who stands in the church with a feather pen in one hand
and a book in the other (today a scroll). The sources of the book in her
imagination are the Bible from which the priest reads at mass in a lan-

guage unintelligible to the barefoot faithful, and the municipal legal
documents of the modern Mexican state on the margins of which she
lived. At the same time her image of the book has antecedents in her

autochthonous pre-Hispanic past: the tonalamati—the “book of days”
—in which the soothsayers read the fate of a child by the day sign of

its birth, and the Mixtec histories painted on folded lengths of deerskin, in which the images march along in pairs like the couplets of her
chants. Across five centuries, what is the connecting link between the
picture books of ancient Mesoamerica and the book in the mind of a


158 \ HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 179]

twentieth-century indigenous Oaxacan medicine woman? Continuous oral transmission is implausible. The collective unconscious is too
hypothetical a notion. I think the connection has to be sought in the
experience itself from which the image originates. The idea of writing may have been suggested to her by the manifestation of visual patterns characteristic of the psychedelic experience. People compare the
abstract designs they see to the motifs of tapestries and oriental carpets. For Maria Sabina they must have at least once taken the form of
script. She says the pages of the book were covered with letters.
The words of Netzahualcóyotl (1402-1472), the mystic poet and
ruler of Texcoco, apply to her, probably the last great oral poet in the
Mesoamerican religious tradition: “A book of paintings is your heart,
/ you have come to sing, / you make your drums resound, / you are the

singer, / within the house of spring, / you make people happy. / You
only distribute / flowers that intoxicate, / precious flowers, / you are

the singer. / Within the house of spring, / you make people happy.”


Three recorded ceremonies given by María Sabina over the course of
fourteen years give us a chance to answer the question, Does she invent from session to session, saying whatever comes into her head on
the inspiration of the moment, or does she always say the same thing,
repeating herself over and over? The essential difference seems to be
the emphasis she gives to her themes. In the 1958 velada, references to

justice and law predominate, whereas in the ceremony twelve years
later they are of minor importance in comparison with images of

water. The presence of different people each time for whom it is necessary to speak is the major incentive for creative improvisation. Constant motifs enter into fresh combinations and are elaborated in different ways from night to night. The 1958 velada is the only night she
calls herself a root woman, says she is a hunting dog woman, and de-


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARÍA SABINA / 159

[PAGE 180]

clares she is a woman of war. But in general she invents little in comparison with the poet of the Western modern tradition who searches
for new ideas and images. Her associations persist over the years as if
they were written in her mind.

She gives the double parallel expressions of traditional Mesoamerican rhetoric a bilingual extension that reflects her social situation,
her indigenous language encroached upon by the national language.
When she says, “I have my paper, I have my book,” she uses first the
Mazatec word for book—xon, “paper”—then the word in Spanish, li-

bro. She calls forjusticia, then she translates the concept into Mazatec,
khoatexoma. She is constantly code-switching back and forth. To call
her a “monoglot Indian” is to underestimate her intelligence. She
couldn’t speak Spanish, but she knew many words in Spanish. She is

what she calls herself: a woman wise in words, an interpreter woman.
When she says, Chjon chjine xqui nia, chjon chjine xca nia—"“I am a
woman wise in medicine, I am a woman wise in herbs”—she often

says in the next breath, chjon médico nia—“I am a doctor woman.” In

the Folkways session after saying, ntia khoa ma, ntia khoa tao— "the

path of business, the path of recompense”—she translates it into Spanish, ntia trabajo—“the path of work.”

The imagination overflows the limits of reality, and in her chants,
as in her profession with the respect it commands, she transcends the

inferior, subservient position imposed on women in traditional Mazatec society. In that sense this medicine woman and poet is a liberated
woman. She is not only a mother woman, she is a lawyer woman, a

woman general. When she says she is demonstrating her courage,

what she says literally is, “I am going to demonstrate my manliness.”
Her bellicose assertion in Spanish, “Yo soy que más hombre” (sic),

means not that she is superhuman but that she is more of a man than
a man. Even the frequent affirmation in her chants that she is a trum-


18680 \ HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 181]

pet woman, a drum woman, a woman violinist goes beyond the roles
allotted to women by her society. In fact, I once overheard a man in

Huautla saying to another that the fame of Maria Sabina puts into dis-

repute the wisdom of Mazatec men.

The couplet chjon nca coya nia, chjon nca co t?a mia—“T am a
woman who looks into the insides of things, I am a woman who examines”—gives an idea of how her words go together in pairs not only

because they complement each other in meaning but also because they
sound similar. Toward the end of the Wasson velada, she proffers all
her personae one after the other in a magnificent passage: chjon tjotsin
nia, chjon tjone nia, chjon tontso?o nia, chjon nca tontsin nia—“T am a

woman who resounds, l am a woman torn up (out of the ground),

I am a spider woman, I am a hummingbird woman.” The euphony
of her chants is based not on rhyme but on the consonance between
words.

The session is a praxis of language with a therapeutic aim. Tixai,

tixai——“Work, work”—her listeners tell her, urging her on in the

same spirit that people listening to jazz yell out enthusiastically, “Tell

it like it is.” Expression is exertion. She says to the sick boy, “Perk up,

perk up,’ clapping her hands to bring him to life. The shaman has to

keep in touch with her or his patients, guide them, protect them, talk
for them, drive the sickness out of them. The greatest praise anyone
can give a shaman is to say she or he “trabaja bonita”: works well.
When she says something particularly beautiful, the listeners spontaneously exclaim, Naskata chili—*Thank you.”

At the end of the Wasson velada, after calling herself a “woman
whirlpool in the lake, a woman who sees into the insides of things,”

she says, “I go down underneath the ground, says / Yes Jesus Christ,

says / My words join Word Rock.” Lao en, Word Rock, is the native

name of the town of Quiotepec in the Cafiada Oaxaquefia where the


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARIA SABINA / 161

[PAGE 182]

Rio Grande from Oaxaca joins the Rio Salado from the Valley of
Tehuacán to become the Río Santo Domingo that enters the moun-

tains in a deep canyon. The Mazatecs call it Nta he, the Big Water, but
they also give it an esoteric name: Nta en, the River of Words. It is
as if she imagines what she says going down into the ground like the
water of the rain into sinkholes, to flow through some of the deepest
caves in the world until it comes out into the river far away below, as
for centuries the words of innumerable shamans singing in the night

have entered a great stream of language running from generation to
generation.

In the chants of Maria Sabina, we can appreciate the interplay of individual invention and traditional liturgy within the oral creativity of
a nonliterate society. The recordings of her words that have saved
them from oblivion give us the opportunity to glimpse the emergence

of a genius from the soil of the communal, religious folk poetry of a
native Mexican campesino people.


SOURCES


For the Mazatec language, the basic texts are Eunice V. Pike, “Huautla de Jiménez

Mazatec,” in Handbook of Middle American Indians, volume 5, edited by Robert

Wauchope (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1967); and George M. Cowan, “The

Mazatec Language,” in R. Gordon Wasson et al., Maria Sabina and Her Mazatec

Mushroom Velada (New York and London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1974). My

writing of the Mazatec words is based on George and Florence Cowan’s transcrip-

tion of the 1958 velada in the latter book and on Eunice V. Pike’s Vocabulario maza-

teco (Mexico: Instituto Linguístico de Verano, 1952).

For material on Huautla, see the chapter “Huauhtla [sic] and the Mazatecs

(1900)” in Frederick Starr’s In Indian Mexico (Chicago: Forbes € Co., 1908), a de-

lightful, insightful look at what he calls “this great Indian town.” Carlos Incháustegui, the first director of the Instituto Nacional Indigenista in Huautla, has writ-


162 \ HENRY MUNN

[PAGE 183]

ten an important trilogy on Mazatec myths and beliefs: Relatos del mundo mágico

mazateco (Mexico: Centro Regional Puebla-Tlaxcala, Instituto Nacional de Antro-

pologia e Historia, 1977), Figuras en la niebla: relatos y creencias de los mazatecos (Tla-

huapán, Puebla: Red de Jonas/Cultura Popular, Premia Editora, 1983), and La mesa

de plata: cosmogonía y curanderismo entre los mazatecos de Oaxaca (Mexico: Instituto

Oaxaqueño de las Culturas, 1994). The opossum myth and the reference to God being on the other side of the ocean are taken from the first of these.

The first book in Spanish about María Sabina was Los hongos alucinantes by Fernando Benítez, included in volume three of his five-volume work, Los indios de

México (Mexico: Ediciones Era, 1964, 1970).

On historical background: Dr. Alfonso Caso first identified the shamanic ses-

sion depicted in the Codex Vindobonensis obverse. See his “Representaciones de hon-

gos en los códices,” Estudios de cultura náhuatl 4 (1963). Quotations from Fray Ber-

nardino de Sahagún's Historia general de las cosas de Nueva España are from the

Angel María Garibay edition (Mexico: Editorial Porrua, 1956). The poem by Net-

zahualcóyotl is from Miguel León-Portilla's translation in his Trece poetas del mundo

azteca (Mexico: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Instituto de Investi-

gaciones Históricas, 1967). For translations of the conjurations collected by the

priest Hernando Ruiz de Alarcón in the seventeenth century, see Alfredo López

Austin, “Conjuros médicos de los nahuas,” Revista de la Universidad de México (July

1970).


THE UNIQUENESS OF MARÍA SABINA / 163

[PAGE 184]

MARIA SABINA IN MEXICO CITY


HOMERO ARIDJIS


A native of Contepec, Michoacán, Homero Aridjis came early to Mexico City,

buildingfrom there a life as poet, novelist, editor, and sometime diplomat, more

recently (through the Group of One Hundred, founded by him and Betty Ferber

Aridjis) as spokesman for endangered species (animals and humans; ecosystems and

deep cultures). Over the years he has become a major presence in Latin American and

world poetry, ofwhom Kenneth Rexroth wrote, “I can think ofno poet ofAridjis’

generation in the Western Hemisphere who is as much at ease in the blue spaces of

illumination.” He servedfrom 1997 to 2003 as the president ofPEN International,

in which position he was able to advance an agenda centered on the relation ofpoetry

to questions ofecological and cultural diversity. In a mode derivedfrom pre-Conquest

and later indigenous sources he writes: “I dream ofseeing theface ofthe earth /

mother ofbeings and mother ofmy mother / and the face ofheaven / father ofair

andfather of my father [now / its shadow appears in my mouth / itsfire in my eyes /

carried by time / my body sacred / trembles” (translated by Eliot Weinberger).


One February day in 1983 my wife Betty and I were driving down
Avenida de Las Palmas in Mexico City when we suddenly saw a headline in an afternoon newspaper saying that María Sabina was sick. We
bought the paper and read that one of the best poets, not only of Mexico but of the entire American continent, was dying in poverty.

Then I remembered R. Gordon Wasson’s words about Sabina:

“Who knows? Perhaps Maria Sabina bids fair to become the most fa-


164

[PAGE 185]

mous Mexican of her time. Long after the personages of contemporary Mexico sink back into the forgotten slough of the dead past, her
name and what she stood for may remain etched in men’s minds.”
R. Gordon Wasson was right in saying this. He had experienced
the magic powers of the “wise woman of the mushrooms” on the

night of June 12, 1958, when she held a velada with the little saint
children, a hallucinogenic mushroom ritual, to cure Perfecto José Gar-

cía, a seventeen-year-old boy, who was seriously ill. That night the

mushroom sang, “There is no cure now.” Then six weeks later Perfecto died.

Given that this assessment was written by Wasson, a foreigner, the
historians of our Hispanic culture were not about to give it any credence. Besides, many of our literary critics, followers of fashionable

Western letters, have ignored the figure and work of Maria Sabina,

even after her death. She was an Indian poet who sang her poems in
the Mazatec tongue. Her chants were first translated from English to
Spanish, not from Mazatec. None of our literati know this language
and few even mention her. This is one of the forms that our cultural

discrimination against the Indian world takes. And an ignorance of

this world among Spanish speakers is something that can be readily

seen, say, if one reads the poem that the Spanish writer and 1989 No-

bel Prize winner Camilio José Cela dedicated to her. This poem is one
of the most absurd and nonsensical texts that any human being has

stitched together in the twentieth century.
I contacted the newspaper to send a message to her through their

reporter. To my surprise I received a collect long-distance call the next
day from Oaxaca. It was her grand-nephew Juan Garcia Carrera, who
told me that he was bringing Marfa Sabina by taxi from Huautla de
Jiménez to Mexico City so that I could help her.
So, when they arrived in the Distrito Federal, Betty and I went to


MARÍA SABINA IN MEXICO CITY / 165

[PAGE 186]

pick them up (María Sabina and three companions) at the Tapo Bus

Station, because the cab driver didn’t want to go farther than Puebla.

We had made arrangements for her at the National Institute of
Cardiology, and at about eleven p.m. Maria Sabina was examined by

the doctors. It wasn’t necessary to hospitalize her, so we took them all
to a hotel where they stayed that night and the following days.
In the meantime, a journalist attacked me in a Mexico City news-

paper, since he had gone to Huautla de Jiménez to interview her, only
to find out that she had come to the capital to see me.

Then, thanks to the help of Dr. Cristina León, who had known her
for some time before, she was taken to the General Hospital. But
when they arrived there, her relatives called me again, telling me that

she hadn't been admitted. She was an Indian and so she needed to
have an identity card from the Mexican National Peasants Confeder-

ation of the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), and she not only
didn't have one but had no idea what they were talking about. Finally
she was admitted.
When the other patients became aware of her presence, they
sought her out in her room in the hope that she would cure them. And
not only patients came to consult her, but even some doctors and

nurses who suffered from certain serious illnesses that Western med-

icine couldn’t cure.
On one of those days a reporter from Televisa TV put a microphone in front of her and asked her why she couldn’t cure herself

if she was such a curandera. Maria Sabina answered him that she
couldn’t in fact cure herself of old age and poverty.
In statements that she made for the Mexican daily Excélsior the

night of her arrival, María Sabina complained that “the government
has always denied help for the poor, even more for the Indians. Before


166 Y HOMERO ARIDJIS

[PAGE 187]

I die I would like to see my people get help. This is one of my dreams,
to see that other Indians like me are rescued from their misery.”

Those words now seem more timely than ever, like the conversations we had in my home around that time and whichI have finally

decided to publish. My perspective on her has not changed since then.
I still think she is one of the greatest Mexican poets of the twentieth
century and a great shaman. Her language is still present in my mind,

different from the one we Mexicans use in our daily lives—that magic
language she heard for the first time when she was between five and
seven years old and the wise man Juan Manuel came to cure her uncle
Emilio Cristino. (See above, page 11.)
After this experience, she would come to revelations of her own

through the mushrooms: “They were the same mushrooms that the
Wise Man Juan Manuel had eaten. I knew them well. My hands gen-

tly tore up one mushroom, then another. I looked at them up close. ‘If
I eat you, you, and you,’ I said to them, ‘I know that you will make me

sing beautifully.’”

The initiation into the world of ecstasy came to Maria Sabina in the
midst of the terrible poverty in which she and her sister lived, that

Indian poverty that accompanied her throughout her life, oscillating
between physical hunger and spiritual insight... Through the mush-

rooms María Sabina learned to see and talk with the dead, and she

kept eating them until she realized that “the mushrooms were like
God.”
Asa sign of gratitude for what Betty and I did for her, María Sabina

gave us a copy of her Vida signed with her thumbprint. She didn’t
know how to read or write. She never went to school, nor did she learn

to speak Spanish. Her parents spoke only Mazatec. Although she confessed that she didn’t know what a school was or even if one existed,


MARIA SABINA IN MEXICO CITY / 167

[PAGE 188]

“if there had been a school, I wouldn’t have gone, because there

wasn’t time. In those days, people workeda lot,” making tortillas and

doing domestic chores, she tells us in her Vida.
As a twenty-year-old widow of someone called Serapio, and with

three children, María Sabina continued a life of hunger and poverty;
she supported herself working the soil and cutting wood, planting
beans, picking corn, and harvesting coffee.

Maria Sabina would later cure her sister by eating mushrooms.
While she was curing her, the Mazatec seer—like Hildegard of Bin-

gen, the sibyl of the Rhine—had a vision: “Some people appeared who
inspired me with respect. I knew they were the Principal Ones of
whom my ancestors spoke. They were seated behind a table on which
there were many written papers.... On the Principal Ones’ table a

book appeared, an open book that went on growing until it was the
size of a person.... One of the Principal Ones spoke to me and said:
“María Sabina, this is the Book of Wisdom. It is the Book of Language.
Everything that is written in it is for you. The Book is yours, take it so

that you can work.’ I exclaimed with emotion: “That is for me. I re-

ceive it.””

“TI had attained perfection,” María Sabina tells us, “I was no longer
a simple apprentice.” And during that same midnight velada, after
having had two visions—in one of which the Supreme Lord of the

Mountains, Chicon Nindó, came to her riding a white horse, and in
the second one a kind of god of vegetation—Maria Sabina, besides
curing her sister, discovered the Language of God: “Language makes
the dying return to life. The sick recover their health when they hear
the words taught by the saint children. There is no mortal who can
teach this Language.”

Maria Sabina gave Betty and me a gift of coffee and a cloth she had


168 \ HOMERO ARIDJIS

[PAGE 189]

embroidered with mushrooms, and she indicated to us that she didn’t
want to do any more trips, because she was afraid that she wouldn’t

return from them and because so much strength was needed to take
the mushrooms, but she would be more than willing to do it for us. We
couldn’t go to Huautla to do the trip with her. But even now the temptation of that lost vision haunts us—especially me, who never took

mushrooms or any drug, although as a young poet myself I knew the
Beat poets who came down to Mexico in the late fifties and the begin-

ning of the sixties searching for the beatific, and many times drugs

were made available to us at literary parties.

Maria Sabina returned to Huautla de Jiménez and died on November 22, 1985, maybe at the age of ninety-seven (nobody ever knew
her real age). It wasn’t known precisely when she was born. Even she
herself wasn’t sure: “I don’t know in what year I was born, but my

mother, Maria Concepción, told me that it was in the morning of the

day they celebrate the Virgin Magdalene, there in Rio Santiago, an
agencia in the municipality of Huautla. None of my ancestors knew
their age.”
In a brief communiqué, the doctor Derna Nila Nodales reported

that “her age, pernicious anemia, pulmonary emphysema, advanced
malnutrition, chronic bronchitis, and nose bleeding were the causes of
the death of the Mazatec woman.”
“The kingdom of the dead is silent, dark and warm ... there is no

coldness there ... there is no need for fear, one must be close to the
dead, we are closer to them than to the living who swindle and cheat
us,” Maria Sabina declared before dying. “I don’t see my face, I don’t
see it. I see peace in that world, and yet I feel sad. I see people whom I
knew in my childhood: my grandfather, my great-grandfather, and
t ”
my parents.


MARIA SABINA IN MEXICO CITY / 169

[PAGE 190]

At dawn, in her house (where the velada took place), after the cock
crowed it was passed over her stiff body. From the sierra dozens of Indians came down to accompany her on the way to the town cemetery.

According to the Mazatec ritual, her soul was received in heaven by
San Pedro.

Translationfrom Spanish by

Laura Jáuregui
and Heriberto Yépez


170 \ HOMERO ARIDJIS

[PAGE 191]

from FAST SPEAKING WOMAN


ANNE WALDMAN


Anne Waldman has been a force in United States poetry since the early 1960s

as a poetforemost but with a lifetime involvement as well in creating and caring

for poetic communities. After heading the St. Mark's Church Poetry Project in

New York, shefounded with Allen Ginsberg and continues to direct the Jack Kerouac

School ofDisembodied Poetics at the Buddhist-centered Naropa University in Boulder,

Colorado. This commitment to poetry and community (in particular to what she
speaks of, wisely, as “the outrider tradition”) has led to her experimental work as a

performer and to her exploration of “chant” as central to contemporary performance

poetry. Her own long chant-poem, Fast Speaking Woman (1975), emergedfrom
an introduction to the recorded texts ofMaria Sabina, an example ofethnopoetic

structures impacting new poetic works over great cultural distances.


“Tis another” —RIMBAUD


because I don’t have spit

because I don't have rubbish
because I don’t have dust

because I don’t have that which is in air
because I am air
let me try you with my magic power


Pm a shouting woman
I’m a speech woman

[PAGE 192]

I’m an atmosphere woman

I’m an airtight woman

I’m a flesh woman
Pm a flexible woman

I’m a high-heeled woman

I’m a high-style woman
I’m an automobile woman

I’m a mobile woman
I’m an elastic woman
I’m a necklace woman

I’m a silk-scarf woman
Pm a know-nothing woman

Pm a know-it-all woman

Pm a day woman
Pm a doll woman

Pm a sun woman

Pm a late-afternoon woman

Pm a clock woman
Pm a wind woman
Pm a white woman

I’M A SILVER-LIGHT WOMAN
IM AN AMBER-LIGHT WOMAN

I’M AN EMERALD-LIGHT WOMAN


I’m an abalone woman

Pm an abandoned woman

I’m the woman abashed, the gibberish woman
the aborigine woman, the woman absconding

the Nubian Woman

the antediluvian woman
the absent woman


172 \ ANNE WALDMAN

[PAGE 193]

the transparent woman

the absinthe woman
the woman absorbed, the woman under tyranny
the contemporary woman, the mocking woman

the artist dreaming inside her house


I’m the gadget woman

I’m the druid woman

I’m the Ibo woman
Pm the Yoruba woman
I’m the vibrato woman

I’m the rippling woman

I’m the gutted woman

I’m the woman without wounds
I’m the woman with shins

I’m the bruised woman

I’m the eroding woman
I’m the suspended woman

I’m the woman alluring
I’m the architect woman

I’m the trout woman
I’m the tungsten woman
I’m the woman with the keys
I’m the woman with the glue


Pm a fast speaking woman


water that cleans
flowers that clean

water that cleans as I go


FAST SPEAKING WOMAN / 173

[PAGE 194]

FAST SPEAKING WOMAN


& THE DAKINI PRINCIPLE


ANNE WALDMAN


Wisdom is Language. — MARÍA SABINA


As I began writing Fast Speaking Woman, | had in my head that I

would do a list-chant naming all the kinds of women there are to be,
interweaving personal details (how I configure the biographical self:
“I’m the impatient woman,” “The woman with the keys”) with all

the energetic adjectives I could conjure up to make the chant speak
of/to/for “everywoman.” Chant is heartbeat. Chant in all cultures is
ancient efficacious poetic practice. One of the oldest pre-Christian lyrics is the gnomic Song of Amergin, a Celtic calendar-alphabet, found

in various Irish and Welsh variants, which has such lines as:

I am a stag: of seven tines,
I am a flood: across a plain,
I am a wind: on a deep lake,
Jama tear: the Sun lets fall,
I am a hawk: abovea cliff,
I am a thorn: beneath the nail,
l am a wonder: among flowers
Tam a wizard: who but I
Sets the cool head aflame with smoke?

[PAGE 195]

This also resembles the Welsh Cad Goddeu or “The Battle of the
Trees” with its ubiquitous litany:


I have been a drop in the air.
I have been a shining star.
I have been a word in a book.
I have been a book originally.
I have been a light in a lantern.


I wanted to use this elemental modal structure to capture Every-

woman’s psyche. The “bottom nature,” Gertrude Stein calls it, of any

human. I enjoyed the bold equation of human “I” identity being at
one with animal, word, lantern. Now it would be omnipresent with
“woman.” Timely, for there was an unprecedented wave of strong
writers and artists coming to the fore on the American cultural landscape, who happened to be women. Any woman might be thinking,

imagining, hearing and saying the same things I was to “name.”
Fast Speaking Woman began on a trip to South America in 1972, a
voyage that triggered durable interest in Meso-American and South
American tantra. “Tantra” literally means “continuity” in the Tibetan
Buddhist sense and refers to the continuity through the ground, path
and fruition of a spiritual journey. Continuity of ground remains “like
the sky.” Continuity of path means you apply exertion (through practice) to overcome aggression, greed, ignorance. Fruition tantra means
you join the wisdom of the teachings and the teachers to your life.
Thus, continuity: the ground has been there from the beginning.

Tantra is referred to as an unbroken golden thread.

I was studying these things hard. Tantra also relates to the quick
path of practice, or Vajrayana, whereby initiates work to overcome
basic “ego”—basic grasping, attachment in this lifetime. It’s often a
radical shift, requiring extreme measures. The suffering that humans


FAST SPEAKING WOMAN & THE DAKINI PRINCIPLE / 175

[PAGE 196]

—these “hairy bags of water”—carry and perpetuate onto others urgently needs to be revoked. Powerful demonic visualizations are conjured. Images of rotting corpses, skull cups of blood, wrathful deities
of all horrific description haunt and vivify the premises. Death is the
magnificent teacher that wakes you up. Mantras are sung to recognize

and invite the provocative, transformative energies into the very

specific human realm of chaos and desire and ignorance. Poetry always seemed an aspect of the spiritual path. Tibetan Vajrayana clearly
draws on the pre-Buddhist shamanic practices of Tibet. Dakinis (Tibetan: mkha’-’gro-ma) are female tricksters, energy principles that

roam charnel grounds, engage in the play between samsara and nirvana moment to moment. They inspire the union of upaya (skillful

means) and prajna (wisdom).

Applied in the indigenous American context, tantra might refer to
the unequivocal power, energy, magic and healing properties of human mind and sacred language, and the unbroken continuity of enlightenment or “seeing.” The fierce images, the “states of mind” one

perceives in Olmec, Toltec, Aztec, Maya iconography are not unlike
the fierce shamanic deities of Tibetan Buddhism. The legends and
myths handed down, cosmologies rampant with visionary landscapes,
magical animal doings, bloody battles, and dramatic couplings resonate with many other “wisdom traditions” as well.
I wrote downa list with all the “A” words in a notebook beginning
with “I’m an abalone woman” to “the artist dreaming inside her
house.” I wanted to assert the sense of my mind, my imagination be-

ing able to travel as artist, as maker, as inventor. To see beyond false
boundaries. As Essie Parrish, a Pomo shaman, has said: “I don’t have
to go nowhere to see. / Visions are everywhere.” And yet I needed to

travel. The poem was written at the Alto de los Ídolos in Colombia;
in Secua, Ecuador; in Machu Picchu; at home on St. Mark’s Place in


176 \ ANNE WALDMAN

[PAGE 197]

New York City. The chant seemed to fall into distinct sections with
more sound associations than anything else mnemonic; thus “d”:
“defiant,” “demented,” “demi-monde”; “s”: “solo,” “sapphire,” “stayat-home.” Obviously, “butterfly” counters “stay-at-home.” Like that.

Very simple, quick—almost child-like—associations, letting the

drive of the repeating assertions take over. Naming, that was the
thrust. And the chant was to be spoken. Or sung. Or more interest-

ingly, sprechstimme, spoke-sung.
I was downtown-white-New York-young-sophisticate college-

graduate-bohemian, but real poet too, reading books, writing books,

listening to jazz, dabbling in psychotropic drugs, magics, beginning

an apprenticeship in tantric Buddhism, attracted to shamanic ener-

gies and pulses of all kinds. I had taken preliminary “refuge” vows in

the Tibetan Buddhist tradition. I had traveled in various exotic direc-

tions and was already “poet” with published work, and Director of the
very oral-based Poetry Project at St. Mark’s Church-in-the-Bowery.

By the late sixties I was reading my poems aloud a good deal, involved
with the activities of Giorno Poetry Systems, helping edit the DialA-Poem series, protesting the war in Vietnam, presenting work col-

laboratively with other artists and musicians, improvising into tape

recorders, editing magazines and anthologies.
I was neither a shaman nor a psychic healer. No special pleading

here. I made no claims beyond those of word/cultural-worker. I was a
“product” to some extent of my generation, the culture, the radical

(were they? in poetry certainly, in politics, in Buddhism) times, but
when I meditated or took mushrooms or ingested peyote, or hiked the

Andes and Himalayas or read deep in Blake or Shakespeare or tried

to imitate Navajo chant off recordings—not to co-opt it but to taste

it—I was timeless seeker in my own imagination’s interstices, passion-

ately in love with the magics of the phenomenal world. I also took


FAST SPEAKING WOMAN & THE DAKINI PRINCIPLE / 177

[PAGE 198]

Gertrude Stein’s language to heart as mentor, as guide. She was out-

rageous.


Comrade-poet Michael Brownstein with whom Pd traveled south
brought me the Folkways recording of Mushroom Ceremony of the
Mazatec Indians ofMexico, which had been recorded the night of July
21-22, 1956, by V.P. and R. Gordon Wasson. It included Sabina’s text
translated from Mazatec into Spanish and English. My friend knew

I would be gripped by it, and could “use” it, appropriating shame-

lessly, as poets are wont to do. Fired by Sabina’s potent voice (both the
sound and the sense, in translation), I then interwove some of her
lines and picked up on the refrain “water that cleans as I go,” also using it as a place to pause and shift rhythm and acknowledge the cleans-

ing impulse of the writing. Although the soundings—Sabina’s voice
chanting—are very different, the text as transcribed into English

clicked with my young woman poem’s thrust and intention. A woman
list. And declaration of power through accretion/repetition. Efficacy

through language.
R. Gordon Wasson, in his “Retrospective Essay” that introduces
the original English version (1981) of Alvaro Estrada’s transcription
and arrangement of María Sabina’s Vida, speaks of how, in discussing

the similarities between the Nahuatl and Mazatec “veladas,” Maria
Sabina and the Nahuatl Wise One “engage in an elaborate self-pres-

entation, beginning in María Sabina's case with professions of humil-

ity and working up to assertions of power and even ability to talk with

the supernatural beings almost on terms of equality.” Her renderings,
compared to mine, come out of pure vision and purpose and include

the sacred mushrooms speaking through her, the occasion of ritual
ceremony, the underpinnings of tribal ritual overlaid with Christian

litany. As such her “workings” (the voices of the mushrooms) are lita-


178 \ ANNE WALDMAN

[PAGE 199]

nies of fully actualized authority. She travels through myriad realms,
becoming omniscient, clairvoyant. Like the highly realized adepts in
Tibetan Buddhism her consciousness discloses its power in many directions simultaneously. “She” is in all the corners of the universe. Her

body of chants (as transcribed and in translation) is clearly one of the
great transformational language texts of any time.

My own composition, pale by comparison, is exploratory—resembling Gertrude Stein's “Lifting Belly”—impulsive, free associative,
naive at times. I didn’t want to draw on Sabina literally or faithfully, I

wanted to absorb the experience of her works (in translation) in me,
and put myself into her and then let the “text” (meant to be performed
or sung) emerge as a kind of intuitive “re-working.” The rhythms on

her recording of course are entirely different from the translation, and

from my own lines, but there is the overall sense of a journey, of continuous energy (sound in space) in act of traveling.

Often in early public readings I would add or improvise lines for
the particular situation at hand. Once during a reading for the “street

people” of Boulder, Colorado, in 1974, where organizers hadn't
secured the proper permit for the public gathering, I saw two cops

approaching from the distance. As they closed in I ascertained that
they were both women. I immediately sprung to “I’m the blue cop

woman, “I’m the woman with the billy club,” “I’m the powerful bust-

cop-lady assigned to close this reading down,” and so on. The tension
dispelled, the event continued. When I was chanting the poem for a

scene in Bob Dylan’s film Renaldo and Clara at Niagara Falls, dressed

like a postcard American Indian (not my idea), I had to shout over the
thundering waterfall, improvising lines that related to the situation:

“Pm the deep-plunging-water-microphoned-thunder woman,’ etcetera. (This scene, mercifully, was not used in the movie, although


FAST SPEAKING WOMAN & THE DAKINiI PRINCIPLE / 1739

[PAGE 200]

some of the soundtrack of the poem accompanied shots of Dylan
walking downa street, as if it’s a “voice” in his head.)
I only knew of María Sabina through the Folkways recording
when I wrote Fast Speaking Woman. Jerome Rothenberg told me more

about her, and in 1976, Sara Dylan described her visit to Sabina and

participation in a “velada” (vigil) and gave me a photograph of her.

(By then, it was fashionable to make the trip to Huautla in Mexico to

imbibe the Aongos.) The Alvaro Estrada Vida, which I came on later,
is both an invaluable ethnographic text and a heartbreaking account

of the adulteration of a sacred practice. Estrada’s transcription of Sabina’s own explication of her difficult life and her coming to the saint
children, along with the subsequent karma that resulted after her

practices became publicized and abused, is a document for these dark
times. Maria Sabina said, before her death, “From the moment the

foreigners arrived, the saint children lost their purity. They lost their

force; the foreigners spoiled them.”

What survives, fortunately, is the poetry, which has a curative

power. It is a kind of “terma”—or found wisdom treasure, a rune that

needed unlocking—that Sabina brought to consciousness to benefit
others. Perhaps the efficacy will be reclaimed in the future. She herself

speaks of the power of Language to heal:


Language makes the dying return to life. The sick recover their health
when they hear the words taught by the saint children. 1 cure with Lan-
guage, the Language of the saint children. When they advise me to

sacrifice chickens, they are placed on the parts where it hurts. The
rest is Language.


Language belongs to the saint children. They speak and I have the
power to translate. If I say that I am the little woman of the Book, that
means that a Little-One-Who-Springs-Forth is a woman and that she


180 \ ANNE WALDMAN

[PAGE 201]

is the little woman of the Book. In that way, during the vigil, I turn
into a mushroom—little woman—of the book....

IfT am on the aquatic shore, I say:
I am a woman who is standing in the sand...

Because wisdom comes from the place where the sand is born.


Since the first publication of Fast Speaking Woman, I’ve taught

classes on shamanic and ethnopoetic literatures at the Naropa Insti-

tute, using, among other texts, Jerome Rothenberg’s Technicians of
the Sacred, as well as Sabina’s imaginative chants. The class one year
experimented with various ritual word-enactments to create a force
field of energy for protest demonstrations at Rocky Flats plutonium
plant in Boulder. One evolved into an anti-nuclear piece which was
subsequently performed as a group collaboration. I also began chanting “Mega mega mega mega mega mega mega death bomb—
ENLIGHTEN!” the summer of 1978 and a list of “glowings”

(“teeth glowing,” “microfilm glowing,” “pages of words glowing”),
later working the lines into the lyrics for a “new wave” recording of a
piece entitled “Uh Oh Plutonium!”
In some respects of course the whole shaman concept is problem-

atic. Lecturing in Munich some years ago on “the poet as shaman” and
the difficult issues that artistic shamanism or even “white” shamanism
raise—considering the hardships and trials of actual shaman practi-

tioners—I wanted to make a case for the influence of shamanism in
the work of specific writers and artists—Joseph Beuys being just one
example. Poets are hardly shamans, a contentious critic exclaimed.
They’
re jet-setters, bunglers, indulgent ego-maniacs. No doubt, I re-

torted—poets don't claim to be enlightened healers, but sometimes,

because they’re available as “antennae of the race,” they can receive or
tap into energy sources someone else might be deaf or impervious to.


FAST SPEAKING WOMAN & THE DAKINI PRINCIPLE / 181

[PAGE 202]

They have a way with the Language. It is a calling, much like that of
Maria Sabina. Whatever else she was, she was also a Poet.
I remember the delight I had when I began Fast Speaking Woman,
thinking every woman can do this, every woman zs doing this. Like
the “dakini” principle in Buddhism, where every woman is a dakini
or sky-walker, one who does not have to walk on the ground, who can
travel and can reconfigure the world through the play of her imagination. She is both messenger and protector, embodying the qualities of
compassion, emptiness, and wisdom.


182 \ ANNE WALDMAN

[PAGE 203]

THE LITTLE SAINT OF HUAUTLA


JEROME ROTHENBERG


I met Maria Sabina in 1979, brought to Huautla by Henry Munn and

accompanied throughout by him and his wife Nati, the sister of Alvaro Estrada. The town was then remote—as it no longer is—and sit-

uated in the high mountains of the Mazatecan Sierras. But it was also
clearly a part of our contemporary world, and even Maria Sabina’s

hillside house—across the path from the mobile home the govern-

ment had put in place for her—had familiar objects in it that linked
her world to ours. Her household altar—memorably—was the repos-

itory for what one took to be gifts brought there by two decades of for-

eign visitors. In memory I can still see vividly the images of Hindu
gods that stood out from among the other, largely Catholic figures.
She smoked packaged cigarettes—as we did—and offered us bottled
beer too, but our presence was, I thought, of little interest to her. And
when Henry Munn asked me—against my own judgment—to take a

rattle and sing an American Indian song for her (in my translation),

she listened for less than a minute and went off to attend to a crying
grandchild or great-grandchild outside her door.

That was all as it should be and a clear indication of the one-sidedness of such a cultural meeting. It was also at Henry’s suggestion, but

possibly as her own idea, that she offered to arrange a velada for us—


193

[PAGE 204]

for a price that she then named. That struck me as curious, since I had

been reading in her Vida, which I was then helping to publish in English, that “a Wise One should not charge for her services” and that

“one is born to cure, not to do business with her knowledge.” At that
moment too I realized, as never before, our mutual contemporaneity

and the fate we shared as poets in an imperfect world.
The poem I wrote about that follows.


THE LITTLE SAINT OF HUAUTLA


lives to be too old

her voice

painful to her chest
echoes

until her belly sags

cries to the tumor
under her heart:

“o you moon child
“you little eye of god
“Tittle birds that grow

“from trees
the drunk beside us
—young man


sans teeth—
who stumbles
to reach her hilltop
sits by the saint
& hiccups

“are you a saint?” he asks
“Tam a governor” she tells him


184 \ JEROME ROTHENBERG

[PAGE 205]

“Tam a clock

“a wheel

“the palsy in the judge's fingers
“flutters my skirts
“Tam the moon
“I welcome my dizziness

“I chew the little things

“& whistle
“you will eat your eyes
“— the clock says—

“your shadows

“will slide down your throats
“will choke you
“you will come back to my hillside
“flying martyrs

“will bang tibetan bells
“the mountain god
“little king on horseback
“will cut you down

the saint says
hides behind her lost teeth

the face of Krishna
smiles back at us

her own face in a glow

of cigarette smoke

as we make
small talk

small mirrors shine from
the robes of all saints
Mexico in summer


THE LITTLE SAINT OF HUAUTLA / 185

[PAGE 206]

still wet with fruit
the garbage of poor lives

poor women know
their huipils bright with birds
& butterflies

flowers of the orange dance
—o mystic weddings—

where in Huautla de Jiménez
we were the last to come

the bus still bringing

freaks from Mexico
to eat the sour mushrooms

with earth & goat shit

wild on their lips:
this is language

tiny letters
so brilliant in the sky
of la sierra mazateca

where we arrive

to meet our tiger shamans

looking for their tracks
their footprints

like whirlwinds in far cities
torn from the earth

o clocks
o eagles

for you the sweat of Christ
Christ's semen
becomes a plant
transparent flower


186 Y JEROME ROTHENBERG

[PAGE 207]

glowing in ocean
someone walking with
Christ’s flower
asastaff aman

with money like a saint
general whose footprints leave

whole jewels
in our path
—she sings
searches for the night—

the drunk Indian
(poor boy)
smiles to her face

& hiccups

like a drum
his language dying in him

“are you a movie star?” he asks

“Tam a calendar” she tells him
“Tam a comet woman

“an opossum

“I drink warm beer
“freshly I make my bed
“my photographs envelop Mexico

“IT cackle like a turkey
“my voice is endless

“in museums where shawls are hanging
“in bars in fancy homes in ballrooms

“in concert with the grateful dead
“France awaits me

“the Italian directors come at night


THE LITTLE SAINT OF HUAUTLA / 187

[PAGE 208]

“they suck my mushrooms
“the Pope comes to Oaxaca with the others
“butlers are dancing with
“the brides of god

“brides of mountain men
“little kings on horseback

“Shiva’s ikon dances
“on my altar

“clocks are dancing
“& opossums

“wheels & governors
“in dreams without a word
“left to intone

she says it says

for her

the book of language says translated into broken Spanish
sold to feed the dead
the dying language

hiding from strangers’ eyes

the way the mushrooms hide

will not speak
except when the children’s voices

tell us:
casa


dinero

hongos

hidden from your eyes too

Maria poet of these hills

fast speaking woman

bought & sold


188 Y JEROME ROTHENBERG

[PAGE 209]

to feed the language of the rich
—cloaca of all languages—
—oppressors whom you love—

you hilltop woman
you saint woman
you clock woman
you moon woman

you martyr woman


you mirror woman

you tiger woman

you language woman

you flower woman
you money woman


you warm beer woman
you my mother shepherdess
(it says)
o mother of the sap (it says)

mother of the dew (it says)
mother of breasts (it says)
mother of the harvest

you rich mother
now standing visible & loud

before us
ha ha ha
so SO SO

SO SO SO

hee hee hee
see see see


hum hum hum
it says & rises


THE LITTLE SAINT OF HUAUTLA / 189

[PAGE 210]

lonely lost
the spirit that wanders through America
saint children
disembodied in city air

crazy in Mexico

a squatters’ village to hold the poor
fury of dead Mazatecs

the ghost of Juárez

speaking English
like my own voice
at your doorway

shaking this sad rattle

singing

without the hope of god

or clocks
with no word between us

veladas that cost
a thousand pesos
this vigil for your book
& mine

for any languages
still left to sell


190 \ JEROME ROTHENBERG

[PAGE 211]

THE POET SPEAKS,

THE MOUNTAIN SINGS


JUAN GREGORIO REGINO


Since the late 1970s Juan Gregorio Regino has been a leadingfigure in the movement

— throughout Latin America — aimed at the creation ofnew literatures using native
languages alongside the dominant Spanish. A Mazatec by birth and upbringing,
Regino was a cofounder and president ofthe Comité Directivo de Escritores en
Lenguas Indigenas (Association of Indigenous Writers). His poetry and other

writings have appeared in his own Mazatec and Spanish versions, and in 1996
he received the Netzahualcöyotl Prizefor Indigenous Literature. The remarks that

follow were made in response to this award, an example ofthe continuities between

the Mazatec past and a present shared with oral poets such as Maria Sabina.


K'e tjien fucho ena. Up to here my voice can be heard.

K'e tyien fucho ndana. Up to here my spirit extends.

Kui ndi’ya xi tsja yik’ien. In this house that gives shade.
Kui ndt’ya xi tsja isten. In this house that refreshes.


Our writing was interrupted many years ago, and yet we have learned
by means of orality to preserve our memory. From the people of wisdom in my land I have learned to value and to cultivate the word.
For my people the word is truth, feeling, memory, symbol of struggle,
of resistance, of identity. To possess it and to re-create it is a way of
knowledge, a form of communion with the sacred, a pact with nature,
a romance with the universe. In the dense vegetation of our moun-


191

[PAGE 212]

tains, it is not only the poet who speaks; the mountain sings also, the
duendes of the ceiba also raise their voices, the duendes of the blue cascades, the duendes of the deep ravines. The countryside is also poetry;

woman is also.
To make indigenous literature is neither folklore nor a passing
fashion; it is a dialogue of identities, of civilizations, of languages, of

millenarian voices and perennial spirits.

It is fellowship, it is respect for difference, it is the knowledge ofone
for the other.
The indigenous languages are a patrimony of our country that

should not go on developing in hiding and subordination. They are
living languages whose contact with Spanish brings a mutual enrichment, because there are no pure languages and no superior or inferior

ones.


Our peoples have not remained static, they construct their truth
every day; today we can say that we sing in two voices, we whistle in

two tongues. We believe in the language of the earth we have cultivated, we believe in the language that arrived from the other side of

the ocean, we believe in the universal language of the sun. Languages
are our treasures as our identity is the eagle and the serpent, the
crowns and the laurels.

We have survived ethnocide, we have learned to write and to cultivate our minds with foreign books. Today we are recovering the tra-

dition of the tlacuilos, blanketed beneath a single concept: Mexico. Today is a time of unity, of peace and of work.
I am ending my presentation with a fragment of the words of a
great Mazatec woman: Maria Sabina.

Ngat’e xujun Ne. Because they are the papers of the judge
K’ui xujun kjuakjintakun. — It is the Book ofyour law


192 \ JUAN GREGORIO REGINO

[PAGE 213]

K’ui xujun xtitjun. It is the Book of your government
Ngat’e mana chjajo ’anjaa Because I know how to speak with
your eagle
Ngaté béjne ngasundie. Because the world knows us
Ngat’e béjne Nena. Because God knows us


Translationfrom Spanish by

Jerome Rothenberg


THE POET SPEAKS, THE MOUNTAIN SINGS .. 193

[PAGE 214]

THE SONG BEGINS


JUAN GREGORIO REGINO


Because they are the papers ofthe judge

It ıs the Book of your law

It ıs the Book of your government

Because I know how to speak with your eagle

Because thejudge knows us

Because the world knows us

Because God knows us

— MARIA SABINA


In the light of the candle,

in the essence of sweet basil.

In the spirit called forth by the incense,
my life’s book is laid out.


Open is my thought before the judge.
The gears of time stop short.

So that Limbo may pull back a pace.
So that the sun and moon dress up
because the images take on a face.


194

[PAGE 215]

What does the smoke of the incense say as it accompanies
the words that initiate their journey to the heavens.

What is the message of the maize your palms propel
that seeks for truth there in the mystery.
In what place, what path

and on what pretext does the guardian of the earth

possess my spirit.

Today reveal it, master:
before my person,

before the eyes of God,
before the witnesses.


Hil


You who know the sacred,

who lead us on the pathway sown with songs.

Open the sky to me, show me the world,
start me on the path to wisdom.

Let me drink from the children who spring forth,
teach me to speak and read the language of the Wise Ones,
flood me with the power of the Gods,
inscribe my name there in the Sacred Place.

I am clean, my wings are free.
Dew will cause new words to sprout,
rain will nourish wisdom.
I am star that shines beneath the stone,

sea that dances in the blue of sky,


THE SONG BEGINS / 195

[PAGE 216]

light that travels in raw weather.
I am sun’s vein, J am song.

I am dance and chant that heals.


IV


The spirit of evil lies in wait,
the song begins.

May the words arıse that open up the heavens,
the prayers that cut across the profane world.

So may the candles of white light be lit
and dripenvenomed blood.

It is a mortal struggle in the Sacred Place,
it is the ransom for my spirit.

For my life these fresh leaves will go forth,
these knowing words,

these colored feathers,

these songs for this initiation.


V


Here my basil is at daybreak,

clean like the horizon:
my medicine is fresh,

my medicine 1s white.


In its leaves the gentle word

that opens up the heavens:
the word that gives us peace,

the word that gives us breath.


196 \ JUAN GREGORIO REGINO

[PAGE 217]

My basil will arrive where sins are purged,

will fly off clean to where dawn grows bright.
My pleas will reach into the book of records,

will free my soul from poisons that can kill me.


Vi


My incense will reach the place

where it communes with life.

It will reach the house of those
who are the guardians of the earth.
It will be heard out in the place of images,

will plead its case there in the bosom of the night.


However many mouths they have,

however many tongues they may possess,

those who have knowledge of the heavens,

those conversing with the codices
and speaking with the Gods.


Vil


Here is my spirit,

my oak, my cedar.

Here in my heart the prayer is born,
is with it in its journey to the heavens.


From the house of purity,

the table of the dawn.

I am asking for strength.
I am seeking justice.


HE SONG BEGINS / 197

[PAGE 218]

The sacred book will open,

the darkness will grow bright.
In the house of writings.

In the house of the stelae.


Vili


Down to the soles of my feet.
Down to the palms of my hands.

At the apex of my thought.
At the core of my extremities.


My spirit has feet,
my soul has hands,
my veins leave tracks,

pulses of time and the way.


I can talk with the dawn,

submerge myself in turbid waters of torrential rivers,

barefoot can walk up the incline,

can hurl my song against the wind.


1X


I arrive with God the Father, God the Mother,
I have crossed seven winds,
seven levels of the heavens.

I have defied seven faces of the World Below.


198 \ JUAN GREGORIO REGINO

[PAGE 219]

Because I have eyes for looking at the night,
light enough to plumb the mystery.
Because I am a messenger who guarantees his word,
a singer who can track the soul.


In the house of purity

I come to put my calling to the test,
come to awaken secrets.

I come to seek the word,
the fresh path and the clean path.


Iam a bird that prophesies the sacred,
morning star that opens the horizon,
cicada that whispers to the moon,

mist that cures the mountain.


Here the fiesta ends,
the road is closed, the song is over.
Lucidity is lingering in the copal,
kernels of corn close up their pages,
standing guard over the journey’s secrets.


A mystery is disappearing,
new ways emerging, ways to fathom life.
The birds trace paths, the earth is fasting.
The moon confides her troubles to the sun
and dawn shakes loose on the horizon.


HE SONG BEGINS / 199

[PAGE 220]

Here the fiesta ends,
the song rests in the morning’s arms.
The children who spring forth open the world’s heart,
nature is sending signals.

Translationfrom Spanish by Jerome Rothenberg


200 \ JUAN GREGORIO REGINO

[PAGE 221]

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY


The sources below cover the original publications ofmaterial in

this volume, along with references that may givefurther insights

into the life and works ofMaria Sabina. The citations at the end of

Henry Munn’s essay (page 162) can act as an additional supplement.


PRIMARY SOURCES


Estrada, Alvaro. Vida de Marta Sabina: La sabia de los hongos. Mexico: Siglo XXI
Editores, 1977.

Estrada, Alvaro, Henry Munn, et al. Maria Sabina: Her Life and Chants. Santa
Barbara, Calif.: Ross-Erikson Publishers, 1981.

Regino, Juan Gregorio. Netzahualcóyotl Prize Address (“The poet speaks, the

mountain sings”). In La palabra florida, año 1, número 2, (1997).

. Ngata’ara stsee (Que siga lloviendo). Mexico: Escritores en Lenguas In-
dígenas, A.C., 1999.
Rothenberg, Jerome. New Selected Poems, 1970-1985. New York: New Direc-
tions, 1986,

Waldman, Anne. Fast Speaking Woman. Pocket Poets Series, no. 33. San Fran-

cisco: City Lights Books, 1996.

Wasson, R. Gordon, et al. María Sabina and Her Mazatec Mushroom Velada.

New York and London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1974.
Wasson, Valentina Pavlovna, and R. Gordon Wasson. Mushrooms, Russia, and

History. Vol. 2. New York: Pantheon Books, 1957.


201

[PAGE 222]

Works by Henry Munn and Homero Aridjis are previously unpublished, as is
Alvaro Estrada’s addendum to his “Introduction to The Life of Maria Sa-
bina.”


ADDITIONAL WORKS ON MARIA SABINA


Benítez, Fernando. Los hongos alucinantes. Mexico: Ediciones Era, 1964, 1970.
Cela, Camilo José. María Sabina y el carro de heno, o el inventor de la guillotina.
Madrid: Biblioteca Jucar, 1974.
Fernández, Fernando, ed. “Tras la huella de María Sabina” (with articles by
Álvaro Estrada, Homero Aridjis, Juan García Carrera, Nicolás Echevarría,
and Fernando Fernández). Viceversa, no. 63 (August 1998).
Munn, Henry. “The Mushrooms of Language.” In Hallucinogens and Shaman-
ism, edited by Michael Harner. New York: Oxford University Press, 1973.
. “Writing in the Imagination of an Oral Poet.” In Symposium of the
Whole: A Range of Discourse Toward an Ethnopoetics, edited by Jerome and
Diane Rothenberg. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press, 1983.


DISCOGRAPHY


Mushroom Ceremony of the Mazatec Indians of Mexico. Recorded by V.P. and
R.G. Wasson at Huautla de Jiménez. New York: Folkways Records, 1957.


202 \ SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

[PAGE 223]

SOURCE NOTES AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


Unless otherwise indicated, all works cited are by Maria Sabina.


THE LIFE


The Life (La Vida), written with Alvaro Estrada, was published in Spanish as Vida
de Maria Sabina: La sabia de los hongos (Mexico: Siglo XXI Editores, 1977). The English translation first appeared in Maria Sabina: Her Life and Chants, by Alvaro
Estrada, Henry Munn, et al. (Santa Barbara, Calif.: Ross-Erikson, 1981). Reprinted
courtesy Alvaro Estrada. Translation reprinted courtesy Henry Munn.

THE CHANTS


“The Folkways Chant” was recorded in July 1956, and the recording was published
as Mushroom Ceremony ofthe Mazatec Indians ofMexico (Folkways Records and Service Corporation, New York City, U.S.A. FR 8975). Translation from Mazatec into
Spanish (1977) by Alvaro Estrada. The English version by Henry Munn is based on
that translation and on the independent translation by Eloina Estrada de González.
It also draws directly on the recording with the assistance of Nati Estrada. Translation reprinted courtesy Henry Munn.

“The 1970 Session: Three Excerpts” were recorded by Celerino Cerqueda and
translated from Mazatec into Spanish by Eloina Estrada de Gonzalez. The English
version by Henry Munn is printed courtesy Henry Munn.

“The Mushroom Velada: Three Excerpts” were translated into Spanish and English by George M. and Florence H. Cowan, and appeared in Wasson’s Maria

[PAGE 224]

Sabina and Her Mazatec Mushroom Velada (New York and London: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1974). Excerpts from Maria Sabina and Her Mazatec Mushroom Velada,
© 1974 by R. Gordon Wasson, reprinted by permission of Harcourt, Inc.


COMMENTARIES & DERIVATIONS


“Introduction to The Life ofMaria Sabina” was written by Alvaro Estrada and was
first published in Spanish in Vida de Maria Sabina: La sabia de los hongos (Mexico:
Siglo XXI Editores, 1977). The English translation by Henry Munn first appeared
in María Sabina: Her Life and Chants, by Alvaro Estrada, Henry Munn, et al. (Santa
Barbara, Calif.: Ross-Erikson, 1981). Reprinted courtesy Alvaro Estrada. Translation reprinted courtesy Henry Munn.

“Teo-Nanácatl: The Mushroom Agape” by Valentina Pavlovna Wasson and R.
Gordon Wasson originally appeared in Mushrooms, Russia, and History, vol. 2 (New
York: Pantheon, 1957). Reprinted courtesy Masha Britten.

“The Uniqueness of Maria Sabina” by Henry Munn is printed courtesy Henry
Munn.

“María Sabina in Mexico City” by Homero Aridjis is printed courtesy Homero
Aridjis.

Fast Speaking Woman and “Fast Speaking Woman & the Dakini Principle” by Anne
Waldman originally appeared in Fast Speaking Woman (San Francisco: City Lights,
1975, 1996). Reprinted in a revised version courtesy Anne Waldman.

“The Little Saint of Huautla” by Jerome Rothenberg originally appeared in New
Selected Poems, 1970-1985 (New York: New Directions, 1986). Reprinted courtesy
New Directions.

“The Poet Speaks, the Mountain Sings” by Juan Gregorio Regino originally appeared in La palabra florida, año 1, número 2 (1997). “The Song Begins” by Juan
Gregorio Regino originally appeared in Mazatec and Spanish versions in Ngata'ara
stsee (Que siga lloviendo) (Mexico: Escritores en Lenguas Indígenas, 1999). Reprinted
courtesy Juan Gregorio Regino.


204 SOURCE NOTES AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

[PAGE 226]

COPYEDITING: MELODY LACINA AT WILSTED
& TAYLOR
PUBLISHING SERVICES


DESIGN AND COMPOSITION: JEFF CLARK AT WILSTED & TAYLOR
PUBLISHING SERVICES


TEXT: GRANJON


DISPLAY: AKZIDENZ GROTESQUE


PRINTER AND BINDER: THOMSON-SHORE, INC.
