[PAGE 001]

RE,nit ee: ” AS
y TEA Re BE
DR EEE oIA SA
LEEREN REF Sey aM
u Biete wi


| CONVERSATIONS

WITH

| Milton H. Erickson, M.D.


VOLUME 3


anging Children
and Families


Edited by


Jay Haley

John Weakland Gregory Bateson Jay Haley

Palo Alto, California- 1950’s


TRIANGLE PRESS

[PAGE 002]

CONTENTS


ITRODUCTION vii


cuapreRn 1 Family Interview Techniques
and the Trauma That Cures

4 nabrir 2 Disengaging Family Members 22


4 arten 3 Dealing with the Difficult Family 52

4 ren A On Disturbing and Instrumentalizing 79

Copyright © 1985 by Jay Haley 1 narra 5 Ordeals of Children and Parents 94
All rights reserved.
First Edition 1 ner 6 Directives and Joining Children 122

No part of this book may be reproduced, storedin a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means electronic, wreNnbDIx A Biographical Conversation 141
mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, or”
otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
Index 169
Printed in the United States of America


Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 84-052027


ISBN 0-931513-03-0

Published by Triangle Press
Distributed by W. W. Norton & Co., Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue,
New York, N. Y. 10110
W, W. Norton & Co., Ltd., 37 Great Russell Street, London,
WCIB3NU


Y

[PAGE 003]

INTRODUCTION


This volume contains conversations with Milton H.
Erickson about his ways of dealing with whole families and
his therapy of children. In Volumes 1 and 2 of this series
are presented his conversations about changing individuals
and changing marital couples. Included as an appendix in
this volume is a conversation with him about his life which
provides biographical information not published before.
The reader unfamiliar with Dr. Erickson will find in
Lhese conversations a lively presentation of his ideas and
approach to therapy. The reader who has read everything
written about Erickson will find new material as well as
the basic data of his views expressed in his own words.
Some of the case reports will be familiar because I drew
upon these conversations for my book, Uncommon Therapy.* A few cases Erickson told to other people who have
since published them. The Erickson scholar will have the
opportunity to examine these transcripts of what Erickson
uclually said and compare them with the summaries of
authors who have written about his work.
"he conversations in this particular volume took place
from 1958 to 1961 and were part of Gregory Bateson's
‚research project investigation of family therapy, an adven-
lure we had just begun at that time. For several years the
project had been studying Erickson’s hypnosis and therupy as part of a larger investigation of the nature of therupeutic change. Besides our research interest, John Weak-


* Haley, J. Uncommon Therapy, New York, Norton, 1973.


vii

[PAGE 004]

Introduction ix
viii Conversations with Milton II Erickson


As I read these conversations now, its seems evident
land and 1 were doing therapy in private practice and so
that Dr. Erickson was often both puzzled and patient with
had a practical concern for learning how therapy should
us. When we gave a complex, negative description of a fambe done. Bateson participated in these conversations with
ily, he would respond with an inquiry about our therapy
both a research interest and a wish to have guidance with
goal and how what we were saying was relevant to what
a family he was doing therapy with as part of the project.
we were trying to do. His emphasis was on operations to
The first conversations in this volume about therapy
induce a change, while we were concerned with a research
with whole families took place in 1958. The reader should
description, if not a philosophical one, about the family.
keep in mind that we questioners were just beginners in
These conversations are presented to bring out Erickdealing with families in that early time. We had done our
son’s views about dealing with families, not to present
first interview with a whole family in 1956, and by April
those of the questioners. My views today are different,
1957 I was interviewing a family and we called it family
both about family therapy in general and about techniques
therapy. At that time there were, at most, one or two peo-
with families containing a schizophrenic in particular. It
ple anywhere, that we knew about, interviewing whole fam-
seems now that the sensible goal is to help the problem
ilies. Dr. Erickson was one of the people who did therapy
young person function normally and the family organize
with families, as we had learned when talking with him
Lo make that happen. That is the view Dr. Erickson had
about other matters beginning in 1955. Therefore, we
at that time. When we were emphasizing discussing with
sought him out to gather information about his therapy
(he family their communication process, he was emphasizapproach for research reasons and also to consult with him
ing that one should help the young person and family
about the therapy we were attempting with families. We
disengage and have a normal life. That is what sensible
had no one else with experience to consult.
therapists do today, and the reader might keep in mind
I say all this because I wish to emphasize that the views
hat getting to that point took experience and trial and erwe project members expressed about families at that time
ror with a variety of difficult families. Erickson had taken
were comments by beginners; they are not an expression
some of those steps previous to these conversations.
of the views we would hold today. In fact, I am embar-
‘The recordings of these conversations were not made to
rassed by some of the comments and questions. They are
present Erickson’s ideas to the world but as a way of takoften the kind of comments which irritate me with trainees
ing notes for research purposes. Therefore, the reader will
today. We were rather negative, pessimistic, often anti-
not find the conversations systematic and complete but
parent and anti-mother. More important, we were confus-
often scattered with a number of interruptions. Sometimes
ing our research descriptions with ideas needed to do ther-
(hese interruptions are practical ones, such as for telephone
apy. A communication description of a family was not
calls or breaks during the day. At other times they are innecessarily helpful if one set out to change a family, and
dications of a break in the conversation for a period of time.
we were just learning that theory for research and theory
The arrangement here is largely by year, beginning with
for change are not the same. In defense, it might be noted
the earliest one and progressing forward.
that we had been doing this kind of therapy hardly more
Por the research-minded, the recordings of these converthan a year, and we were working with the most difficult
tuitions are on file with the Erickson Foundation in Phoetypes of families -- those families with a hospitalized mem-
nix, Arizona.
ber diagnosed as schizophrenic.

[PAGE 005]

CHAPTER 1


Family Interview

Technique and the

Trauma That Cures


1958. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Gregory Bateson, Jay Haley,

and John Weakland.


Bateson: We want to talk to you about your experiences
in working with husbands and wives, husbands and
wives and children. How one deals with multiple pa-
tient situations. How you deal with multiple patient
situations. And about the dynamics of families that
have schizophrenics in them.
lrickson: You want a discussion from me, unformulated,
as to how I would approach the situation with a given
family.
B: There are various ways this can be done. We can run
you (audio)tapes of families, or John and Jay have spe-
cific questions. I have some myself.
17: Why don’t you conduct it the way you think it should
be conducted.
13: Well, let's start the way John thought it should be con-
ducted, by asking you questions rather than throw-
ing data at you. It is your data in the back of your
head that we are after.

[PAGE 006]

Conversations with Aiton HE Mrrehson
Family Interview Technique and the Trauma That Cures 3

Weakland: My idea of the way to conduct things is that
tween. Then if I send mother and child out of the
it would be profitable to start more or less the way
room, Ill carefully move father from his chair into
Jay and I have worked at getting information from
mother’s chair. Quite often I'll have mother, when she
you before in the course of our several visits to Phoe-
comes back, sit in child’s chair, or in husband’s chair,
nix. We have certain questions about families and
at least temporarily.
dealing with them, and we ought to try and bring
W: So that you define the position, but you indicate that
some of those up first.
they can sit in somebody else’s seat, so to speak, for
E: Well, there is something I think that I ought to say first.
a while.
If Pm going to interview a father and mother and son,
E: That's right. “As you sit where your son sat, maybe you
or a father, mother and daughter, or two children, to
can think more clearly about him through that asso-
begin that interview, to preface it, to lay the founda-
ciation.” “If you sit where your husband sat, maybe
tion, I happen to mention that father is sitting in that
it will give you somewhat of his view of me as I sit
chair. Of course mother is sitting in that other chair,
here.” Thus I force them into an objective role about
and sister is sitting over here, and brother is sitting
their organization. I tell the child, “Well, suppose you
over here. I make mention of that in several ways so
sit in mother’s seat.” “Suppose you sit in father’s seat.”
that I define them geographically. That way I give
Also, from time to time when I repeat the interviews
each one of them a position, a spatial position in the
with the entire family, I shuffle them about so that
interview. By giving them this spatial position in the
while mother had this chair originally, for the next
interview, when I talk to them, I talk to that particu-
two or three interviews, all of a sudden, the family
lar space, and the others listen in. When that person
grouping is rearranged. Yet it’s a family grouping, but
talks to me, the others listen in. So I get that spatial
mother’s chair has now become the one that used to
compartmentalization. That considerably prevents
be father’s chair. I can think of the family that I saw
the others from barging in, and forces the others un-
just recently: father’s chair, mother’s chair, big sister’s
wittingly to take an objective view, at least in part.
chair, younger sister's chair. I maneuvered that around
It's a rather simple procedure. That's all I have to say
because not one of them would talk and tell me the situ-
on that.
ation. So I maneuvered their positions. When younger
W: Well, I take it that when you deal with families, at
sister got into big sister’s chair, younger sister gave
times you see them all together, and at times you will
me an awful lot of information. Father couldn’t talk
separate out one or two members and talk to them
to me in his chair. His statement was, “My mind just
separately. So that you work both ways.
goes blank.” But in mother’s chair he gave a lot of inE: I work both ways. I may interview the family jointly,
formation. I carefully defined their positions because
and then I'll put one member out. But after I send the
l wanted to start to handle that situation. I knew it
other members out, I again redefine the position in
was going to be critical.
which those members were. I usually give the wife a
Haley: Do you have general rules on when you send the
certain chair, and then the husband this chair over
family out and talk to one member alone, or why you
here, and the children, or the child, the chairs in be-
don't consistently deal with them all at the same time?

[PAGE 007]

4 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Family Interview Technique and the Trauma That Cures 5


E: I watch the interplay between inhibitions, hesitation, and mother likes it well done, and sister likes it med-
antagonism, resentment — something of that sort. Any- ium. And they all eat the same meal.” Any kind of an
thing that indicates that they could think about it dif- analogy that allows them to agree with you that there
ferently but not as long as the other person is there. is acommon thread. I don’t care how good that anal-
Or if I see any evidence of a separate set of ideas that ogy is, but I mention it.
they are withholding. Then I know that I’ve got to B: Tweedle dum and tweedle dee agreed to have a battle.
deal with them separately. E: Yes. Why shouldn't they agree to battle? Why shouldn't
W: Then you'd have to do something later about bringing they agree to disagree? I bring that out when deal-
that separate set of ideas in. ing with father and mother. When she says, “I disE: After I’ve gotten the information, then I interview the agree with you,” I ask father, “Do you really under-
group, and I can point out that necessarily mother, stand your wife? Your wife says that she disagrees
being a woman, really has different views about what's with you. That means that she has a totally different
going on in the family. Because father's working dur- opinion. And you agree that she has a totally different
ing the day, and he sees the family only when he's opinion. (Laughter) Because Pd like to have that clear-
tired at night. And one gets more “iffy” with fatigue. ly understood, that she does have a different opinion.
In that way I justify... That means you are in agreement with her, and you
W: You sort of legitimize differences in view when they can agree with her being different from you, and she
come back in. can agree with you that your feeling is different from
E: So that they can come back in and they hear me legiti- hers.” Then I’ve got an agreement.
mize their differences. I: Milton, how do you deal with a couple or a family busy
W: I know that the family I work with tends to swing back proving to you that he or she is the one in the right?
and forth, at least on the parental part. The son is the They tend to pull the therapist in and prove to the
sick one, ostensibly; the boy is in the hospital. The therapist they’re right, and they get into competition
parents swing back and forth between insisting that proving who’s innocent.
they don’t have any differences and insisting that i’: They prove that they are right, and the other person
they have practically nothing but differences, with a is wrong. They want to pull you in on their side, and
clear implication that they have different views and | keep out of that situation by saying to father, “You
things are impossible. So I find myself grappling re- and I are going to listen. Your wife is going to point
peatedly with this in trying to get across the idea that out to you, and to me, the matter in which she is right
differences in view do exist, but they don’t mean that and justified, and we are going to listen.” You see, I
life is impossible. shift from you and J to we, but I am allying him with
E: Jay Haley has spoken about my tendency to use analo- me.

gies. When people start disagreeing in that fashion I IT: At. the moment the mother is trying to ally you with
like to offer an analogy. When they try to tell me that her,
they are in disagreement and they must think in com- I- At the very moment the mother is trying to ally me with
mon, I point out to them, “Yes, father likes meat rare, her, | deliberately ally myself with father and we are

[PAGE 008]

6 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Family Interview Technique and the Trauma That Cures 7


going to listen sympathetically and intelligently to “Now you and I are going to listen. First to your
mother. Then mother has to present her case to father mother, and next to your father. And we can think
and to me because we are listening intelligently. Now about what they're saying, and we can know what's
mother knows that father can’t listen intelligently, wrong in what they say.” With father and mother the
but she knows / can. That's why she's talking to me, emphasis is on recognizing what is right. With the
but father and I are listening; we are listening intel- child the emphasis is on knowing what is wrong in
ligently. She has to credit father with listening in- what father and mother are saying.
telligently. So I’ve got her over there talking to we, H: Why that difference?
and then I can turn to mother and say, “Now you have E: Because you see the child knows his parents are wrong.
explained this, and we have been trying to understand The child belongs to another generation. The child has
the best way we can. Now suppose you andI listen a different background of understanding. And you
to father’s understanding of what you said, and as we convey to the parents that the child thinks they are
listen we can recognize how well he understands it. wrong. You're merely using what they already know.
And we ought to know every one of his good under- It is an error to try to tell the child that his parents
standings. We really ought to.” So my alliance has are right, when he knows they are wrong. That’s the
suddenly switched to mother. She and I are allied child’s orientation. The parents are in error, and the
while father is explaining. parents know that the child thinks they are wrong.
W: This also sort of keeps a balance, rather than letting But a couple of adults think that they ought to be
one person get hold of everything in a situation. That right; that's a general assumption. “You're a full-grown
is, if mother has the floor to present her views, father person, you really ought to think right, you ought to
has the alliance, and then the other way around, so understand right.” “No, you're a child, you don't un-
that no person gets the whole advantage at one time. derstand, you're wrong, you're mistaken.” The child
E: I am the hub. thinks, “Yes, just because you're a grownup, you aren't
W: Around which it all revolves. right.” You see it's a totally different point of view.
E: Yes. In that way I can play almost a passive part, and W: I understand that, in part, you're picking up the fact
yet each has to rely upon me. They can’t rely on me that the parents are drawing sucha big line between
without giving credit to the other person. You do the themselves as adults, and the child as a child, that you
same thing for the child in the total situation. Johnny go along with that and turn it around.
and father and I will listen, and as we listen, mother lv: I turn it around.
aot


presents. Il: And you continue this even though the child is reasonW: What about the matter of the child speaking up? I ably adult, say in the teens?
wonder if this presents any differences. 1': In the teens. Why certainly.
r


E: Oh yes. 13: “specially in the teens.
W: It's sort of presented as having differences, and there I’: Because the teenager so thoroughly knows his parents
are some real differences. are wrong.

E: It’s a very real difference, and therefore, with father and 11: What about the matter of the child speaking out as well
mother present, I ally myself openly with the child. as listening to what is wrong in what his parents are

[PAGE 009]

8 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Family Interview Technique and the Trauma That Cures 9

saying? Do you encourage the kids to point out the so nicely; this will give you this, will give you this, will
way they see things? give you this. Now when you are actually in there mixE: Sometimes I point out, by asking the child, “Now sup- ing with a family, they’re all going at once, or if they’re
pose you andI sit very quietly, and let us note in what not all going at once, the feeling gets so strong that
way mother is wrong, and then we'll listen to father they don’t respond in this quiet way that you are
and note in what way he’s wrong.” Then we ask mother presenting. Now how do you keep them, other than
to explain the situation, and then we ask father to ex- spatial orientation, speaking when you want them to
plain the situation. And we note particularly in what speak, and allying with you in a way that you want
way they are both wrong on the same things, which them to ally?
then allows the child to recognize mother is wrong on E: That's where I get authoritative. If I think there's any
certain things in a different way than father is wrong possibility of them talking all at once, I tell them,
on certain things, but they’re both wrong in certain
“Now just pause, just listen to me briefly. I’m going
ways. Then I can ask the child who’s listening, “Your to say certain things, and then I’m going to have
mother won't believe it, but you can actually point out you talk, and then brother, and then sister, and then
some things where she’s mistaken, she’s really wrong. mother, and I want you to do one of two things, either
The same thing holds true for father. You can actually you listen when the other is talking, or turn your back
point out some things where father is wrong, but he and note in what way they are wrong. You'll have to
won't believe it.” But you know mother will believe be silent as you do that, in order to note in what way
it on these particular things. Just as father will believe they are wrong.” And I demonstrate to them how to
it on certain things in relationship to mother. Because turn their back to their seat, and then when they just
they’re wrong in different ways on some things. But can’t contain themselves, I say, “Now turn your backs
they aren’t going to believe it when they’re both wrong
a little bit more.” (Laughter)
on the same thing in the same way. Then the child H: Give them something to do.
starts thinking about where mother is wrong in her : Give them something to do that expresses their at-
special way, where the father and child and I will Litude, their feeling, just as competently as verbali-
agree but mother won’t. Then the child is free to ver- zation. You watch a wife turn her back to the husband
balize on that. and listen. And she’s got her back turned toward him.
W: This begins to make it clear-cut, you know, instead of
W: He has to be given some room to maneuver in.
E: To maneuver, and he's got allies. Mother is wrong in having it with our families where they're doing two
this special way, father and I are allied, so the child things at once all mixed together.
is in a good situation to verbalize. You switch the I: But, you see that turning of back is very expressive.
child over, and mother is allied with me, and he points Then T can tell the husband, if he can't take that sort
out that special way in which mother can recognize of interference, “All right, keep on with your explana-
that father is wrong. And you've got an awful lot of Lion. Your wife's really got her back turned toward
action there. . you emphatically. Pm approving of your wife's
FT: The way you present it, Milton, they're just responding nonverbal participation. So that you can tell it to me

[PAGE 010]

10 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Family Interview Technique and the Trauma That Cures 11


better, suppose you just turn your back to her.” So way you say things, because you don’t know just how
I’ve got him in competition with his wife, back to to say these important things. Just as I am going to
back, instead of voice to voice. So they’ve got their be clumsy at saying some of these things. Because I
interplay, but it’s a silent, non-interfering interplay. don’t know what you are going to say. You won't alH: They can outshout each other with body movement. ways understand me the first time I say something.
E: Outshout each other with body movement. Each ex- You won't always understand me the second. Many
plains. Each will listen and take note of where the other times I say it 4, 5, 6, 8, 10 times before my meaning
is wrong. If they had any intellectual background, I gets clear.”
can suggest that they note in an orderly fashion how Then if I think that they are too sensitive, I’ll say,
the other is wrong. Because when you note in order- “Of course, you know, in order to clarify a difference
ly fashion, then you note in an intelligently critical of opinion we've got to have our feelings hurt. You've
fashion. “Note in an orderly fashion.” The people with got to hurt my feelings by impressing upon me the
the college background, or highly intelligent people; thought that I can’t understand a simple declaration
it's one way of getting them to be objectively critical. on your part. You'll have to repeat it a half dozen
H: Well, that's a way of handling it when they're angry and times before it will get through to me.” That implies
anxious to talk. What about the reverse when they're that I’m not very bright; of course, I am not very
busy not talking because they're protecting each other, bright in this situation. The same things are going to
and they are concerned about hurting each other's hold true for the wife. “You know as your wife explains
feelings? things to me about you, your feelings are going to get
E: Well, then you build a situation up somewhat different- hurt because she won't get through to you because she
ly. That's less likely to occur, but you first build it up has to talk from a feminine point of view. You can talk
in this way: “You know, if this interview is to be sat- from a masculine point of view. The two of you must
isfactory, you have got to say a number of things that talk from a marital point of view. I have to talk from
won't be understood until after you have expláined a psychotherapy point of view.” In that way I’ve de-
them. So you will say something that in the first fined certain geographical situations: psychothera-
sentence sounds unpleasant, or critical, or adverse peutic, the masculine, the feminine, and the marital,
that might actually be painful, but as you add the which is separate from that. Then I add to them the
second sentence, the meaning of the first sentence family point of view. That is separate from the mari-
changes. Then as you add the third sentence, your tal. I know that those are all more or less false cate-
point will get clearer, and by the fourth... so I’m go- gorizations, but the patients are concerned with them.
ing to ask you to listen first to the first sentence, and I: You define their hurt feelings as a misunderstanding,
wait for the fourth and fifth sentence so that you will or a lack of understanding?
be sure to understand the point that’s being made. Re- lv: As a lack of understanding.
member this is an unrehearsed situation, and you W: Which will be taken care of as things go on.
haven't had an opportunity to organize your thoughts, 17: That's right. And an expectable and a warranted hurt
and you're going Lo be just a little bit clumsy in the feeling because certainly you can't expect all of it all

[PAGE 011]

12 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Family Interview Technique and the Trauma That Cures 13


at once in the first sentence. Then I can offer them three months previously, that her feet were much too
an analogy that they can accept. “The child is awful- large. Her mother thought it was that she thought her
ly afraid of the hypodermic needle and is going to faint hips were too large, but the girl was most insistent
or scream or go into a panic when he feels the needle that her feet were too large. So the girl had been very
penetrating his skin. Don’t you think you really ought much of a problem. She didn’t want to go to school
to take ahold of that child and pinch his skin just a or to be seen on the street. She wouldn’t go to church.
little and hurt him? Then you plunge the needle in. Her feet were too large. She was utterly adamant in
Because he’s paying attention to that little bit of a her attitude about that. She was getting more and
pinch you're giving him, he doesn't notice the needle. more seclusive, and mother consulted me because she
And the child has got the medicine he needs. He's just couldn't get the daughter to go to a doctor. The daugh-
wondering about why did you pinch me on the wrist?” ter would not allow the subject of her feet to be disB: Is this what you say to them or your philosophy? cussed. Mother asked me if I could do something
E: Well it's an analogy that 1 can give them. It's one that about it. So I arranged with mother that I would come
I’ve used about hurt feelings. To bring it out and to over on the false pretense that I would do a chest ex-
get the initial hurt feelings, to get something from an amination of the mother to see if the mother really did
individual subsequently. Of course it is a good techni- have the flu. Since it would be Saturday, the girl

que with children. would be at home. The mother wanted to know what
H: Well, there's more in that analogy than meets the eye | was going to do, but I had worked out my own plan.
when you're telling that to a couple about their feel- | knew the girl by sight. The girl called me, and when
ings.
I got over there, the mother was in bed. I asked the

B: Mm hmm. (Laughs) They're busy needling each other. pirl to bring me a towel, and I asked her to stand right
E: Well, of course the thing that's in that analogy is the here, in case I wanted something else. I did a rather

fact that you are stating very definitely that you are careful examination of the mother, and 1 sent the girl

deliberately pinching. That there is a deliberate pin- lor a teaspoon so 1 could look at mother's throat, and

ching. It’s intentional, and it's for the purpose of hurt- then T had the girl hold a flashlight as I was looking

ing. It is essential to the situation, but it's preliminary al, mother’s eyes and mother’s throat. In getting the

to therapy. Then if they want to find fault with it, you irl to do things, I asked her to wait so that she could

ask them how they're going to distract the child's at- stand right there in case I needed her again. Finally

tention? Then they can't think of another way that's | finished my examination, and I had maneuvered the

going to be successful, so they acknowledge that they pri into position. Then, before getting up, because I

are going to pinch. wis silting on the edge of the bed, I asked the girl just
Lo wail; L thought I might have something else for her

* *
Lo do, just wait. And then I very slowly, and careful-
ly, and thoughtfully, got up from the bed, talking

E: 1 don’t think I’ve given you this instance. There was to the mother, and then with the greatest of care I
a 14-year-old girl, rather stockily built, whose mother stepped back awkwardly, and very carefully stomped

came to me because Ann had developed the idea, about my heel squarely down on the girl’s toes. The girl, of

[PAGE 012]

a Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Family Interview Technique and the Trauma That Cures 15


course, squawked with pain. 1 turned on her, and in
thing, correctly orient it, and just thrust it upon the
a Lone of absolute fury, I said to her, “If you would
person in such a fashion that they have to accept it,
row those things large enough for a man to see, I
and deal with it, and incorporate it.
wouldn't be in this sort of a situation.” The girl looked
Ht ‘The therapeutic trauma?
al me so puzzled. Before I had finished writing my
I The therapeutic trauma.
prescription and calling it in to the drugstore, the girl
li Now the remarkable thing, which I don’t understand,
asked her mother if she could go to a show. There was Milton, is, granted that episode and others like it, this
no further trouble. You see, the girl thought her feet must mean that in daily life we are all encountering
were too large, and in the most beautifully convinc- such things with enormous frequency, really.
ing way, 1 had forced upon her a compliment. If she ' Thals right.
would grow her feet large enough for a man to see. e ! Probably at the order of once or twice a day, certainly
There was no way of rejecting that compliment. There
very high frequencies, and in daily life they are, in
was no way of disputing. I certainly hadn't been try- »oneral, not carefully tailored to suit our needs, and
ing to make her feel better. There was nothing for the why aren’t we all nuts? (Laughs)
girl to do but accept the absolute proof that her feet bed | know, we have to wait for something that appeals to
were small. There's no other way. us in particular.
H: She had no more difficulty with her feet after that? mn
¡he damaging thing would have to be as accurately
E: You see, I think it was a superficial manifestation, but tailored as the therapeutic?
the girl was caught in it. She was caught with her ra- HF Yes, and there are so many thousands of them. Among
tionalization, and she was becoming more and more
those thousands and thousands there's one that's tai-
seclusive to substantiate her neurotic feeling, and she lored to fit. Just as I tailored that to fit Ann, and of
was building it up more and more. All I did was step course, you see, I had her in an anxiety situation. An
right in with one forceful step and smashed the whole anxiety situation in relationship to her mother. Was
thing. What could she do about it? There was no an- her mother really suffering serious illness? Having the
swer. The girl couldn’t tell me that I was clumsy, I
irl assist me, holding the towel, and get another
was her mother’s doctor. She couldn’t retaliate in any
towel, and get a flashlight. The girl was anxious, and
way. > | built, that up carefully. My listening to the chest,
FH: Did you see her again after that?
my percussion of the chest, my relistening, my entire
E: Oh yes. Friendly, agreeable, went to school, went to demeanor, and the girl was very much attached to her
Sunday school, went to shows, that was the end of all mother.
of that three-month pattern of seclusiveness. And you
IH Well, what does anxiety contribute to the situation?
see, when you consider a lot of neurotic manifesta- 1" "lhe girl was withdrawing from society because of her
tions, some little traumatic thing will precipitate pro- anxiety about her feet. So let's have an anxious situa-
gressively larger and larger neurosis. Why can't you tion in which Lo trample on her feet. And have a com-
take the same attitude toward the correction of neu-
plete setting there, So there's the anxiety situation
rosis? Take something that is in essence a traumatic
into whieh her feet came, and then the utterance which

[PAGE 013]

16 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Family Interview Technique and the Trauma That Cures 17


the girl was forced to accept in all of its implications. 11- So that your procedure was rather tailored to the mother
B: How do you know that the mother is not going to tip as well as to the girl.
her hand? 1" 'lailored to the mother. Tailored to the total situation.
E: 1 don’t. | was very careful to palpate the thyroid, feel for
B: You're keeping her in line all the way down the line? tenderness in the mastoid area, I felt of her scalp. So
E: Yes, but you see mother couldn't know. that mother and the girl could see it was a very comB: Mother knows the medical examination is phony. plete and adequate examination. Of course, during it
E: Yes, but you see 1 also pointed out to mother that while | questioned the mother about the frequency of colds.
the medical examination was a phony, one never 11 How old was this gal?
knows when you do pick up things. F She was 14, and she had been maturing physically rather
H: You assume the possibility of mother ending this, or rapidly.
frustrating this? II E was wondering about that.
E: Oh yes. But you see the mother didn't know what I was FH Yes. With that rapid physical maturing and that psy-
going to do about Ann. She certainly couldn't see chological withdrawing, you could have a very path-
through that situation. All she could notice was that ological pattern built up.
I certainly was impolite to her. The next thing she II You get a situation in which she would start to go back
would discover was that Ann wanted to go to a show. just when she should be coming out.
And that would confront her with another insoluble Yes
thing, and she wouldn't be able to understand that. li On a point of fact, the mother comes to you without the
H: She couldn't defeat you because she couldn't connect rirl, you have not seen the girl?
the two? 1" Oh, | had seen her casually. Because on one occasion
E: She wouldn't be able to connect the two in a way that | had seen her father, and I’d seen the girl, but not
would defeat me. a al person.

W: Would you say that the mother was also the sort of li One of the things that always mystifies me about these
woman on whom your statement, “And you never carefully tailored operations is how you know enough
know what you might have picked up,” would hit her about that girl to be able to tailor. I mean you hadn't
rather strongly? 1 just sort of wondered if somehow really; you had seen her casually at best.
she might have also been a woman who was rather !' You. You see while I was examining the chest and the
anxious about her own health or anxious about things pirl brought me the towel, and then held the flash-
in general. Iyrht,, and then brought me a spoon, I had no tailored
E: Well, she was a bit anxious, and the examination plan in mind.
relieved the mother's anxiety. Of course, Ann would N Ol it isn’t Lailored till toward the end of this medical
see mother's anxiety, and she would see it relieved, examinabion then?
because I examined the heart, I examined the breasts, Fill the end. | was wondering how I could present some-
I examined the lungs, I examined the throat, and the (hinge Lo the girl, and that’s why I asked the girl a
eyes. number of questions, Because I could ask the mother

[PAGE 014]

18 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Family Interview Technique and the Trauma That Cures 19


how often she had colds, and then I could ask Ann, give me for what I have done. I haven’t faced you. I
“Is your mother about right in her statements about know it’s rude. I’ve played with this paperweight, it’s

how often she has colds?” You see, just to get the girl been rather difficult to look at you. I'd rather not tell
in a situation so I would have some kind of chance to you, but since this is a psychotherapeutic situation, I
clinically evaluate the girl. Then as soon as I felt that really ought to tell you. Perhaps you can find the ex-
perhaps I had some understanding, the idea came to planation. But actually I have the very strong feeling
me, and I maneuvered her into place. You see, the en- that when you get reduced, at least everything I see
tire thing that concerned me was how can I convey about you, that’s why I keep avoiding looking at you,
to this girl that her feet are not hideously large? How indicates that when you get reduced you will be even
can I get her to accept that idea? How can I force it more sexually attractive, which is something that
upon her without seeming to force it upon her? should not be discussed between you and me. But you
H: It’s a difficult problem all right, because any mention are, of course, extremely attractive sexually. You'll be
of her feet would have meant that you noticed her feet. much more so after you're reduced. But I think we
E: That’s right. You take the girl who is very, very fat and ought not to discuss that matter here now.” The first
is convinced that she is horribly, horribly unattrac- time the girl knew she was sexually attractive. I had
tive. There’s no way of telling her that she’s attrac- proved it by my playing with that paperweight. All
tive except in a traumatic fashion. I can think of Judy, my argument was fallacious.
/1: Then you can turn and give your full attention to her
and Judy knew that she was much too fat. Judy was
horribly fat. She would go to church regularly, and after just listening; this is something you won't talk
she was a very prudent and prudish girl. She came to about then.
me as a patient about this matter of reducing, and she hy Vos,
/t And that’s traumatic to her?
cheerfully told me how horribly unattractive she was.
I'd seen her sitting outside of the office, and I could I’ ''he way she flushed, and the way she blushed, and the
see the sort of behavior she was exhibiting. So when way she squirmed. I don’t think it was too traumatic.
she came in, after I had her sit down and was courte- (Laughter) But, of course, according to her codes, it
ous about it, I took that paperweight and asked her was horribly unpleasant. According to her codes. But
to tell me the story. I listened to her and what she had there was a man whom she respected immensely, who
to say, looking at the paperweight and glancing at said that she was attractive sexually and would be
her. I kept right on just giving these brief glances at even more so after she reduced. And who had noticed
her. I got her entire story while I directed most of my that sexual attractiveness immediately. But you see
visual attention to the paperweight. When she had ihat play; I could have done it even if I hadn’t recog-
finished, she wondered if I would be willing to accept nized her feelings, because I like to keep myself free
her as a patient considering that she was so hideous- so thal | can observe and then manipulate the situa-
ly unattractive. She said even if she did reduce, she tion. As soon as she started telling her story I saw
would still be about the ugliest girl in creation. My her sense of physical inferiority and unattractiveness.
statement was rather simply this, “I hope you'll for- Later she reduced and said she had fallen in love with

[PAGE 015]

20 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Family Interview Technique and the Trauma That Cures 21


an older man who was not interested in her. She let 11': Maybe there's a better choice of material. Let's see
me know that she had fallen in love with an older man. where the other 50 is.
A man almost old enough to be her father. I" Yes, but isn't that the tendency of psychotherapy? To
B: Did he play with paperweights? see only the negative aspects?
E: He didn't play with paperweights, but he wouldn't play 11 Well, that's true. That's important.
with her either. After she told me about that, I told I'- And in Judy's case, I couldn't tell her that men see fat
her it was awfully nice she'd fallen in love with him. dames as attractive. 1 couldn't tell her that men see
Very, very complimentary to him. Then, since she had skinny dames as attractive. 1 couldn't tell her any-
learned to compliment a man, she would undoubted- thing about sex appeal. She couldn't tolerate that. But
ly turn her affections to some man closer to her age. [ could explain my behavior. It was my behavior I was
But she ought to keep on complimenting that older explaining. My avoidance behavior was explained. And
man for a while longer. That was a nice, easy, gradual she had seen it. I had apologized for it, and she had
loss of interest in him. Lo accept my explanation. She had to recognize I had
H: So simple, isn’t it. avoided looking at her. And that validated my stateE: How do people develop their neurotic problems, and ment she had sex appeal. Never mind the logic of it.
their neurotic feelings and attitudes? Very, very blind- (laughter)
ly, and yet nevertheless very elaborately. So why not HH Well, presumably, when you were not looking at her,
assume that same blindness and that same elaborate- she was thinking that she was too unattractive for
ness in the correction of them? Once you give them you to look at.
a push in the right direction. You know Judy couldn’t I’ ‘Ihat’s right. And she was wishing that she weren't that
turn down that compliment. Just as Ann couldn't turn unattractive. That’s the positive aspect.
down the compliment on her feet. IE Yes,
B: Well now, we would, in one of those cases, tend to 1" And my apology proved that there was that wishful
assume — the girl with the feet— that the thing she's aspect. My statement, “We should not discuss that,”
working out with her feet is related to things that also validated her wishful thinking.
mother and father, etc., are doing, and are interper-
sonal defenses to some degree. Therefore, to deprive
her of that device would leave her open to some sort
of attack from them of some kind. Now this might not
be so; we might not think that in this case.
E: Yes, but why assume it must necessarily be an attack?
There will also be support. She’s open to both attack
and to support, and there’s a 50/50 chance. And you
wait...
B: We see the patient remit during the week, go home for
the weekend, and come back nuts.

[PAGE 016]

Disengaging Family Members 23


a
scribed in two ways: One, she has this unfortunate
transfer of blame defense where it’s always somebody
else; the other that everything she says she qualifies
in a contradictory way. When she’s nice to you, she’s
CHAPTER 2 EOS

nice in a mean way and mean in a nice way. And a pa-
Bad
BEN


a tient, son or daughter
— whenever this patient makes
EEE

i
an assertive effort of any kind with regard to the
Disengaging aie

DE parents, he or she takes it back or negates it. You have
Ese
these three people and they’re going round and round
Family Members and round. Now what is your goal as far as relating
to each of them?
en)


1: How old is the child of the family?
we


NOOR


II. Well let's say 21 or 22; schizophrenic.
A


Ke: | have such a family with children ages 23, 19, 17, and
1958. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.
A
you've described the father and the mother. The
therapy has been centered around first getting the
H: Well, we're at the moment taking a look at the families
older boy out of the home. Second, getting the second
of schizophrenics, trying to describe what goes on in
boy on his own. Third, getting the 17-year-old to move
these families, and ultimately trying to devise more
in with his 23-year-old, single brother and go to school.
practical methods of changing them. Actually we're
IH. Separation as rapidly as possible?
in the process of therapy with them already, when we
I "That's right. The father has never been allowed to have
don’t even know what we're after, we haven't described
any of his own beliefs except by virtue of his dogged
them, and were not sure what changes we want, or
persistence, That is, he's an artist, but his wife has
what’s crucial, and so on.
never allowed him to paint the pictures he's wanted
W: Really our thoughts come out of two things, I think:
Lo paint. So then he started working on ceramics. He
They come out of trying to deal with family groups,
made absolutely beautiful bowls and put on those
that is, father, mother and at least the schizophrenic
bowls and cups and vases the pictures that he wanted
patient. Sometimes we have a sibling in also. They
to. Line drawings. Utterly beautiful. Until his wife
comea little also out of some related questions from
suddenly discovered that he was having satisfaction
your practice where you're dealing with family prob-
here. He sneaked over to canvases, and to still life,
lems of a different sort. But still, what we're concerned
and then to landscapes, then to portraits, then to his-
about is situations where you're dealing with more
Lorical scenes. Right at the present time he’s sneaked
than one related person at a time. The focus is on the
over Lo sculpturing, but always remaining in the home
families of schizophrenics, but not exclusively.
ind always coming to grief by virtue of his wife jumpH: Let's pose it this way. Suppose sitting here instead of
mp on him.
us was a father who tended to find it difficult to agree
H While encouraging: him, no doubt.
or disagree with wife. And a mother who can be de-

73

[PAGE 017]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 25


E: While encouraging him. “No John, you must do this.” terly unusual situation. Then I had her place her
Now with the older son moved out and in college, the hands in her lap, I think it was essentially this way,
third son living with that son, and the second son so that she could look at her palms. And I told her
working and his own master completely, father is a to feel her hands there very carefully and to keep look-
bit worried about mother because father has got a ing at them. Keep the thumbs just about that far
summer artist teaching job away from home and he’s apart. Not this close, not that far away, but just about
moving out. That leaves poor mother in an awful fix. like that, and to feel the weight of her hand. And that
What I’m doing with mother is pointing out to her she would then have an exceedingly hard struggle
that she is making the transitional step from good keeping her mouth shut. And to do it no matter what
mother of the past, and good wife of the past; she’s her son said. No matter what her husband said. Then
got to look forward to that era in life in which her I turned to the husband and I told him that he would
children are grown up. She now occupies the position have to keep his mouth shut. And I told the oldest
of expectant grandmother. Not a wife. Not a mother. son to keep his mouth shut. The second son to keep
But the expectant grandmother, in that she can now his mouth shut. That allowed the baby of the family,
expect her sons to marry and father children. That ex- who was the least important one, the one whose opin-
pectant grandmother role of hers is so vaguely de- ions were least momentous, to start voicing his opin-
fined. How does one define it? She’s quite pleased with ions of each of the other members of the family. As
it. She’s working on it. I think she’s going to solve her they listened to him tolerantly, and especially mother,
resentment about her husband taking that teaching she could curb her lip, because that was just the baby,
job for the summer because she’s got the much more not understanding very much, talking. Mother there-
important role to work on —expectant grandmother- by affirmed the second son’s and the first son's right
hood. But there's nothing real enough about the to talk. Then, of course, she would affirm the hus-
grandmotherhood to cause her any immediate trou- band’s right to talk.
ble. The whole thing is so vague, and yet so seriously I! You proceeded this way with each of them?
stated to her, and so plausible and so reasonable that 1” With the whole group. Third son, second son, first son,

it can take up all of her fantasies. laLher, then mother. In order to have the last say, she
H: Well, when you see a family like that I gather you don’t had to keep her mouth shut. That meant if she were
see them all together? Lo answer all those things, and have the last say, she
E: I’ve seen this family all together, and then I’ve seen had to listen attentively. Now and then Td raise the
them separately. question, “Are you really listening to that, mother?
H: How do you handle them when youre all together with Because how will you be able to reply if you don't lis-
them? I mean, do you lecture them, or do you get Len?” So she was horribly trapped.
them interacting with each other, or how do you man- II ‘The mothers we've been dealing with, it would take a
age? whale of a trap to hold them still.
E: In order to build up the situation with this family, I had Ht Why did you tie the hands in with it?
to tell mother that she must prepare herself for an ut- I Well, you have to tie them together some way. If they

[PAGE 018]

26 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 27


maintain this, then the tendency is to keep the mouth I’: You restrict it by building up the restriction so that they
shut. (Demonstrating holding the thumbs slightly are motivated to be more communicative. It’s just
apart) temporary restriction. Because you listen to Little
W: Sort of a parallel. Johnny, and then to Medium Willy, and Big Tom and
E: Sort of a parallel. It holds them. In order to get up out then hubby. Well each one motivates the other to be
of the chair, see what they’ve got to do? (Moves the more communicative because he’s entitled to that.
hands) This keep them from initiating any adverse ac- When it became mother’s turn to tell, she literally had
tivity, because they first have to undo this, and this to tell everything.
is so unimportant. There’s no reason why it should be 11: This becomes, in a way, the opposite of what these
undone. But before they can do anything, they’ve got families ordinarily do, as 1 see it, which is to talk a
to undo that, and keeping the thumbs just so far great deal without saying anything.
apart. Not this way, not this way, but like this. They /'- "That's right. You see, mother, in the ordinary situation,
can always correct the tendency to put the thumbs can talk by the hour, and never succeed in saying a
together. Every time they correct it, they cooperate. thing. But in that situation she had to have plenty
H: Did you do this for one session, or several, or what? Lo say on every point that Little Johnny, Medium WilE: I had several sessions. ly, Big Tom and Bigger Joe had to say. And everyH: Each time the same set up starting with the youngest? thing about herself. And everything about her father,
E: After I once started with the son, the youngest, then and her mother, and her aunt and uncle and so on. It
I think the second . . . let's see, I had three sessions was utterly amazing the amount of information.
with the group. I started with the father the second 11 Are there other ways that you restrict them, like this?
time, because he’s actually the weakest member of the | remember once you proposed a game of cards as an-
group, because he’s been bullied all his life. His mother other way. Do you have other devices?
started out by bullying him, then his foster mother, ' Yes. When you've got a group situation, you restrict
and then the orphanage bullied him, and he married the wife from looking at her husband.
a wife who had continued it. 1 From looking at him?
H: Did you see them individually first to take a history " Yes. Restrict the husband from looking at his wife. They
like that? feel that restriction very, very strongly. There's alE: The father came to see me to find out if Pd be willing ways tendencies to sneak a look and see how the other
to see the members of his family, and he came secretly person’s taking it. But that's the naughty thing to do.
without letting his wife know. He said he was too un- That’s their reaction to that. So they have to spill
happy and too miserable and his sons were getting much more than they ever thought of spilling. That
into trouble with the law. He had been analyzed years need Lo do something. They can't quite do it, and
before by Eisler. He's not a Phoenix patient. He's from they ve got to do something, and all they can do is
out of Phoenix. So he went for a drive one day, landed communicate.
in Phoenix, so his wife didn’t even know he was here. I! Verbally, you mean?
H: What you tend to do when you see the family together I’ Verbally. Because they can’t sneak that look, and they
is to restrict their communication there’? feel yruilty about sneaking that look, you see, and

[PAGE 019]

28 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 29


therefore they express ideas and thoughts and tell mother’s going to watch for father to betray himself
things that carry a burden of guilt. So you've just on some of her unhappy ideas.
created a nice guilt-producing situation so that they W: Well, aren’t you there, sort of thinking over what they
will communicate other guilt. However, with that sort must have been doing already? I mean, if they're any-
of thing, you have to watch and make certain that thing like the ones I’ve seen, while appearing offhand,
they don’t use it for vengeance. They start recrimina- they’re watchful as hell.
tions, “He wouldn't take me out to dinner.” You don't lv. Yes. But you're taking it over, and you're demanding
want that. That’s just fault-finding. that they do that. You are forcing them to do the
W: It seems to me that in some of the families we’ve been things that they were going to do anyway out of your
dealing with, at least the one I’ve been thinking of range of activity. Now just like the farmer who puts
that I see all together, I have actually been provok- up signs, “All hunters welcome,” and then he says,
ing some recrimination and I wonder if you think that “Yes, you're welcome, I'll show you where the pasture
it is or is not in order against background which we is; keep away from it.” So he sends them hunting
have in this family. Despite the fact that they are ob- where they should be hunting. He's protecting his pas-
viously miserable — he has ulcers and she drinks like ture. He could put up “No trespassing” signs, and
a fish, one boy is in the mental hospital here—they they'd sneak into the pasture and every other place.
come in and, sitting all together, present the picture: The farmer's taking control of that. Guiding it and
“Everything is dandy between us and we agree on directing it.
everything.” In this situation, certainly a considerable H: One of the things you're also doing is preventing an
part of my effort has been to get them to speak up alliance against you.
a little about what is not so dandy. Il". Yes.

E: Well, I think recrimination is a good thing, but I enlarge II. You’ve got them watching each other.
upon the recrimination then. I want mother, I want 1" That's right.

brother, I want father to be very, very sure not to tell I! 1low much do you deliberately work to break up an
something that father would prefer mother and broth- entente? 1 mean, a couple obviously have problems
er didn’t learn about. In other words, I make father with each other, but they come to you and they pre-
very watchful of his utterances. I make mother very sent a relatively united front.
watchful of her utterances. And brother very watchful l' "Therefore you need to break that up without seeming
of his. But while they are watchful of their own ut- Lo break it up. A man and his wife, it's a rather sim-
terances, they are extremely watchful of the other per- ple hing, because you can tell the wife, while the hus-
son. Because he might betray himself. I have sug- band sits there and smiles smugly to himself, “You
gested that you better be watchful of what you say know you really have to make it rather simple when
unless you betray yourself. Now mother is going to you explain things to me, because, being a man, I can't
watch her statements, but she’s going to see how really understand the subtleties.” What does she do?
father and brother are going to betray themselves. So She steps on the other side of the fence right away,
you get, not recriminations, but resentments, because ul that. right? Because she is going to differentiate

[PAGE 020]

30 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 31


herself as a female, and I’m a poor, miserable male. E: That's right. It also implies if she makes it simple for
Her husband is going to recognize that I’m an intelli- me, that she can simplify complex things, and thus
gent male, and that I really understand the masculine is not revealing all because it's just the simple aspects.
side, and he steps over and joins me. I’ve got that all IT: One of the other mixtures is I feel, and I think John
busted up right there. does too, that were in a sort of halfway house between
W: Suppose you then wish to keep the division but get over what is usually called insight therapy and the kind
on the wife’s side, how would you go about that? of directive therapy you do. I’m always caught not
E: Well, you use the ploy — I suddenly become not a poor, quite doing either very completely. Here's an exam-
dumb, stupid male, I become the interested third party ple; I wonder how you wouid deal with it. You have
who’s not involved in this. Then I’m on both sides of a child, say a schizophrenic, or anybody, and the par-
the fence. I’m on his, but I’m also on hers. Being a ents and the child are caught in this horrible relation-
third party, objectively interested, I can really under- ship, with the main problem being the child can't get
stand the woman’s side much better. Before, I empha- with them, but he also can't get away from them.
size that as a male I don’t understand very much, but Every time he starts to get away, they pull him back,
as the third party, objectively, and only objectively Now 1 don't think you would handle this by discuss-
interested, then I can really understand it. So I have ing this with them or pointing it out to them. Or, when
a dual role—the stupid male and an intelligent, objec- they started to pull him back, you wouldn't point out
tive observer. You see, that gives the woman, at any to them just what they're doing. You would handle
time, the opportunity of doing it either way. Now if it in some other way, is that right?
she wants to view me as stupid, then she’s going to lv: Well, they're going to pull the child toward them when
compensate for that by crediting me with intelligence, the child is trying to get away, and then when the
because she just isn’t going to waste her time on a child tries to get to them they push him away.
completely stupid man. She came to me because I’m I’: Absolutely.
an intelligent, objective person. You see, my stupidity I Therefore, I would like to disorient them so that when
gives her the opportunity to reject, and in return for the child is trying to get away, they push him away.
giving her permission to reject, she is then under ob- It. Wow do you do this?
ligation to receive. I! Gebting that third son to move in with the older brother;
W: Since she has a mixed attitude about you, if you em- every time the mother told me, “But you don't under-
phasize one side of it, she’s got to emphasize the other. stand me,” I immediately emphasized that as long as
E: That’s right. Because why should I assume the responsi- son three was at home, she'd have an opportunity to
bility of maintaining all the equilibrium? As I start understand him. I did that over and over again. Every
rocking the boat this way, well then she’s going to lean Lime she mentioned that I didn’t understand her, I
this way. pointed out that she could understand her son, since
W: The same thing goes, only, “You've got to make it sim- he was living at home. Every time she admitted that
le for me,” forces her to come out more 1
into the p
open. | idl seem to understand her in some regard, I men-

[PAGE 021]

32 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 33


tioned, “You know this idea of your son living with so that she wasn't leaving them, but in actual physical
his brother, I haven’t made up my mind about that.” movement she'd be 40 miles from them.

So every time I understood her, I mentioned the pos- E: Yes. This mother is actually glad she thought of brother
sibility of brother living with brother. Every time she living with brother. The father and the three brothers
said I didn’t understand her, I mentioned son living are still wondering how I managed to make mother
with her. And therefore, since I didn’t understand her, force the issue of brother living with brother. Because
I was always saying the thing that was wrong; I mother has discredited me, but fortunately she’s suf-
didn’t understand her. What was I saying when I ficiently in command of the situation so that the right
didn’t understand her? Son living with you. Every things are being done. I haven’t got much hope for the
time she said I understood, I spoke about brother liv- mother. I have for the other four members of the
ing with brother. And I disapproved of brother liv- family.
ing with brother every time she accused me of mis- H. I’ve gathered that before, in a couple of cases you men-

understanding. tioned with the mother of a schizophrenic, you don’t
H: From the practical point of view, she says to you, you seem to feel there is much hope for them.
don’t understand me in relation to something that’s Is: They are so tremendously bound up and they are so un-

been going on before, and then all of a sudden you willing to recognize it.
bring up her son living at home. Is that the way it IT: Is it the schizophrenic you're speaking of, or the mother

occurs? of a schizophrenic who is bound up?
E: Yes. Is: Well, if mother is a schizoid personality.
H: Doesn’t she feel rather disjointed for a moment? I mean, II: The difficulty with them that we see is this unfortunate

doesn’t she say, “What the devil has that got to do way they have of whatever way you go they have to
with you not understanding me?” go the opposite. That isn’t necessarily useful, because
E: Yes, but put sufficiently earnestly, she’s got to try to if you then start going to the opposite they go the
find her meaning. And it was mother who literally other way at that point. But this works very rapidly.
made brother go to live with brother. That is, they aren’t just negativistic. A negativistic
W: On the disjointed point, if you take such a woman and person you can push in the opposite direction.
try to talk to her in a very sensible, connective way, 1: I wonder if it isn't somethinga little bit like my say-

she'll disjoint the thing herself. ing to the family something about the way for their
E: She'll disjoint it. And if there's any disjointing to be son to be independent is to get together with him?
done, I'd prefer to do it. (Laughter) This boy was still pretty schizy. He brings up the
H: Then what you would do is try to define the leaving as idea, “All I want to do is go out and get married.” I
a coming to? That is, at the moment I’m thinking suggest to him that while this is a nice aim, that in

about getting a schizophrenic girl separated from her order to really do it he should get together with his
parents and boarding out in a foster home, more or family first.

less. The way you would handle that would be to de- IT: Now this is a larger point we're concerned about:

fine this as being done under the parents' protection Whether it’s necessary for a schizophrenic. ... I

[PAGE 022]

34 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 35


mean, you can take a schizophrenic and take him FT: Is it wiser under those circumstances to bring the kid
away from his parents and he can still be as schizy back with his parents so that he leaves them feeling
as the devil, or you move him through therapy away more free?
from his parents and he may move pretty slowly. 17: Y know, but you get the kid away from his parents, and
Whether it’s useful, or perhaps necessary, and possi- you get him all set to discover the identity of some-
ble, to take him back into the family and require him body else in his environment. That is, you get the girl
to learn to handle his parents, as a way of getting free out of her parental home, and she's got an apartment.
from the problems he has. She goes to sleep with the idea, the feeling, that she's
E: Can he really learn to handle his parents? still at home and papa and mama are in the next room
H: It’s a question. asleep. She isn't really away from her parents. But you
E: He's got a lifetime of experience in which he has learned pose the problem of finding out in how many ways the
not to handle them. landlady and the landlord are different from her father
W: That sure is true. and mother. The landlady and the landlord, well,
E: He’s learned such a wealth of tiny little ways, and such they're cruder people. They talk with poor English.
tiny little skills in not handling his parents. They're pretty graspy; they're not generous. They're
H: Your first impulse then is to get them separate, as fast not thoughtful. And pretty soon the concept comes,
as possible? “But they do leave you alone.” Then you've got maybe
E: Get them separated. When mother begins to recognize the opening wedge inserted. Then they start identi-
that you’ve outmaneuvered her in getting sonny out- fying other people. Then you simply build up the iden-
side the family, then you defeat mother in another tity of this other person, and that person, and the first
way at another level. Because she is really going to thing they know, they have buiit up some relation-
get sonny back into her clutches. Because while she ships with other people. The more relationships you
had to go opposite of you, when she discovers that build up with other people, the more you adulterate
you want her to go opposite of you, then she’s right father and mother relationships.
along with you. But that’s when you frustrate her Hl: By identifying other people, you mean differentiating
completely by flatly, absolutely, refusing to discuss this person from all others?
the matter. She can’t do anything about getting sonny 1;: That's right. That girl moved into an apartment at my
back to the home until she first discusses it with you request and always went to sleep at night in her bed
and makes you admit that you were in error. And you feeling very strongly — and she said it was so unreal,
are refusing to discuss it. and yet it was so real—papa and mama were in the
H: He has attitudes about women, or men, and so on, built next room sleeping. She could almost hear them snor-
in to him by his parents and carries these attitudes ing. She could almost hear them turn over in bed.
away, and this is again an insight problem. That a kid N: You instructed her to feel that?
can get away from his parents but not really be away 17: No, that was her reaction. So she hadn’t really moved
from them — “I’ve been away from them 372 days and away from them. Then my demand that she identify
three hours” —that sort of thing. her landlady and her landlord. It’s a simple problem
E: Yes. an identification of two specimens of the human race.

[PAGE 023]

36 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 37


The landlady was so tall and weighed approximately of leaving only as the outcome of a marriage cere-
so much, and the landlord was so tall and weighed ap- mony, which is definitely in the future.
proximately so much. He had a moustache. Until she W: You emphasize the ceremony there, I think?
began to look upon them not as just physical objects E: That's right. She emphasizes the ceremony.
but as living human beings. W: Specifically she can’t see the relationship, she can only
W: But you start on them as different physical objects. see the form.
E: As different physical objects. Then she got more and 17: Only the form.
Wy


more extensive in her identification. She had to drag
* * *
in personal qualities. The landlady had a much nicer
voice than her mother. IT: Well, the most typical parent-child problem that we see
FH: Why is it that you wouldn't, with the mother, discuss is the inability of the parents to draw any line with
with her, and point out to her, her difficulties in letting the child because the child won't like it. This terrible
the child get away? feeling of “the child will leave me forever if I punish
E: When does a child leave the mother? him in any way.”
W: I sometimes wonder. lv: What do they need to be told?
a


E: I know. But with that type of mother, the child, so far 11: That's what I would like to know.
as her willingness to think about it, that child leaves : “The child will leave you forever. Why would a child
the mother only when the minister says, “I now pro- leave you forever? Of course, he’s going to, you know.
nounce you man and wife.” He moves out into mar- But why would he leave you forever? Of course, he’s
riage, into another home, with another woman. But going to, you know. Of a certainty, but why would
not until that moment can she conceive of the child he?” I ask that question repetitiously without giving
moving out. There’s no possibility of that happening, a chance to answer. “The child will leave you because
because Sonny isn’t even in love. It will probably be you didn’t do the right thing. But of course the child
several years before he gets engaged. Of course, he is going to leave you anyway, whether you do the
ought to have at least a year-long courtship, or longer. right thing or the wrong thing. Of course you do want
She’s perfectly willing that he gets married way off the child to leave you because you want your son to
in the dim and distant future, so she never had to „row up and move away and live with another woman.
crystalize the idea of Sonny leaving her. But Sonny And cleave unto her, abandoning all others, including
is leaving her by virtue of entering into his teens. Up you.”

to puberty he’s her little baby, and as soon as he gets 11 ''hey're not usually that explicit about, “They'll leave me
into the teens he starts leaving. Before puberty he’s forever,” but that seems to be the feeling they have.
just her baby, an undifferentiated human being. But ‘They chastise the child and then the child is unhappy
as soon as he enters puberty, then he becomes very because he's been chastised, and they can’t stand it.
definitely a male. And a different male. And a male Then they go and they make it up in some way.
destined for some other female. So he starts to leave, I" Yes. So those parents should be made to realize by the
but the schizy mother can conceptualize that matter analogy, “What do you want the dentist to do when

[PAGE 024]

38 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 39


your child has an aching tooth? Just give the child ing to quit school.” The mother is continuing school,
some medicine to cover up the pain, or do you want and the daughter's in the hospital. She really can't
the dentist to hurt the child? Because no matter how understand, I don't think, why they connect this in
much local anesthetic is given, remember the needle any way, because she can't see the fact that she's
will hurt. Remember, there'll be a cavity in the jaw. holding her daughter. All she can see is she's trying
Remember, there'll be a tenderness as the jaw heals. to get rid of the girl. “And I wish she'd get well and
What do you want the doctor to do about that great get away from me,” Now, once again, on this insight
big painful boil? Don’t you want the doctor to shove problem, I gather you wouldn't work to help her dis-
a knife through it quickly and hurt the child horribly cover, learn, or whatever, that she isn't letting that
for a second?” girl get away?
W: So you use an analogy to bring in the idea of the hurt E: I know. One of the procedures that I employed, and I
that really fixes something up. have employed, is this matter of questioning some of
E: The hurt that fixes. these overly possessive mothers about the daughters’
growth and development. With the mother, if it would
* * *
be at all possible, I’d raise with her the question, “Do
you want this girl to establish herself as an independ-
H: I mean it this way. I have a mother and she has a ent creature? You have quite rightly so expressed that
daughter, and her constant complaint is, “When does as your desire. But there are a number of things that
a mother stop being a mother? How long am I going you'll have to tell me to help me understand what’s
to take care of my daughter?” Daughter is in and out wrong with the girl that she hasn’t seemed to be will-
of the mental hospital. “How long am I going to have ing to leave you. Now, when the girl was growing,
this burden?” She's very resentful of this burden. ’m when she wasa little girl, and then entered into puber-
sure she hasn’t much awareness at all that she can’t ty, what was the first thing about the girl’s pubertal
let the girl get away. Now you wouldn't discuss with changes that the girl brought to your attention? Did
her her difficulties in letting the girl get away, I she alter the way she moved her chest? Did she sort
gather. The girl went away to college at about 18, had of bring her pelvis to your attention? Did she in some
a rough time the first quarter, began to do better the way manage to take a bath and need some towels that
second quarter, and her mother decided to go back to she forgot, so that she could let you know that she
college, or go to college. She went down and joined was growing pubic hair? Just what was her attitude
her. Loward lipstick? Was she willing to learn, from you,
E: Mmm hmm. the importance of utilizing to the fullest her lip conH: The girl cracked up that summer. tour?” Then Td take that mother, systematically,
E: Mmm hmm. through all the steps, the changing steps of pubertal
H: Now several psychiatrists have told this mother she growth and development. Always emphasizing the
contributed to the crack up by her going down to the daughter as a different person. And the bewilderment
college. The mother’s response to this is, “I’m not go- Lhe mother had because the daughter was actually in-

[PAGE 025]

40 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 41


terested in a totally different kind of personality. Un- do you think in terms of the function .. . now it seems
til mother would have a tremendous sense that she apparent to us that these mothers and fathers, in
didn’t belong in her daughter’s class in college, she some sense, need a burden that they gain from the kid
didn’t belong on her daughter’s campus. That her being schizophrenic. That they somehow ... for ex-
daughter belongs to another, younger, new genera- ample, at the crudest level, they might fight a good
tion. But you see, T’d be emphasizing the growth of deal more or they might separate if they didn't have
the daughter, and the fact that mother is fully estab- a sick child. This holds them together. That they gain
lished as an adult, mature, female. And that she is like that in quite a number of ways so that it's very
watching the increased appearance of pubic hairs. hard for them to let the child get healthy and go about
Watching the increased growth of her daughter’s his business. Now how do you handle ... I mean, this
breasts. A breast that is going to be meaningful to is again a problem, to some extent, of insight. There
another man than father. You get these schizophrenic are two schools functioning here that I’m still trying
mothers who get along perfectly all right until the to differentiate in my mind.
child starts to enter puberty, and then it’s such a lv: Father and mother are sticking together and hanging
shocking experience for the mother. on to child.
H: You wouldn’t suggest to the mother, or discuss with W: Meanwhile blaming any difficulties on the mentally ill
her, her difficulties in letting the child go? child.
E: No, because that’s her reaction to it. To the ceremony I‘: That's right, and the child is so very, very useful.
of letting go. But I let the mother get awfully, pain- 11: “We would be so happy if Burt wasn’t sick.” They will
fully, acutely aware of the fact that daughter is grow- state that they have no other difficulties except that.
ing up. That daughter is adding one pubic hair after lv: And sick sonny or sick daughter is the only bone of con-
another. Daughter is adding one bra size after an- tention. Their only frustration in life. Again, I go
other. That daughter is appealing to, first the 15-year- through that developmental process, and I can in-
old boy, then the 16, then the 17, then the 18-year-old troduce that threat, “You can wonder about when
boy. And that daughter isn’t really appealing to ma- your son reaches your age whether he is going to have
ture men the way mother is. And if daughter is ap- the same trouble with his children.” You've actually
pealing to, and interested in, only immature boys, that accused them of having a future of being grandpar-
emphasizes that mother has her superior experience, ents. They ve got to resolve son's difficulties all the
and her superior maturity, and her interest in mature way along the line up to the point where they become
e


men. The mother is differentiating herself. She’s being grandparents. But they are accepting the idea of a
ci


forced to the conclusion that daughter may be fish but change in themselves. When you can get them to
she is fowl. (Laughter) think about being grandparents, we can think about
W: That's what you're offering mother in exchange for the whal kind of a grandmother would she make? She
realization that daughter is not a part of her anymore. starts thinking the same thing. They haven't seen
E: Yes. Because who wants to hang on to the fish when thal coming. Then you've got them started on an ex-
you really are a bird? amination of their views of each other. To deal with
H: Well, again the difference in approach. | think, what that, Whey have to pet sonny somewhere where he can

[PAGE 026]

42 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 43


provide a grandchild for them so that they can deal Tucson to live. They both consulted me about how of-
with her deficiencies as a grandmother, and she can ten I thought the other was entitled to visit. My state-
deal with his deficiencies as a grandfather, but they ment to Grandpa was that Grandma ought not to vis-
better shove sonny out into the cold world where he it oftener than one afternoon every six weeks or two
can get married and sire a child so they can actually months. And by curious coincidence, I felt the same
fight that issue out. about Grandpa. So they’ve been visiting about one afH: You mean in the anticipation of that fight, they can go ternoon every six weeks or two months.
a period of years? The daughter was very much alarmed about her
E: Oh yes. parents. She asked me about, “What’re they going to
H: We find, related to this same problem, that if the kid do to me? Building on an addition to the house so that
does get better, there's quite a disturbance in the if I ever fall in love, if I ever get engaged, if I ever get
family. Mother gets upset. Father gets upset. They married, that I have to live there?” I told her fall in
may fight more. There's a possibility, or certainly the line with it. I'll handle this. Those two parents are still
mother seems to feel, that she's going to have a break- complimenting me on my wisdom. And Grandpa is
down. seeing to it that Grandma is not too solicitous.
E: I can think of two very, very possessive schizoid par- W: You've got each one controlling the other one.
ents. Horribly so. When their daughter went to col- 17: And taking a tremendous joy in their grandchild and
lege, well of course mother did all the laundry for their daughter and her husband. They’ve got a con-
daughter, all the sewing, mother supervised all the trolled situation. But you know it was a question:
weekends. Of course, a girl that goes to college is like- How would grandson learn to walk in those rooms?
ly to encounter young men. Likely to fall in love. In What kind of a grandparent would the spouse be?
that schizoid fashion they approved of it. They even That theoretical speculation. On Grandma being too
built on rooms in that house for daughter and her hus- solicitous, Grandpa being too solicitous. And daugh-
band to live. They were really going to run that girl’s ter is just a freshman in college. She didn’t get mar-
life, including the life of her husband that she picked ried until her senior year. Yet I went through this
up. My approach to the matter, when they built on question of grandson while daughter was a freshman.
the rooms and started furnishing them for their daugh- Because part of her high school graduation present
ter's anticipated falling in love, anticipated engage- was the building on of a room with the plans for more
ment, anticipated marriage, was to fall in line. 1 antic- rooms. As the daughter grew up, she and her husband
ipated daughter's pregnancy. And daughter's delivery. would live right there.
And grandson's crying. And grandson's learning to IV’: So once again you fell into line and took it over.
walk. And to the anticipated grandmother, I antici- I: Yes. I went so much further down the line than they
pated grandfather’s lack of understanding of his could comprehend, and I helped them build so elabo-
grandson. To anticipated grandfather, I anticipated ralely that they had to build for that oversolicitous
grandmother’s lack of understanding. _ prandparent.
It wound up with the two of them insisting when II: Well really, you do a kind of substitution, then, of the
daughter really did get married, that daughter po to idea “grandparents” for the idea “mother or father”?

[PAGE 027]

44 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 45


E: That’s right. But isn’t it a legitimate substitution? H: Well, you'd only work for insight with parents, it seems
H: Yes. to me, in order to prevent some future grasping by
E: Because parent can't remain parent forever. The new the mother of the child. This undermining, constant
mother has to change into an older and older and older
undermining. I mean, here’s a typical example: A pa-
mother. You can’t tell her that she’s got to change. tient here wants to go home on trial visit. The mother
H: And your goal isn't in any way to get the mother one starts talking to him about how he ought to be more
day when walking down the street to realize, “I’ve independent. Another week he says he’s on the hos-
been holding on to this daughter and not letting her pital baseball team, he’s going to go down to Moffet
get away”? Field down here and play with the team. She said,
E: Well, that’s an offensive idea. It would give her an in- “That’s fine, dear, there are doctors there too.” So
creased amount of guilt. there is this constant kind of undermining influence
H: I'm talking about what is meant by insight, discovery. whenever he does begin to get independent. Now, if
Oh, you mean guilt about having done it? they continue to have contact with each other, and the
E: About having done it. If you can correct the issue with- mother doesn’t have any awareness of his difficulty,
out the mother suffering such extreme guilt — well, she’s going to continue to undermine him.
think of these grandparents. Why should they ever 17: I know, but she’s had a lifetime of experience in not hav-
feel guilty about that addition they put on the house? ing insight. You can give her insight into her behavior
In their old age as grandparents they’ve got two al- in one particular regard, or a dozen regards, but will
ternatives: one to keep that in case daughter or hus- she have insight into another type of behavior that’s
band or grandchild wants to come and visit for a long just as restrictive? You teach the mother, “You don’t
visit; or they can rent it out to tenants and have an use toilet paper on your son for him. Let him wipe his
increased income, and they're going to leave their sav- own bottom. He’s ten years old, you know. (Laughter)
ings to daughter and her child. Now why should they Let him walk across the street. It’s a residential sec-
feel so horribly guilty about that addition to the house?
tion, there’s no traffic there, and he’s ten years old,
It’s a perfectly sound thing. They are renting that.
you know. He's old enough to walk across the street.
Why should they feel guilty about it? You and I can Let him go to school all by himself. The traffic patrol
look at that addition to that house and think what an
there will take care of him crossing the streets safe-
awful thing for parents to do. To grow up visualizing ly. Let him go to the toilet in the schoolhouse.” And
the daughter as such a helpless appendage, with no so on. You can give the mother absolute insight into
rights, no privileges, whose entire future is dictated, all those things. What is that poor kid doing? Mother
and here is the tangible evidence of the extent of that is very helpful with his career as a musician. He is
dictation. We can see it as horrible. The parents can studying music and he's very gifted, but mother is
look upon it as a nice source of extra income that goes puiding and guiding and guiding him on every note
into a savings account that will probably help educate and every piece of music.
grandson. Well, which is better? Is it essential that IT: You don’t think, then, that she generalizes from wip-
they feel guilt? I don’t believe in salvation only through mp his rear end to the music?
pain and suffering. Ee You just can’t make her understand. Of course, mother

[PAGE 028]

46 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 47


has had musical training. Mother has had much more E: Have you differentiated the daughter from the father?
experience. This is a learning situation. Mother does H: I’ve been trying to bring them together.
have perfect pitch, and she knows so much about E: I mean, you say the mother fights with her husband but
music, having graduated from the Boston Conserva- still picks on her daughter. But, of course, in fighting
tory. And had excellent teachers, and being gifted with father, she can also fight with father through the
herself. But, nevertheless, it’s not a teacher’s role that daughter, because the daughter is equated with the
she has. It’s mother helping her little boy. The ex- father in certain ways. At least 50 percent of the
cellence with which she arranged the music on the daughter is father, isn’t that right? If you differenti-
piano was just as delicate as the way she used the ate the daughter as no part of the father, then she’s
toilet paper on his rear. When he picks up his violin, got to fight with father here, but here’s daughter over
she takes hold of his arm with the same care that she here now, which way is she going to direct her ener-
held his arm when walking across the street. But you gies? Because this daughter really isn’t part of father.
can’t tell that to her. This is different. But it’s the In other words, you differentiate the daughter so com-
same thing. And there’s no way of her recognizing pletely from the father.
that. W: I think we've got to be going.
H: It’s strange that you assume this about the mother
when in the patients you treat you assume that, if you * ok *
get them to do one thing, they will generalize to others.
E: That's right, because you're only dealing with the pa- 1961. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.
tient. With the mother, you've got two patients there.
And the mother is bringing the son. You give her in- W: When treating a family or a couple, what, if anything,
sight. You’re trying to get sonny straightened out. are the really crucial things to start changing? In
Mother knows it’s sonny that needs to be straight- other words, you sometimes speak of getting a wedge
ened out. Of course, she isn’t too much at fault, and into the situation, but is there anything that is cen-
she isn’t really your patient, and so she has the priv- tral to change compared with other things?
ilege of going back. If I can have the mother, only, lv: Almost always I insist right away on the recognition
as the patient, I would like to get her fighting with of the integrity of the individual as a completely sepa-
her husband. rate person.
H: Then what? lv: Well, I would take this as meaning that you want to
E: Then she'd let sonny alone. Because she hates her hus- unlock them a little from each other?
band. 17 'Vhat’s right. Even with the five-year-old, even with the
H: I’ve got a mother fighting with her husband, and she Lwo-year-old — you can't communicate much to the two-
still won't leave the daughter alone. year-old — but you can get the father and the mother
W: Husband doesn’t fight back. Lo recognize that the two-year-old is another person.
H: If he gets drunk he does. They get drunk every weekend Then, of course, if there are two kids in the family, you
and fight. point out to the father and mother that they are ab-

[PAGE 029]

48 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 49


solutely unrelated to each other. She comes from one cause little Johnny wanted to dig a hole. That is a
ancestral background, and he comes from another, complete togetherness at the minimal level. Now 1 will
and they are not blood relatives in any sense of the agree that was a family in which there was no quarrel-
word. The brother and sister, and the two sisters, are ing, no disagreements, But it was an appalling family.
decidedly closely related. They are made up of two I don’t know how you would describe it. These were
bloodstreams, identical bloodstreams. One of which college educated parents. Were they malicious? I don't
is alien to the mother. One of which is alien to the think they were consciously. I don’t think there was
father. Therefore, they better recognize that their chil- any malice of forethought. I don’t see how they could
dren are separate individuals, because of that mixture be that stupid. But the 15-year-old, and the 13-year-
of different bloodstreams, one of which is alien to her old, and the 11-year-old—utterly featureless as indi-
and one of which is alien to her husband. The sepa- viduals. The 15-year- old had to listen to the 13-year-
rateness and individuality of the child is assured at old and the 11-year-old.
the biological level. Then you point out that you in- W: I think this is particularly striking to me, because I’ve
herit just so much from your parents, so much from been working for quite a while with a family with a
your grandparents, and so much from your great- badly schizophrenic child where the mother is a native
grandparents, and that your parents are merely a Californian and the father is a native born European.
vehicle of transmission of inheritance. That’s why in It’s just been dawning more and more on me that even
a family of eight kids you have eight completely dif- in this family where there are conflicts about their dif-
ferent individuals, all different. ferences, or ostensibly about their differences, actual-
I can think of one family that appalled me. A very ly I’ve gotten much further when I said, “Yes, of course
brilliant young man married this very delightful young you're different,” than I ever did before. Even when
woman, and they’ve got a family of five children. I they’re already quarreling about the differences, to
visited in the home when the oldest child was 15. It emphasize the fact that of course they are different
was a Saturday, father was home, mother was home, is helpful in that it frees them from each other some.
the children were home, and they were really having lv: Yes, that's right. You separate them, and then you give
a family day. Even though I was visiting there, they them the opportunity for an overall appraisal. What
had their family day. They did it by sitting down in is so different, and what do I like about that dif-
the livingroom, and they all sat there and listened ference, what can I use about that difference.
while mother and father took turns reading a story IV: "That was very hard to see when they were already quar-
book to little Johnny, aged five. The 15-year-old sat reling about the difference, but it still applied.
there and listened to the story that was read to Johnny, / | think I’ve mentioned to you another technique I have
and the 13-year-old, and the 11-year-old. After they for warring families. I can think of the father and the
read several stories to little Johnny, all of them lis- mother and the daughter, and I set the clock. I gave
tening and sharing a togetherness, they, with together- them a statement, “age before beauty, ladies first.”
ness, went out into the backyard, each with a little ‘The mother had the first 20 minutes in which to lay
shovel, and they each dug a hole in the backyard, be- oul her daughter, and lay out her husband, while they

[PAGE 030]

50 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Disengaging Family Members 51


sat there gritting their teeth and keeping their mouths last word. But she was the youngest, and the most
shut. The daughter came next, and she really tore into incompetent for the last word. But I knew that; she
her mother. Just laid her out. Then she tore into her didn’t. But she had absolute freedom. And that was
father, and then father’s turn. Then the question, “Now the way I handled that particular family difficulty.
how much, mother, did you agree with what your hus- They came in fairly often for a couple of months for
band said about daughter? How much did you agree a family tearing down and building up. And finally they
about what your daughter said about your husband?” were building up good family relationships. “Sticks
But this polite listening in silence while the other is and stones may break my bones, but names will never
free to say anything, and as exaggeratedly as possi- hurt me,” was one way which I summarized one of
ble—I’ve staged that sort of quarrel in the office re- those interviews.
peatedly.


* * *


E: Another variation: “I’m going to listen to each one of
you and see what you really do mean. I’m going to
keep my mouth shut, and my eyes and ears open, so
that I can see and hear what you mean. So mother,
for the next 15 minutes, just blast away at four of the
most courteous listeners there are. Pull no punches.
Give them a chance to listen and to see what you ac-
tually mean. Then after you, mother, I think father
should. Then after father, I think brother should, be-
cause he’s older than sister. I think the three of you
ought to teach the youngest member of the family
quite a bit about listening and hearing and under-
standing.” I will let mother blast all through them,
and I listen to it with the greatest of interest and
curiosity. Father kept looking over at me, and I was
listening. He did his level best to listen intelligently.
Brother and sister were watching father watching me,
and you could see written all over brother’s face, “I
can do it better than father.” And he did. And sister’s
delight at seeing father and mother and brother at
their worst as they each took their turn. Then you
could see that grin on sister’s face, triumphant, the

[PAGE 031]

2
a Dealing with the Difficult Family 53


cause it paid them both! She demonstrates in this way
that he’s inadequate. Shortly following his giving her
this salary check, the boy raises such hell at school
—the boy has been a long time near schizo, now 15,
CHAPTER 3
and he immediately gets turned out of school. They
wouldn't have anything to do with him anymore, which
brings the family to us. At the end of the first session,
Dealing with the talking about this salary check business, the father
makes a very straight, but a little bit withdrawn,
Difficult Family statement on the following lines, “Yes I have altered
that. I agreed that it was a great mistake I made to
try and keep the control in my hands. I think that my
reasons for saying that this is a mistake are different
1958. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Gregory Bateson, Jay Haley, from yours.” Wife: “You're just being facetious.”
and John Weakland. lv: “And your wife says that you are being facetious, and
you know you're not.”
H: On the question of families, particularly the kind of It: This would be your reply?
severe families we deal with—they’re the kind that lv: That's my statement. “All right, but your wife says you
anything you do is wrong, and anything any member are facetious and you know that you are not. Your
of the family does is wrong, and nothing can get very wife says you are, and you know that you are not.
definite and nothing can get very set anyway. Now, Now one of you ought to be right. Ladies first. You
how do you handle this in a directive way — where in- tell her that you are not right. And you can be not
evitably directions aren’t going to be followed? If you right, and indicate that wheels are going around in
give a clear statement, they aren't going to do it, your head. You are saying the correct words but this
that’s all. gesture of wheels going around in your head makes
E: Give me an example. those right words facetious words, and your wife is
B: Father and mother had been married 19 years, and dur- right, and you're right too. You're saying the right
ing the whole of that time she has battled for control words.” Now what are they going to do with that sort
of the salary check. Her right as a woman had been of thing? They have to start looking for other grounds
infringed. Shortly before they came to us he capitu- for disagreement. But they're looking for other grounds.
lated, gave her the salary check, and took on a second You have just provided them with grounds, and they
job to try and redeem the family finances. Incidental- have accepted them, because as soon as they start
ly, she indirectly confessed to having been sabotag- looking for other grounds, then they have accepted
ing the household financial system, not economizing these grounds you just offered him.
the way she knew she could have. And he's quite ob- I can think of the experimental set-up where two
viously been sabotaging the finances on his side, be- resistant psychology students wanted to go into a

[PAGE 032]

54 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Dealing with the Difficult Family 55


trance, but they were completely resistant, and noth- alter the arguments that they use. Wife says he’s
ing that I did would put them in a trance, so I asked facetious, you make him facetious. I like to use puns.
them to face each other. Then I instructed them, “Now You say the right words so that by saying the right
you watch the other person very carefully, and be sure words, you'll be wrong.
not to go into a trance until after he has.” And they W: I’m lost. Oh, you mean you say the right words as a
each had that. “But be sure to go into the trance im- pun doesn’t mean you're right, it means you say the
mediately after he has, but not before he has.” So they right words?
are obligated to go into a trance after the other. Ob- lv: Yes.
ligated to go into a trance immediately after the other. Il: | was saying to Milton that our families don’t follow
And each knows he’s going to go into a trance. Each directions very well, and he was asking for an exam-
knows the other is going to precede him. Each is ple. Could you give an example of when you were try-
keyed to that. That’s an impossible situation. They ing to film this family on Sunday?
can't go simultaneously. IV: Well it was pretty chaotic. With the S family it is hapH: What was their response to this impossible situation? pening, in a way, over and over again.
E: Can you figure it out? 8: The S family are these people I’ve just been talking
H: Well, the only thing I could guess is that they would about.
go into a trance and deny they were in a trance. IV: I came in, after leaving them in a room for a couple of
W: Hallucinate that the other person went into a trance? moments. I started out by being introduced to the
E: That's one way. I was thinking of two in particular. But family and I had them sit down and said we'll be ready
that’s one way they can do it. They can hallucinate in a minute or two. I go out for a minute, and mean-
the other person going into a trance. while they are on camera without any further instrucFH: What's another way? What else might happen? tion. They don’t know they’re on camera yet; it hasn’t
E: A withdrawal from the other person. Which is essen- been stated. Then I come in, and ordinarily at that
tially the same as you said— negative hallucination. point I pick up the family and talk to them for a cou-
Find it increasingly difficult to watch the other per- ple minutes about being in this photographic situa-
son. The more difficult it became to judge and observe tion. I may say that 1 would naturally feel a little bit
and watch the other person, the deeper into the trance uncomfortable and anxious, this is just to sort of
they went. So they literally withdrew and strengthened sound them out and to let them loosen up if they want
their relationship to me. Lo. So I come in with that to this family, and before
H: You stayed out of it and just waited? | can get a word out they started off by taking it right
E No, I was offering them the suggestions. out of my hands and saying, “It's just like TV, where's
H: What sort of suggestions? ihe prompter, where's the script?” Okay, so I attempt
E: Trance. To get tired, to get sleepy, slowly to go into a to pick this up, I say, “Okay, PH do a little prompting
trance, and each watching the other, each getting set and write a little script for you.”
to go into a trance just as soon as the other one. With He Who said that?
the husband and wife who are at swords’ point, you WW Father said that. | forget their specific response to that,

[PAGE 033]

56 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Dealing with the Difficult Family 57


but every attempt I made thereafter to give them a had a good opportunity for it. Well, no, that’s no good
suggestion, a procedure to follow, they did something of course. But this is the way the whole thing ran.
else. Usually our families don’t do that so obviously. Mother was a key figure, but they were all involved
But they did it very obviously. My first suggestion in it. Whatever gets started, that’s broken off, and
again followed our usual routine; I would offer them they're somewhere else.
something to talk about for a few minutes and discuss ls: What do you want me to do— discuss this?
among themselves, something to get started on. P'd IH: I just wonder how you handle that? For example, if you
suggest a topic to them, and then I'd give them a few have a mother who says, “I never drink, at least not
minutes by themselves. Afterwards I'd come back in often, and then only on weekends when I want to be
and talk to them. The suggestion I offered is that they more cheerful.” Now how do you deal with these kinds
plan something they'd like to do together, say, a trip. of self-contradictory statements?
They said, “Well, we've just been talking about that 1: What do you want brought out?
before we came here.” I said, “Well, fine, then you can IH: Well, how do you get them so that what they say they
go on a little further with it.” They stopped talking affirm instead of deny? So they can reach an agree-
about going on a trip almost immediately. I then came ment and stick to an agreement?
in and started to give them the next one, which is to Ir: Yes. “I never have a drink. Only on weekends, when I

play the game of “each play an idea.” They hassled want to feel cheerful.” Is that the statement?
around. “I don't play games.” This was mother’s con- it: Yes. We find in one of these families that what they say,

tribution. They kick things arounda little bit. I sug- they contradict. That what anybody else says, they
gest they can try this anyway. They get started in no contradict.
sequence, and what do you think they're talking about IV: Only they don’t even clearly contradict it.
in about one minute? Somebody says, “Well, what I: That's right. If father says, “Let's go to the movies,”
about that trip?” (Laughter) Well, this wasn't the end mother will say, “All right,” only she'll say it like she
of it, but that's the general shape of the half-hour I doesn’t really want to go, or shell say, “Let's go some-
spent with them in front of the camera. Of course this where else,” and he'll say, “Well, I only wanted to go
was interspersed with a number of dirty cracks about Lo the movies because I thought the child wanted to
the situation. Mother said something at one point go,” and the child will say, ‘Well, I really don’t want
about, “Well, I don't see why, if you're going to do Lo go to the movies,” and they have a devil of a time
something like this, you didn't just eavesdrop on one getting to the movies even. It’s this kind of self-con-
of our regular sessions,” meaning one of their inter- tradiction, and contradiction of each other. They're
views with Gregory. “It's a little disconcerting just constantly in this hassle.
to be sitting here talking to a black stranger.” This I“. But as long as the child is going to contradict father,

is me. (Laughter) I said, “Well, you give me an idea father is going to contradict mother, and mother is
there. If you like that better, perhaps we could ar- roing to contradict the child, and contradict father,
range to film one of your regular sessions.” We've it’s mutually contradictory. You pose the question go-
thought about filming therapeutic sessions; we haven't my Lo Lhe movies. Then you take it out of their hands,

[PAGE 034]

58 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Dealing with the Difficult Family 59


by saying, “Now mother, tell father you won't go. Now said, “No, there really aren't any dogs there. Now
child, tell father you will go, since he invited mother, listen to me carefully, David, 1 would like to have you
but tell mother you won't go.” Before the child’s got see dogs there.” And he said, “There aren't any dogs
that handled, then you tell mother, “Now you tell the there.” I said, “That's right, there aren't any dogs
child that he’s got to go, and you tell father that you there. What I asked of you was to see some dogs
won't let the child go.” there.” Then he paused, and he said, “I can't see any
H: You tell them to do this and you wait until they do it? dogs there.” “So maybe you better try a little harder.
Is that it? See some dogs right there.” “I can't see any dogs there.”
E: Yes. (Getting softer and weaker) “You're trying hard, that's
B: What happens if they say, “Ridiculous. I know my fine, just keep on trying because, it isn't important
husband.” that you see dogs there, it’s just important that you
E: “You're here, and you're trying to learn something. What try,” and I lifted his arm. He was in a trance state.
it is you want to learn you really don't know. You Why should 1 be upset by all that contradiction? 1
won't even know it after you've learned it. But it will know what ideas I’m going to present to the crowd.
be a part of you, so you do as I tell you, even though I know what ideas I’m going to present to the patient.
you don't know that you're doing as I tell you.” Certainly the patient can dispute those ideas. The paW: (Laughs) That's wrapping them up. tient can argue against them. All I need to do is keep
E: You see, usually you take a nice, polite social attitude on presenting my ideas until the patient realizes that
toward your patients. You present them with an idea, I’m very, very serious about it. Then the situation
and if they don't respond to it, if they don’t accept it, changes inexplicably. I can help that change by seem-
then your face falls and you get crestfallen. Your chin ing to agree with the child, “I know there are no dogs
drops, and you try to restate it. You let them know there but I want you to see dogs there.” This allows
that your feelings are hurt, and you'd rather they the child to wonder. “I'd like to have you try harder.”
wouldn't have turned you down. Saturday night I was But it’s your absolute persistence in spite of the con-
demonstrating child hypnosis. I picked a child out of tradictions, instead of politely withdrawing and try-
the audience, and I asked him to come up and sit ing another gamble with that script thrown away.
down. I knew nothing about the child. He was a very You tell the patient, “I hope you won't get tired stand-
large child. From the looks of his face he might be 10 ing up.” The patient looks at you and says, “What’s
and he might be nine. I just couldn’t tell because he the matter with you, I’m sitting down.” “Oh, I know
was obviously large-boned. So I didn’t know. And so you are, but I hope you won't get tired standing up.”
I pointed out to the audience, “Now there’s one way “Please talk sense, doctor, I’m sitting down. I’m not
that you can have this boy go into a trance. You ask standing up, and I won’t get tired of standing up.”
him to see those dogs there. David, you look at those “Yes, I hear you, but please try to understand, don't
dogs.” He said, “There aren’t any dogs there.” I said, get tired of standing up.” And then they know that
“That's right, there aren't any dogs, will you look at I understand them, but in some way they just don't
the dogs there?” “But there aren't any dogs there.” I understand me. (Laughter) And that’s all that I want

[PAGE 035]

60 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Dealing with the Difficult Family 61


them to grasp. That I understand them, they don’t it: That's right. Impose it upon them. And use that as the
understand me. foundation. “Father, you are disputing mother and
W: I can put that in another way. Jay, you know I'd say child, child you are disputing mother and father,
that he gets across the idea that he can top any con- mother you are disputing father and child, and you
tradiction they would pull. can keep right on doing that, but you need to clarify
FH: Well, now you say to the child, on this movie, “I want your own ideas through knowing what your own ideas
you to tell your mother that you won't go, and your are.” You can present the entire thing in slightly dif-
father that you will go, and mother I want you to pre- ferent words. “You know, father is in the same posi-
vent the child from going, and tell your father or hus- tion, and father, you know that mother needs to clar-
band that you'll let them go.” ify her own ideas by expressing her own ideas, and
E: “And now, you know, we can keep right on with that that will clear her mind.” Mother's going to say father
sort of thing, but it goes in a circle, you see. But there has to do that himself. But father's going to agree
are certain understandings that you want to get out with you that mother should do it, and the child is go-
of this situation; there are three of you involved, father, ing to agree with you that both of them should doit,
mother and child. And there are certain understand- and you've got an awful lot of agreement right there.
ings you want to get. Certain understandings you “And I don't know which one of you should begin
need to get from father, certain understandings he first.”
needs to get from you. Certain understandings you ii: Let's take another tack on these families. One of the
both need to get from the child. And certain under- things we find is that a mother will have this transfer
standings the child needs to get from the two of you. of blame; whatever happened, she didn't do it. Or if
But there are certain understandings you need to get she did do it, somebody told her to do it. So she doesn’t
from yourself by talking about and clarifying your ever acknowledge affecting anybody adversely. In
ideas. And mother, there are certain understandings fact, she really does not acknowledge affecting any-
you need to get from yourself by expressing your body nicely. She denies what she does. Now, how do
ideas and clarifying them. And sonny, there are cer- you handle that sort of a blame problem? How do you
tain ideas that you need to get from yourself through get her to acknowledge it? Naturally, what happens
talking out your ideas and talking to father and is when she doesn't acknowledge any blame, then the
mother. And mother, of course you'll have to talk to rest of the family blames her, and she feels terribly
father and child, and father you'll have to talk to blamed all the time, while busy defending herself about
mother and child.” And you've presented that, and being at fault.
what can you do about that? You’ve emphasized they Ba a, know. How do you want to make her accept blame?
can clarify their own ideas from their own ideas. You Do you want to make her accept blame by antagonism
need to get something from father, from mother, from or by agreement? By antagonizing her, or by forcing
child, from each other, from both of the others. her to agree with you gently?
HH: Then, in general—I’m trying to understand what you’re IH: Neither way in particular.
getting at here— you would take what they're doing E But it has to be some particular way.
already and impose this upon them. H Well, we are wanting, | should say, to get to a point

[PAGE 036]

Dealing with the Difficult Family 63
62 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


where, when somebody says x, y, z, the question “Who justify her complaints; she's not an angel to put up
is being blamed?” is not the first question that pops with everything. But she's caught with her own state-
into the mother’s mind and into everybody else's mind. ment. She has to admit she's at fault in some one
E: Yes. I can think of what I did with one mother in that regard. Well, let's make it two. “You know, mother,
regard. I said, “Mother, now you have explained the there were two times if you think hard when you were
situation: No matter how hard you try, something at fault.” (Laughter) Let's make it three.” But while
always happens, or someone always does something, you're jesting, while you're joking, there's an under-
that brings your most carefully laid out plans to grief. current there. And she gets so very, very grateful to
It’s perfectly obvious that it isn’t your fault, and you you for making it a jesting admission. She's grateful
can recognize that fact. But mother, there is some- to you for bringing out her lack of perfection humor-
thing I’d like to point out to you. I don't know if you ously. Then all of a sudden, you put him on the spot,
have a sense of humor, but I’m going to assume that “And actually, confidentially, your husband hasn't got
you do have a sense of humor, and I’m going to ask wings either.” Then she accepts that so gladly, but the
father to feel your back from one shoulder to the other fact that she accepts it...
shoulder. Just straight across your back, to pass his 13: Underlines her.

hand from this shoulder to this shoulder. And I want 1: Underlines and emphasizes her own lack of perfection.
him to tell me what he feels.” Father did that, he said “And you know, I think your child inherits a lot from
he had felt her shoulder blades. I said, “That's quite both of you.” (Laughter) “And he does, you know,
right, I was very certain you would. Now I don’t know you're very certain, aren't you?” And we're talking
what you think about a sense of humor. I don’t know about her defects, and we're talking about her hus-
how corny you like humor. But I want to point out band's defects, and she starts looking in her child for
to you what you've been telling me. No matter how the defects the child inherited from her. She starts
carefully you plan things, either something happens looking at her child for the defects inherited from
or someone in some way interferes, and upsets your father. But she's admitting defects. Now there's one
plans, so that you are perfectly disappointed every defense —to burst into tears and say you don't under-
time. And I thought only angels were perfect, and stand. Then you state, “Now I always keep that klee-
your husband didn't feel any wings. (Laughter) And nex handy right there.” And she looks over and sees
so you know, really, honest now, I’m not going to the kleenex right there.
believe that you can do things with such perfection. Ht; And you have understood her.
Now if you'll think hard there was some time when I: She acts upon it. She reaches over and takes the kleenex.
you didn't plan perfectly. There really was because he She can’t do that without knowing that I understand
didn't feel any wings, and besides a lot of people are her. And she goes through the physical behavior of
allergic to feathers and nobody ever sneezes when you admitting that I understand, and you don't press your
come around.” What can the woman do? She has to point. Then T tell the husband, “All right, now while
admit she's not perfect. She's not an angel. In fact, your wife is drying her tears, suppose you say some-

that's one of her proudest boasts. And she's going to thing.” But, she has heard, “drying her tears.” She's got

[PAGE 037]

64 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Dealing with the Difficult Family 65


her orders. She thought I was only talking to her hus- if they have to contradict everybody, you can trap
band. (Laughter) You see, too often the tendency is them in a contradictory impasse.
to look at the woman crying and try to do something FE: And you know the answer to it, “That's not true, I was
in relationship to the woman about her tears. Why not deliberately vicious the last time that we were here.”
recognize that she is crying? And instead of trying My answer would be, “I hope that you will be as free
to do something about her crying in relationship to and easy to recognize that next week.”
her, as the crying object, her husband’s in the room; IT: Never stop building?
why not do something about her crying in relation- ls: That's right. And then if she said, “But I’m not going
ship to her husband? “So while your wife is drying her to be vicious next week,” I’d say, “No, why should you
tears, I would like to have you...” You're doing be? But I wonder if you, next week, will be as free and
something about the wife’s crying. But it isn’t recog- easy to recognize that last time you were deliberate-
nized as something being done about her crying. But ly vicious. Because, you know, we forget things from
it is. You started telling her, “I try to understand you, one week to the next, and I wonder if you'll forget that
that’s why I keep the kleenex right there.” She has to next week?” So you've made your sally, and if she ac-
reach the conclusion that I understand. Just the other cepts the fact that she may be vicious next week, fine,
day when a woman started crying, I said, “Now you that's okay. If she wants to dispute it, you're still talk-
know why I keep that kleenex right there.” And she ing about the freedom of recognition and applying it
said, “You know, I was beginning to think that maybe to last week, so you haven't lost any ground. But
I was the only woman that ever cried, and when you you're asking her to recognize deliberate viciousness
said that I knew that they all do, or you wouldn't have next week, and so you're still building.
the kleenex there.” IE. Y don’t know how you set these up, Milton, so that you

H: Well, what you keep recommending against is ever step- don't lose any ground no matter what they do. It's as
ping one-down or being defensive. if you anticipate answers and give what would be apE: No, never be defensive, unless you can use it. (Laughter) propriate no matter what answer they give.
H: Well it's a problem how —it’s a task enough to handle lv: Yes. But you try and understand the answer that they

one person without getting in a defensive position, but give. Now, let's see, Frank Bacon played in that play
to handle three is more complicated. The only time in called Lightning, wasn't that it? Does anybody
this family I’m seeing — the only time the wife ever ad- remember that? Frank Bacon, an old-time actor. The
mitted that she did something that harmed somebody thing that he taught me was when he said, “No.” He
was when I suggested to her that she didn't really was supposed to say, “No,” as one of his lines in the
understand her husband, and that she didn’t mean to play. Frank Bacon ran away with the play because on
do what she did. At that point she said, “That’s not one occasion he said, “No,” 15 times in succession with
so, last time I was here I was being deliberately vici- a different inflection. He just held his audience ab-
ous to him.” That’s the first time she acknowledged solutely spellbound with those different ways of say-
being vicious, but she could only do this when I said ing, “No.” One right after another. One “No” meaning
she wasn't, you know? You can catch them sometimes; a “startled yes,” another meaning a “pleased yes,”

[PAGE 038]

66 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Dealing with the Difficult Familv 67


another meaning a “startled no.” It was just simply child in another direction. The child thinks that you
incredible what he could do with that one word, “No.” tell the most wonderful stories in the world. (Laughter)
And he achieved national fame on that “No.” That was Because you stimulated that child and kept that child
the time I got the idea that you ought to study words on edge the whole time.
and find out what they mean. IT: I’ve done that with just changing names, but I’ve never
H: They mean, “No.” (Laughs) done it with putting the emphasis somewhere else so
E: You ought to know. they couldn’t quite handle changing their name.
H: Did you take some training from him? Is: How do you deal with a child who says, “I’m not going
E: I think you ought to go listen to a tape recording, or to eat my meat”?
take some typewritten material, and wonder what all W: Well, I haven’t had to deal with it yet. Our child is a
the different meanings are in that sentence. How very good eater up to this point.
would you say it this way? How would you say it that I: You've got lots of surprises ahead. (Laughter) You ac-
way? The same words. cuse the child of being a bird. Then you get the child
H: This is relevant to something I was wondering about; all involved in proving to you that he’s not a bird. Part
suppose we had a family or a couple, and we wanted of the proof that he’s not a bird is eating. (Laughter)
to approach them in your style, which is different I}: And if the child says, “Cock-a-doodle-do!”?

from other styles. Now, what would be the most prac- lv: 1f he falls in line with that, you point out that he’s wear-


tical way of learning your style? We have a lot on ing feathers. He knows darn well he’s not wearing
tape; we've had a lot of discussions. feathers at all.
E: I think one of the nicest ways is entertaining little I}: At some point he has to turn and prove that he’s not

children. By telling them stories, “Little Bambi flapped a bird, even if he plays along the first round.
his ears? Then flew high?” “No, that wasn’t Bambi, fy; That's right. The first round, and the second, third

that was Dumbo.” round he'll still prove it. And then, when the child tries
H: You're not clear enough to me yet. out with you all of these things, then you pose the imE: Do you know the story of Dumbo? possible for him. He agrees that cloth is feathers, and

H: Yes. his hair is feathers, and the eyes are at the side of his
E: He flapped his ears and he flew high, isn’t that right? head, and this is really a bill and that’s what he’s

So you call him Bambi, it sounds like Dumbo, a lit- eating with, and these are wings with feathers. So you

tle bit. (Laughter) The child is eager to correct you. lead him out and he is smugger and smugger and
But you put the doubt into “flapped his ears.” The smugger because he’s agreeing with you completely.

child wants to assure you he did too flap his ears, but After he’s agreed with you completely, you tell him
the child can’t tell you that because it wasn’t Bambi. you hope he'll stay awhile before he flies away.
(Laughter) Do you see? (Laughter) Now he’s got to backtrack. But you tell

H: So what do they do? him that very simply. Now you’re following along
E: You correct it yourself. “Oh, that was Dumbo.” And you wilh him, and he isn’t following along with you. Be-
bounce the child, and bounce the child, and bounce the cuuse he's got Lo backtrack right then and there.

[PAGE 039]

68 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Dealing with the Difficult Family 69


H: I have an idea that you can almost diagram a couple. it’s much better than an hourlong explanation. They’ve
You see the husband, you see the wife. This is the had the carpet yanked out from under their feet. They
situation. This is the relationship. This is what it feel themselves sprawled out, utterly helpless, and
needs. And this is the maneuver that will get them completely at your mercy, but they can’t accuse you
into the situation that they should be in. of attacking them.
E: Well, you know the phrase, the sentence, “The teacher II. There's just something so tricky about the way you take
says the principal is a fool.” “The teacher,” says the what a patient is already doing and urge them to con-
principal, “is a fool.” And you listen to what somebody tinue to do it, and then suddenly it’s something dif-
says and then you repunctuate it for them. They have ferent.
to repeat it. You’ve used their words. They know you 17: Well, just take that, “You're a damn fool.” “I knew that
heard them correctly, but you didn’t hear them cor- but I didn’t know you knew it.” Well, what becomes
rectly because you didn’t say the teacher comma says of that accusation, “You're a damn fool”?
the principal comma is the fool. So you’ve got them !t: | don’t know what has become of it.
on the alert because you throw in that punctuation, P it’s no longer an accusation, is it? It’s an utterance on
you change the meaning of their words. Then you their part that puts me in a superior, one-up position.
make honest mistakes like Bambi for Dumbo. See The words are the same. The meaning is the same
anything that scrambles a meaning. Do you remem- but...
ber Jane East on the radio? The way she could scram- PH It, turns into a compliment to their understanding.
ble things? “But bald heads are scarcer than hens’ !’ (Us a compliment to their understanding, but it puts
teeth.” Just what does that mean? (Laughter) And you me one-up on them.
pause and pause and pause, trying to figure that one 11 They can’t stand the compliment, if it is a person who
out. comes in and gratuitously attacks you.
W: That’s another of these things that deals with just what ti. Suppose they say, “I knew it, and I knew your wife knew
your patients are bringing you, too. it, but I didn’t know you knew it.”
E: That’s right. I" I can think of a paranoid patient who walked into my
W: They make more honest mistakes than anybody I ever office and said, “Is that your wife out in the other
heard. room?” And I said, “Yes.” He said, “She's the most
E: I know they do. And you try to be so politely correct. stupid-looking woman I’ve ever seen.” I said, “You
The antagonistic patient says you are a damn fool. really ought to see her on Saturday.” (Laughter) I
And what happens to them when I say, “Well, I know could have said, “What do you mean? Well, some of
that but I didn’t know you knew it.” (Laughter) What thal isn't important, why are you here?”
can you do? I Well, you find over and over again that with schizoH: This is the willingness to take the one-down position? phrenics, those parents are pretty concerned about
E: But you aren't one-down you know? talking with cach other, but they're tremendously conH: One-downness requires defensiveness. cerned about talking in the presence of the patient
E: One-downness requires defensiveness. Right then and about nearly all of the things that we think are im-
there they regard you as a very worthy opponent, and portant in the situation.

[PAGE 040]

70 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
nn

Dealing with the Difficult Family 71


patient about nearly all of the things that we think W: It’s something that’s madea little safe to start with
Ban


are important in the situation. but it can go on from there.
E: Yes. E: Yes. And if there’s only one or two or three points that
W: Then when they haven't talked, when the family is are wrong, that means 97 points are right. But you
together, they sort of seize us by the arm and say, aren’t emphasizing the 97 points. (Laughter)
“Can we talk to you just a minute?” Then they want B: Our general theory, I should say, in terms of what
to bring out everything that they haven't said, or Pm you've been saying, is that what these people do to
not sure they really do, but... each other could be described as looking at all the
E: They’ve got a need to talk, but... alternative ways of interpreting somebody’s need
W: They’re terribly afraid to talk in the presence of the for privacy, for example. Or for somebody’s blush, or
patient. whatever it may be, and of that spectrum selecting
E: I tell them, “You're going to be hesitant about talking that particular interpretation, which will be patho-
in front of the patient, and I think you ought to be, genic in that particular situation. This is, on the whole,
but your reason for talking to me is because you feel how they seem to make psychotics of each other.
very strongly that there are a lot of things the patient W: They look over the possibilities and pick out the worst.
doesn't understand. It’s the things that you feel he 13: They look over the possibilities and figure out the most
doesn’t understand that you want to talk to me about. destructive.
And you may be right that he doesn’t understand E: I go over the possibilities and pick out a nice one.
those things. But if you talk to me in his presence, and W: I think this is a good idea, but it seems hard to develop
youre really talking to me, and he’s not participating, it.
he'll have a chance to listen to what you say to me and B: Yes, but now how are we going to influence, or teach,
perhaps get a better understanding of those things.” them to look over the possibilities and pick out a nice
Then I turn to the patient, “You know you haven't got one instead of picking out a son of a bitch. This is the
a corner on all the misunderstanding. There's a lot of thing they need to know more than any other single
things I don't understand. A lot of things your father thing, I think.
doesn't understand, your mother doesn't understand, i: The way you teach them... I can think of this very,
a lot of things you don't understand. And we can be very rigid old maid who came to see me—tense, hor-
charitable and allow the other person to be mistaken, ribly self-conscious. She developeda terrific abdomi-
and | think it should be decidedly interesting to you nal rumble. And she started to blush and squirm, and
to listen to what your father has to say, to what your she was obviously ready to run home and never come
mother has to say, and perhaps now and then you can back to me again. Then I said, “Did you know that the
wonder how they can be so wrong on one or two or medical term for that sound is ‘botulismness’?” And
even three points.” So I’ve given them permission to she looked at me so surprised. I said, “Botulismness
wonder. You know, when you start wondering, you're is a hard one to spell.” What had I done with that ab-
getting objective. One or two or three points. They're dominal rumble of hers? I had identified it as some-
going to make a hundred. thing that was scientifically named, and furthermore

[PAGE 041]

72 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Dealing with the Difficult Family 73


it was a difficult medical name. Hard to spell. Her W: We need all we can get.
blushes and her squirms disappeared, and later in the E: I think that if I had a couple in the office, and he said
interview, another rumble, and she said, “Is that... she said exactly that, 1 would say, “You know the sur-
what do you call it?” (Laughter) I said “Botulismness.” prising thing about it all is this, you’re both completeB: I see that you can take somebody’s message and put ly wrong. Your husband thinks you're going to drive
a beneficial frame on it, or whatever you want to call home. You think you can’t drive home by that road,
it... and that’s what both of you honestly believe. I say
E: Her tendency was to take that abdominal rumble and youre both wrong, and I need your cooperation be-
label it fearful, embarrassing, stressing, shameful, cause I would like to be right. So since you live at
humiliating. 23401 Pasadena Road, I would like to have you drive
B: Etcetera. Yes. And you then substitute it. on the Freeway until you can turn at right angles and
E: And I said, “Here's a scientific fact.” drive nearly home, and then make your husband drive
B: Yes. home. I'd put her on a different road for a different
E: With a scientific name. She's had another scientific fact, goal, not too far away from her home. Then she could
namely, it’s hard to spell, like other scientific names. make her husband drive the remaining couple blocks.
W: Well, you see, I find they are cooperating so busily with Do you see?
each other in looking for bad interpretations. Il: I see, but I don’t see why.
B: In the opposite direction. Yes. 17: I don’t want her to refuse to drive home because it’s that
E: And too many therapists are cooperating with them. road. I’m going to put her on another road. I’m going
FH: Well it’s this kind of a situation, Milton, they all behave to give her another goal. And I’m going to make her
as if there is going to be disaster, no matter what they husband do something.
do. They each behave like they feel always in the 11: How does this help with them on the problem of both
wrong. tess, being wrong, I mean, indicating to each other that the
E: Yes.
da
‘a,


other is wrong?
H: And sometimes they'll say that. Mr. B. will say, “I wish / : They both prove that the other is wrong. I help both
ali a

m


my wife wouldn't act as if I’m going to do the wrong of them prove that the other is wrong. She's not go-
thing no matter what I do.” She’s learning to drive, ing to drive home; he is. And she's wrong in saying
he suggests she drive home, she says, “My God, I that she's not going to drive; she is.
can't drive out on that highway,” and she doesn’t as- Hf: | get it that they both prove they're wrong. Now how
sume that he’s going to take her on a quiet country does this solve the problem of always feeling that
road. That’s the example they came up with. But they they're being put in the wrong?
always feel like the other one is thinking that any- H: Bul you see they have that feeling that they're always
thing they’re going to do is wrong. Now, how do you in the wrong in an involuntary fashion; you're doing
accept this and turn it around? it. in a controlled fashion. You want control over that
E: In the situation, or in the explanation? situation. It’s utterly imperative. And anything that
H: Both. you can do to build up the control.

[PAGE 042]

74 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Dealing with the Difficult Family ‘ths


FH: So once you get them in the wrong, or putting each
comes something under my control, but not notice
other in the wrong, under your control, then what?
ably so. Because I missed something that he said. !
E: Then you see being in the wrong isn’t such a devastating
missed some of the implications in what she said. So
experience. They willingly, gladly, walk into the wrong
I’m making him attack himself, and I'm making her
situation. It’s not humiliating. It’s being voluntarily
attack him, all over again. I can think of the time that
done. So she drives out the wrong street. She drives
Lance was teasing Allan unbearably. Allan was about
out Camelback instead of Indian School. He drives
seven years old. Great big 5 foot 7 Lance was teas-
from Camelback to Indian School. She’s made him
ing little Allan. And Allan kept saying, “I'll sock you,
drive home, but she has abided by his wish that she
I'll sock you.” And he was furious, and Lance was
drive. It’s a voluntary thing. They're both cooperating
laughing at him. So I went out and said, “Lance,
with me so J won’t be wrong. There's no sense in all
you're 5 feet 7. Allan doesn't even come up to your
three of us being wrong. So they're cooperating with
shoulders, he's just a little boy, and look at the age
me. If they cooperate in this regard, I’m going to get
difference. You're ten years older than Allan. You are
them to cooperate in this regard for these other steps.
17 and Allan is 7. Allan wants to sock you. And you
H: Let's take the B family. NowI see them pretty regularly
wouldn't fight with somebody smaller than you. You
and typically in the sessions father says something
really wouldn't. So kneel down, try to bend at the
that puts him in the wrong. Mother points out that
same height as Allan. And Allan, just as soon as
he's not what he ought to be. Now in taking control
Lance kneels down, I want you to walk all the way
of this, would you suggest to them that sometime dur-
around him, look him over carefully, and see where
ing this half-hour he's to say something that will put
you're going to hit him.” Lance kneeled, full of uttor
him in the wrong?
bitter resentment, and glared at Allan. Allan walked
E: He says he's in the wrong?
around, and I said, “Well, maybe you better walk
H: No, he says something that puts him in the wrong, or
around again, because you might see a better place
he does something that shows that he's in the wrong.
to hit him. Just keep walking around until you pick
Mother points out that he's in the wrong.
out the very best spot to hit him.” So finally Allan
W: Mother labels it.
says, “Right there.” I said, “All right, make a fist in
H: How badly he does, and then he gets silent and defen-
your hand and draw it back, now place your feel se
sive about it. But usually something comes up. He
that you are properly braced. Now move your hand
says the wrong thing or he does the wrong thing, or
this way, just to make certain it moves right, and ure
he mentions something that he did that was wrong,
you sure you know how hard you want to hit him?"
so that mother can attack him.
Lance set his jaw and glared. I said, “All right, now
E: Very, very often when that happens, I do a repeat on
hit him.” And here’s Lance’s jaw. At the last fraction
it. Because I missed part of what he said, and I missed
of a second, Allan pulled his punch. | said, “Did you
part of what she said. So I make him repeat what he
hit him hard enough?” Allan said, “Yes.” I said, “Are
said that put him in the wrong. I make her repeat
you sure you don’t want to hit him again?” “No.” |
what she said when she attacked him. Thus, it be-
said, “You wait a while, maybe you think you will.

[PAGE 043]

76 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Dealing with the Difficult Family Wd


Maybe you better think it over. Hold back the fist and B: Sooner or later.
think it over.” Allan said, “I don’t think I'll hit him E: Tf not the first time, the second time. Almost an abso-
again. I hit him hard enough.” Lance was looking at lute certainty the third time. But the probability is
Allan looking at me; a grin showed up on his face, then the first time. Once in a while you get the first punch,
Lance stood up and said, “Well, Dad, I guess I learned and pulling not until the second, and very, very rarely
something that time.” Because we do that sort of does it happen that they have to pull it on the third
thing. Lance was furious, Allan was furious, I set it
B: What it takes is the guts to be willing to go on. And
try.
up. When you have the wife attack the husband in
repetition, you're setting it up. You're setting him up, to know that you are willing to go on.
and you're setting her up; punches are likely to be E: Yes.
pulled. If not in the actual words, in the venom that B: Yes.
accompanies them. And anything that you can do to H: Well, can you explain why that punch is pulled”
alter that situation. I was utterly deadly serious with E: Why? “Mama, can I go to visit Johnny? Mama, can |
Lance and with Allan. And they knew it. go to visit Johnny? Mama, can I go to visit Johnny?”
B: You did not indicate the outcome? “Yes.” An hour later. “Why haven't you gone Lo 150 Lo
E: 1 didn't indicate it. visit Johnny?” “Oh, I just wanted to know if I could”
B: There were no overtones to suggest the outcome? You know that. He was just discovering the range ol
E: No overtones. That's why Lance remained angry until possibilities. And in this matter of hitting and strik
after the punch. That's why Allan remained angry un- ing, Allan was so furious at Lance, and he was so help
til he pulled his punch. And then didn't really know less. Lance was so much bigger. And he did want. to
that he pulled it. (Laughter) And people do behave know if he could hit Lance. Lance was so much bij,
that way. It’s very, very seldom when you ask kids ger, so much stronger, did he dare to hit Lance? He
to fight it out seriously that they ever give that full wanted to know the range of activity. “Mama, can I
punch. If they ever do give that full punch, you can go to visit Johnny?” Just inquiring to find out if he
point out that maybe they ought to punch on the has that privilege. Allan asked me the other night,
other side of the face. The child who really got punched “Dad, may I have the car?” “What do you want it lor?”
looks forward with dread and horror, and then with “To go to a dance.” “How long do you want to keep
such a contrast of feeling of satisfaction and pleasure; it?” “Well, first I want to know if I can have the car.”
that takes all the sting out of this one—this one is I said, “Yes, you may have the car.” “May | keep ib
pulled. until midnight?” I said, “Yes.” He said, “Fine, IV be
B: Then you're prepared to go on. home at nine.” I'd asked the wrong questions. Allan
E: That's right. wanted to find out the range. And he wanted to find
B: I mean whether it’s Allan or Lance, if Allan is hit the it out by Ais questions, not by my questions. He
first time you would put him through the second time. wanted to ask me if he could keep it Lill midnight. 1
E: Pd put him through the second time, but he would have asked him how long he wanted to keep it. He tipped
to pull his punch. his hand. He wanted to keep it until nine o'clock, He

[PAGE 044]

78 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


wanted to know if he had the range up to midnight.
H: There’s something in this Lance and Allan business,
though, about the fact that you're directing it. You’re
saying that this is spontaneous, but everybody is ar-
ranged by you. It must have something to do with CHAPTER 4
taking it out of their hands, so that even if Allan hit
him, it wouldn’t be the same sort of hit.
E: That's right, and how would Lance react to it after- On Disturbing and
wards? Lance felt very guilty about having teased
Allan so much. He went all out for a while in enter- Instrumentalizing
taining Allan in a pleasing way. Lance is wonderful
when it comes to entertaining kids. So he was able to
take his guilt reaction out by entertaining Allan. Not
because I’d ordered him to, but because he was at 1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.
liberty to do as he wished. He was at liberty to be
furious at me. I didn’t seem to care. He could glare
H: When you see a child and you think the parents need
at me and glare at Allan, while Allan stalked him so
to be brought in, how do you solve the problem that
nastily. With your quarreling patients you set them
all of us face of getting the parents in without blam-
up for each other. You take the sting out of it for
ing them for the child's difficulties? When the mere
them. But you take it out in relationship to doing the fact of calling them in implies that what's the mat-
things to each other that would actually meet your
ter with the child is them?
approval. Lance didn’t know that he was really pleas- E
: I say, “I know you've done everything that you could
un


ing me. But I do know that Allan, after Lance left the
think of to help the child. But considering the indi-
house, felt constrained in some way to tell me how
viduality of your child as a unique personality, no
good Lance had been to him. And Lance hadn’t asked
matter how fertile your thinking was, it just hasn't
him to do that. Allan had his own little guilt reactions worked, has it?
too, and expressed them. 1: So you approve their motivation and imply some inade-
quacy on what they’ve been able to think of doing?
1: | approve of their motivation, and I stress the exten-
siveness of their effort. I leave it an inexplicable ques-
tion why it didn’t work.
W: You also make a point of the value of the child by
stressing the individuality.
ly: That’s right. Then if I think they're going to interfere,
| say, “So since we know that all those approaches
don’t really help, it’s going to be my responsibility to

79

[PAGE 045]

80 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
On Disturbing and Instrumentalizing 31

see if I can’t be as comprehensive in my efforts as you
H: What has this to do with the unexpected? The rever-
were, but from a different angle.” It’s a different angle
that’s going to bring the cure. I’m merely going to be
sal of it?
as comprehensive as they were. This matter of face-
E: Yes. The superintendent finally was forced to put that
saving is so awfully important.
12-year-old Ruth into a seclusion room. Then he called
W: Yes. It’s important enough with couples, but I think me in frantic haste. He said, “It’s Ruth, she has done
it gets even sharper with parents. $400 worth of damage already on that ward. Now
E: Yes. she’s in the seclusion room, and she’s taking the plasW: They just feel like their whole value somehow stands ter off the wall. She’s wrecked the bed and we got that
or falls on that child. out, but she’s still doing damage.” “How much damH: Well, do you very often bring parents and child together age are you willing to settle for?” He said he was look-
as a group and have them deal with each other?
ing over the record. Last year it was somewhere around
E: Not very often. $5,000 worth of damage she did. I said, “Well, supFI: One of the things we see, and I’m sure you see, although pose that I see to it she does $400 or $500 dollars more
you have this approach about the uniqueness of in- of damage. Are you willing to accept that in place of
dividuals, is we see that typically a disturbed child,
a higher bill?” He said, “Anything.” I walked up to the
whether delinquent, schizophrenic, or whatever, is
ward, into the seclusion room, and I said to Ruth,
functioning in some sense
“Now listen, Ruth, that is about the most inefficient
— his disturbance is part of
the relationship between his parents. That he’s some-
job I ever saw of ripping plaster off the wall. Now here
how in the middle. From this point of view we wonder is what you need to do. You can break those laths.
if you set out, if you were a pair of parents and you
You can take your dress and you can tear it into
set out to create a disturbed child, what would you
strips, and you break those laths, and you can literally
make a very nice hammer. Then you can tie a couple
do?
E: You do the thing that they don't expect you of laths together, and then you can use that hammer
to do.
FH: Who is “they” in this? The child? made out of laths to drive the laths through the wall
E: Yes. What do you do if you want to disturb a child? and that will rip the plaster off the wall on the other
You
do the unexpected. You do the wrong thing. You act side.” And Ruth said, “But doctor...” I said, “You
out of your role. I can think of that 12-year-old do that later, here's something else we can do. Do you
psychopathic child at the Worcester State Hospital. see that radiator over there?” 1 said, “Well, if you jerk
Oh me, she would plead with the nurse to buy her it enough times, you can break the pipe, but it's go-
some candy, and the nurse would, and oh how beau-
ing to take a long time to do it. Now shut up and sit
tifully Ruth could smile, and thank that nurse in the down on the floor with me. We'll both brace our feet
prettiest fashion while she delivered a stinging kick against the wall, and we'll take all that, and we'll pull
on the nurse’s shin. She could hug the nurse so grate- it loose. Come on, sit down.” Ruth sat down and |
fully and verbalize a tremendous gratitude, as she helped her tear that radiator loose by twisting the
ripped the nurse’s blouse. pipe. Ruth burst into tears, and she said, “You're a
doctor, you shouldn't do things like that.” I said, “You

[PAGE 046]

82 Conversations with Miiton H. Erickson
On Disturbing and Instrumentalizing 83


wanted it done. I helped you do it. Now I’m busy.
sweet and very, very pleasant. She’s filled my glass
Goodbye.” I walked to the ward. She cried for hours.
of water. I’m going to tip her, and I’m going to be
Hf: That's how you disturb a child, by doing the unex-
perfectly willing to recommend to my friends who
pected?
want well done steaks to come in and have this waitE: Yes. Whenever Ruth got upset, emotionally disturbed,
ress serve them. But I explained to you I had a brief
all the nurses would do is say, “Shall we call up Dr.
time in which to eat. I told you how I wanted my
Erickson?” “No.” But when Ruth was gay and happy,
steak cooked. It wasn’t done. The caloric value of this
she would ask the nurse, “Could you call Dr. Erickson
meat is excellent, but it lacks the satisfaction I’m buy-
to see if he’s got time to visit with me?” Ruth wanted
ing according to the price on the menu. You expect
me as a friend, but she didn’t want me when she was
me to pay my bill. P'd like to see my bill, I want to
disturbed.
write something on it. I’d like to have the waitress
FH: Well, you as father, or you as mother, could do the unex-
take it and show it to the chef who cooked the steak.”
pected, but what could you do between mother and
The hostess tried to argue me out of it. The waitress
father that would disturb the child?
took the bill in and showed it. Five dollars and fifty
E: I haven’t done much thinking in that regard.
cents was the price of the steak dinner. I reduced the
H: Gee, we stumped Milton.
price to $3.00. Then I said, “Now charge it to my
E: 1 don’t like the question in the first place.
room.” I said, “You can take it up with the manager.”
H: I know that you don't think in this way.
I walked out. They took it up with the manager. The
E: I can think of a recent parallel of that. In Atlanta, waitress was wary, and she said, “What will happen
Georgia, the hotel was very shoddy in their handling to me?” And I said, “Don't worry, nothing will hap-
of seminars in hypnosis. They promised us nice rooms pen to you. The manager of the restaurant and the
and everything. After we got there, it was a miserable manager of the hotel are really going to come to grief.”
mess. I went down ona free hour to the hotel restau- The next day I went down. The manager of the restau-
rant. I was hungry, and I was tired, and I wanted a rant put in a great big beef to the manager of the
rare steak. I explained to the hostess and the waitress hotel. The manager of the hotel put in a great big beef
that I wanted a steak that was seared. You lay it on to the manager of the restaurant. The waitress was
a hot griddle and then you turn it over. That’s all, just very happy about the entire thing. The chef was mere-
seared. If the cook is unwilling to do that, bring it to ly regarded as a hurried, bad boy, but you really aren't
me raw. The waitress spoke up and said, “I know ex- going to rebuke him. I went down to see the manager
actly what you want, my husband likes his steaks of the hotel. First I got my bill for my room from the
that way, and I'll be delighted.” I said that if the steak cashier. I took it in and showed it to him. They had
isn’t served that way, I’m not paying the regulation finally decided to disregard me. A thorough investiga-
price. The waitress brought me my steak, well done. tion had been made and the customer was wrong. So
I only had a brief time in which to eat. She said, “I | went in to the manager of the hotel, the final author-
hope this will be all right, sir.” I called the hostess ity. | said, “Do you agree that a thorough investiga-
over, and I said, “You know, the waitress is very, very Lion was made?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “You're sure

[PAGE 047]

84 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson On Disturbingr and Instrumentalhring Rh


it was thorough?” “Absolutely.” I said, “Well, what tually this wasn't a heart attack. He went to bed be-
was his report of my statements? Or was the inves- cause something was wrong with his heart. He'd never
tigation so unthorough that the major party was omit- had this before. In another family, the girl — well, it’s
ted from the investigation?” He said, “I will okay the complic — but she had her baby in another state,
ated
deduction.” (Laughs) I went back to the hostess. I and she was a helpless schizophrenic. She decided to
said, “How did the big shots get along?” She said, “Oh, go get her baby. Against her mother’s protest she flew
they had a terrible time.” There I had two authority back, got her baby, she brought it home. That week-
figures fighting. By having the child and the older end mother and father had a fight, and father was im-
child. The younger child does something right, the potent for the first time in their marriage. Twenty-
older child didn’t, but the blame somehow or another three years or so. Now these things keep happening
got on to the mother and father, right? enough so that there's some concern, or some evidence,
H: That’s an example of how the child can disturb the that there is something out of the ordinary with the
parents. parents.
E: Yes. Without the child getting blamed. le: Yes, but father has had a

In little impotence, but it has
FH: What about the other way around? Well, we see it in never bothered him, or dismayed him, but this is one
this way, that we think families with a schizophrenic time he can really enlarge it to distract his attention
in them, that when the patient begins to improve and from the other tension.
behave in a more normal and sensible, self-assertive if : You assume that it’s something that has been going on
way, something happens to the parents. One of them but is now emphasized.
either develops a symptom of some kind, or they hi : Emphasized, enlarged.
Rather than worrying about,
threaten divorce, or separation; there's a crisis of some well I’m getting to the heart attack age, now here's
kind when a patient improves. Now this seems to us a good time to exaggerate and emphasize it. He’s too
to imply that the patient's pathology has a function busy thinking about that to consider son's improve-
in the family. ment. The first thing that 1 would do in those situaE: 1 think you're wrong in the statement that a patient tions, whenever I encounter it, I disparage the situa-
begins to improve, a crisis develops in the family. tion. Here’s one of fairly long-standing, and naturally
H: What's wrong about it? with energy being used up by the problems of readE: It’s this. Mother gets a bad cold or a headache, or father justments and acceptance of son’s improvements, he
meets with an accident. What I think they do is they hasn’t got enough energy to handle this old trouble
take some little thing that frequently occurs in the of his.
family ordinarily, and then they seize upon that and It: Well, where do you go from here? u
psychologically turn it into a crisis. They use some- E: 1, may bother hima little bit until the son's improve-
thing. ment is an old thing.
IT: We haven't had that experience. One example is father 11: Now what were still on, and still having some difficulty
went Lo bed with a heart attack when the patient took with, is whether or not you think there is some func-
ajob. He's never had a heart attack in his life, and ac- tion of a child in a miserable marriage. Whether the

[PAGE 048]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson On Disturbing and Instrumentalizing 87


child is used in this marriage for ways that are unfor- damental processes of reading then. You can't wait
tunate for the child. until you're 21 to learn to read; it’s too late. So you
E: You always point out to parents that the child has a learn the fundamental processes. How does one learn
tremendously important function for them. That they're the ABC's of parenthood? After the minister says, “I
really not going to get that full measure of satisfac- now pronounce you man and wife,” or after the doc-
tion out of the child to which they are entitled unless tor says, “It’s a baby”? Then you've got to deal with
the child is happy. That the mother isn't going to get the baby as a totality. You've got no time to learn the
her full measure of satisfaction that she's entitled to basic things that you need to learn from your parents
out of the child, unless the father gets the full measure when you were a little child. So the parents are obli-
of satisfaction to which he's entitled. Neither of them gated to teach their child something about parent-
are going to get that full measure unless the child gets hood. So the child will be basically qualified for par-
his full measure of satisfaction out of each of his par- enthood when the doctors say, “It's a baby.” The
ents. That ifit's a female child, she desperately needs parents can recognize the logic of that.
to learn something about the male from her father, H: They can often recognize the logic of these things with-
because she has to start her learning in the home. You out being able to do them. I mean, I’m seeing a fam-
learn to talk in the home. You learn to creep in the ily where I’m sure the mother recognizes the logic of
home. You learn to walk in the home. You learn to rec- the daughter’s getting something from her father, but
ognize father and mother and other people in the home. let father and daughter begin to get something from
In fact, the home is the beginning place of all learn- each other and mother becomes upset.
ing. Intellectual learning, social learning, mechanical ii: I know, and what do you want to impress upon the
learning, whatever kind of learning you can think of. parents? “I think you ought to be awfully sure that
So the little girl has to learn everything possible from your wife teaches your daughter those feminine things
her father if she is going to grow up in a world where that your daughter has to learn from a female, from
there are men. Where there are males. So you justify her mother. And I think that you ought to feel obli-
the little girl getting something from her father; in gated, just as your wife feels obligated, I think you
fact, you make it imperative that she get something ought to feel obligated to see to it that your daughter
from her father. But she also has to grow up in a world has that opportunity.” Obligated to see that daughter
where there are women. Therefore, she better get some- has the opportunity means you're obligated to let
thing from her mother, too. You make it absolutely mother go ahead. The parents that came to me, “I
obligatory on a biological basis that she get some- don’t think my husband should be the only one that
thing from both parents. Then you point out that takes Johnny to the store. I think I ought to take
eventually the little girl, accordingly, is going to be Johnny to the store and show him how to shop.” Father
a parent. When do you learn to read a book? For ex- said, “I’m working, I have very little opportunity. I
ample, a book such as Gone With the Wind. You will like to shop. I think it’s nice if I teach my son how to
learn to read in kindergarten, first, and second and shop. His mother has him all day, why should she take
third grade. Because you've got to learn the fun- that one privilege away from me?” I asked the father,

[PAGE 049]

88 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson On Disturbing and Instrumentalizing 89


“Well, tell me how do you shop at a supermarket?” there’s something wrong with his heart. That’s a hor-
Then I said, “All right, now how would you shop in rifying idea to him. He isn’t ready to face it. And what
a corner grocery store?” He said, “The procedure is en- does he do to the country doctor? He goes in and says,
tirely different.” I said, “That’s right. Now tell me, do “You know, Doc, I’ve been working awful hard in the
you think you shop in the supermarket exactly the field lately and I guess I’m getting some kind of ar-
same way your wife does?” He said, “No, she probably thritis in my feet, and would you mind looking at
has a different procedure.” “Do you think your son them?” The doctor better do that. The doctor who ex-
ought to learn how to shop in a corner grocery store?” amines those feet with the greatest of care notices
“Well, of course, but the procedure is entirely dif- that the veins are quite prominant on the dorsal of
ferent.” “He isn’t going to do very much shopping in the foot. Then he wants to check up on the veins in
the corner grocery, but do you think he ought to know the legs. You see where it goes? And he can wind up
that procedure, even though it’s different?” “I certain- with the conclusion that the veins are really all right.
ly do.” “Do you think he ought to know the slightly The farmer knows he’s had a complete examination.
different procedure your wife has shopping?” I put up Then the farmer says, “Well, what’s the bad news?”
the same argument with the wife. Then they finally But if the doctor suggested that he'd better have a
agreed. Then my question was, “What are Johnny’s an complete physical examination, he would say, “I'll go
to some doctor who knows what I’m talking about.
ra
rights?” They said, “What do you mean?” I said, “Both
ET

of you have dictatorially been saying, ‘I will take I said it’s my feet.”
art

ga


Johnny shopping.’ I think that’s wrong. I think ovale
W: So the smart doctor has to pay attention to the feet,
Johnny’s got some rights. I think Johnny ought to and yet be damn sure to know enough not to stop
say, ‘I’m going to take father shopping, or I’m going EN there.
to take mother shopping, or I’m going to take you E: That's right. But you don’t say, “You need a complete
a AREA


both shopping.’” Now there’s a petty little quarrel physical examination.” You just don't.
brought in for me to arbitrate. It could have grown W: Let's try it a little different way. One of the things we
into a tremendous analogism. were really trying to bring up was not just a matter
H: Well, one of the things you do is— you have the oddest of what do you do about it, but in what way you see
way of taking at face value what the quarrel is, while children as getting caught up if there are difficulties
at the same time assuming it’s more than that. I mean, between the parents that they can't handle. How do
apparently if somebody did come in with just that as the children get involved when the parents are having
the quarrel, it would obviously represent problems in trouble with each other?
the family of some severity. The father would feel that i: The tendency of the parents to try to instrumentalize
mother was using child and shoving him out in some their children. There is such a wealth of ways in which
way, that he was feeling left out. they instrumentalize their children. There's a beautiful
E: Yes, but in the practice of medicine—there is an old joke: The lady of the house answers the doorbell. Just
farmer who hasn't had a physical examination or med- as she is about to speak to the salesman who had rung
ical checkup for years and years. He thinks maybe the doorbell, another salesman comes up. The lady of

[PAGE 050]

90 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson On Disturbing and Instrumentalizing 91


the house speaks to the second, “Just a moment if you this is the answer, should they call me in. It’s a doc-
please, Tl get rid of you just as soon as I get rid of tor and his wife. I said, “Why don’t you approve of
this other salesman.” Jimmy’s dawdling? Every one of my kids has learned
W: How is the connection of that with the parents and of the absolute peril of dawdling. I can outdawdle
children? anybody, while hurrying as fast as I can. You dawdle,
E: There is the situation in which something's got to be you use the child’s pattern. You raise the question of
done about this. Instead of meeting the salesman's something the child is expecting, something he wants.
needs, the salesman is utilized as an instrument. “You You start to get it, and the child is waiting very eager-
stand here while I get rid of this salesman; then I get ly, and something distracts you. You apologize abject-
rid of you.” “Sonny, you stand there while 1 get rid of ly to the child, “I’m hurrying just as fast as I can but
your dad; then Ill get rid of you.” Only it’s done un- I’ve got to get this first.” The child waits, and you get
pleasantly then. This joke was done sweetly. The sec- that done, and then you start. You start a conversa-
ond salesman is obligated to stand there. The first tion with someone and it drags on, and on, and on.
salesman is obligated to await being gotten rid of H: The child will connect this with his dawdling?
because the second man is standing there waiting for sataa
E: I can think of one medical student who dawdled hor-
him to be gotten rid of. It’s a very binding situation. ribly. I had given a final deadline. That book review,
W: Yes. all book reviews, had to be in by 8 o’clock on SaturE: They're both caught in it. And the father was gotten day morning or there would be flunks. I said it had
rid of while a child is made to wait, then I'll get rid to be given to me in person, and that any that weren't
of you. handed to me in person would not be accepted. Oh yes,
H: About the only thing you can say is, “No, get rid of me that dawdler showed up out at Elouise. At the last
irst.” minute, exactly 8 o’clock. I had seen him headed for
E: Yes, but you can’t do that. Neither salesman can say my office. So I tipped someone off to buzz me on the
that. He doesn’t want to be gotten rid of. phone, and I walked up to the office and I said, “Well,
H: Yes. How do you keep the parents, or help the parents the phone is ringing, excuse me,” and I said on the
keep the child, from manipulating them? phone, “Good heavens, really?” And I rushed out. The
E: 1 asked some parents... I saw only a mother recent- poor sap waited. Do you know, it was noon before I
ly. Do you know how long it takes their 11-year-old got back. (Laughs) He sat there, because when he had
boy to tie his shoestrings? Twenty-three minutes. He waited five minutes, he had committed himself to
helped his mother set the table. It took him three- waiting ten minutes. You see?
quarters of an hour. “Oh, I’m busy. I’m hurrying.” In W: Oh, I know that’s the position you get in once you begin
three-quarters of an hour he got one plate on. His to wait.
mother said, “I timed him. His father and I have talked I): You’ve committed yourself to waiting.
it over. Shall we call you in or should we continue to W: Did you accept him as having got there; that is, you
try our own method? Jimmy’s only started this re- accepted his report when you came back finally?
cently. Now what do you think we ought to do?” Well, lv: Yes. At, noon he was literally raging. I walked in with

[PAGE 051]

92 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson On Disturbing and Instrumentalizing 93


a friend and said, “I’m happy.” He said, “I’m not, and
that we have differences.” My statement is, “Don’t you
you certainly fixed me.” I said, “Your grade on your
want your children to think you're human? Don't you
book review is ‘A’ because you learned an awful lot of
think they ought to know you're human? Don't you
dato


insight.” (Laughter)
ta
think they ought to know that you can quarrel and
still love each other? Don't you think they ought to
have a realistic view of life?” I’ve had parents look at
* *
ene
EME


me in abject horror at what they had done, and say,
FH: Well, what do you do about the way one parent makes
“Now, how can we quarrel in front of the children?”
an attempt to draw a line and the other sabotages.
“Take issue on a very, very minor point. It'll shock the
ER:


Father decided he’s had enough of this child doing this
poor kids. But don't stage a big quarrel.”
sort of thing, but as soon as he starts to step in and ap


do something, mother steps in on him, or vice versa. a a

E: I ask the child to use his intelligence in watching the


sabotage of the parents. I’ve had children aid in cor-
recting the parental sabotage because mother hates
to have the child point out to her, father hates to have
rat,


the child point out, “Your behavior is not really pure.” y
Sanieren


FH: Well have to tell Gregory that one for his family. It’s


Just so explicit in that family that every time that
father tries to chastise that boy in any way —it’s the
boy in that film you saw — mother is on him like a shot.
Very typically, these are mothers who protest that fa-
ther never takes responsibility for the children. That’s
one of the reasons we begin to see a system going on.
E: Oh, there's one thing I want to emphasize to you. I think
it’s awfully important in every growing family for the
children to be aware of the fact that parents can dis-
agree and that they ought to approve of quarrels be-
tween parents. Because the kids ought to learn on
their own how to have difficulties with their siblings
and surmount those quarrels. They ought to learn
that parents can surmount quarrels. That teaches
them that they can take issue with the parent and,
win or lose, still surmount that. It’s so false that so
many parents try to teach a child, “We have always
painstakingly concealed from our children the fact

[PAGE 052]

Ordeals of Children and Parents 95


So Johnny found himself in the situation of making
his mother watch him improve his script. He only had
to do that on mornings when his bed was wet. Noth-
ing more disagreeable than getting up at that hour
CHAPTER 5 of the morning to improve your handwriting. (Laugh-
ter) So it wasn't long before Johnny, instead of a wet
bed every morning, he began skipping mornings.
Ordeals of Children and Parents Pretty soon he was having only two wet beds a week,
then a wet bed every ten days. Mother still had to
get up.
H: Every night and check?
1961. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland. E: Every morning and check. Finally it was once a month,
and then Johnny reoriented himself entirely. He deE: In dealing with a mother and boy, I can think of little veloped the first friendships he had. It was during the
Johnny, 12 years old, who wet the bed every night. summer, Kids came over to play with him; he went
He was utterly hostile towards his mother in that re- over to play with kids. His marks in school that fol-
gard. After sizing up the situation, I told Johnny that lowing September were greatly improved. He was
I had a remedy for him that he wouldn't like. It would even elected Class President —the first real achieve-
be effectual, absolutely helpful, absolutely certain, ment. Now that’s playing mother against son, playing
which he wouldn’t like, but which his mother would son against mother. It’s that same thing of, “I’ve got
dislike more. (Laughter) Now, what could Johnny do? the remedy for you; you won't like it.” Then digress
If his mother would dislike it more than he, that to the fact that mother will hate it even more. He
would be fine. He could put up with anything that wants me to come back to, “What is it?” and he’s all
made his mother suffer more. Then my proposal to for it.
Johnny was rather simple. I pointed out to Johnny IT: Mother's all for it too?
that his mother could get up at 4 or 5 a.m. in the lv: Mother's all for it too: Improvement in handwriting be-
morning, and if his bed was wet, then she could rouse comes the primary goal. The dry bed becomes an in-
him. He would then get up and sit down at a desk and cidental, more or less accepted thing. It’s no longer
copy so many pages from any book he chose, putting the dominant, threatening issue at hand.
in from 4 to 7 o'clock or from 5 to 7 o'clock in the morn- 1[: Mother can hardly not go along with that since it’s for
ing copying material. His mother would watch him her son’s sake; to help him and all.
do that, watch him learning to improve his script. To lv: And the whole family relationship is improved. I had
Johnny it sounded horrible, getting up at 4 or 5 in the one interview with the father to size him up. The
morning. Mother had to get up first. Sounded horri- father was a loud-voiced man who walked into this of-
ble, having mother sitting there, watching him im- lice, sat down, and spoke as if I were about 60 feet
prove his script. His handwriting was really terrible. away from him. He asked me if I didn't know that all


94

[PAGE 053]

96 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents 97


kids wet the bed until they got about to age 16, that’s H: Why wouldn't you include father in your instructions
what he did, that’s what his father did, he was very about it?
certain I had done it. He was certain every other boy E: How do you mean?
grew up that way, and what’s this nonsense about cur- H: I mean, you confine it to an activity with mother and
ing his son of wetting the bed? child only.
W: How did you respond to that? E: Because of the father’s absolute opinions. He knows
E: Oh, I let father explain to me. (Laughter) He enjoyed everything. During the discussion of how all boys wet
the interview, and he shook hands with me, said he the bed until they're about 16, he also pointed out to
was delighted to have such an intelligent listener. me that any man who had even a particle of common
When the son and mother came in the next time, the sense would vote for his certain political party. The
woman said, “My husband said that he had explained father has his opinions.
things to you.” I said, “Yes, that’s right. He explained IT. What do you suppose his response was to the boy stop-
at very considerable length.” Her facial expression ping wetting the bed? |
said, “I know.” The son had a pained look on his face. 17: It was very complimentary. He told the boy, “Well, you
My statement was, “So far as I’m concerned, I’m go- learned to have a dry bed faster than I did. Must be
ing to forget about everything that was said. You you’re a lot smarter than I am.”
don't have to, but then of course you weren't here, you IF. (Laughs) That sounds extraordinary.
only have some ideas of what he said. I’m just going i; And that was the end of that.
to forget them, because it’s the ideas that you and I W: It seems to me in that if you let him express his opin-
and your mother have that are important. It’s the ion, then somehow this is satisfactory enough to him
ideas that you and I have, and Johnny has, that are so that he can accept the actual change.
important.” You see what that does? It’s tying myself E: He had told me off completely. He had implied that my
to Johnny first, then tying it the other way around. political sense was deficient. He had already told me
Having me allied first with Johnny, then having that my psychiatric sense was deficient.
mother allied with me. You see, Johnny’s going to iV: So it’s done.
stand by me. Because I’m going to forget what his lv: Then he could afford to be very generous. Besides, it
father said, and Johnny would like to forget that. wasn't the psychiatrist that did it for his son. It was
Then I tied mother to me by having her join me in for- the superior brain power he bequeathed to his son. He
getting what father said. was the boy’s father and therefore...
H: And this shuts father out of the picture pretty well. 1: “My boy did it!”
E: Shuts father out of the picture, puts him off on a side lv: “My boy did it.”
track there. But it’s not a hostile putting him aside. IV: Now, on the bed wetting, would you assume that the
W: You've already heard him out. bed wetting was a product of the relationship with
E: Pve heard him out, and they know it, and father’s come mother? It was something they had worked out to-
home and told them. I’m just forgetting about it. No gether?
particular anger or distress. 17: The father was so cruel and harsh and cold and matter-

[PAGE 054]

98 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents 99


of-fact. He yelled at his kids. No words of sympathy, W: Oh my, Jay has got half the population of Palo Alto
nothing at all. His accusations to his wife that she was up in the early morning now. (Laugh) He’s going to
babying the brats too much, “Every normal kid’s got have the other half up shortly.
to fall and hurt himself and yell awhile. That’s what H: Quite a few people, including local psychiatrists, are try-
I did when I was a kid.” Those were the things that ing this now. It’s effective. But I’ve never tried get-
the father said. When the little boy would try to go ting two up. Could you give some examples?
to his father, he'd get shoved aside, “I’m busy, I’ve E: You see, mother, in watching her son’s handwriting im-
worked hard all day today.” Then the mother tried to prove, was really satisfying a craving, a need, to see
make up for it. The boy’s fundamental reaction was, excellence in her son. Her son could take a great deal
“I want love from my father. He doesn’t give it. Moth- of pride in his improved handwriting. It was a joint
er always steps in and makes it unnecessary for him venture with shared pride and shared satisfaction.
to give it.” Now the father’s statements ever since the When the two would bring the handwriting to show
boy could remember, “Every kid wets the bed, it me, it was just an eager boy, an eager mother, show-
wouldn’t be normal if he didn’t. I wet the bed.” Of ing me this beautiful handwriting. I could go through
course, the mother got awfully fed up with those wet it, page after page, and point out this letter “n,” that
beds. letter “g,” this letter “t,” and discuss the beauty of the
W: Didn’t you, in fact, reverse that picture somewhat? script.
Didn’t you arrange things so that the mother, of W: The thought that has come to my mind here is that
course for his own good, which again is appropriate, maybe the only thing that some people can share ini-
was giving the boy a rather hard time all these morn- tially is an ordeal.
ings, and father was in a position where he could then [5: An ordeal, that's right.
identify the boy with himself and be pleased with W: People that can’t share pleasure may be able to share
something he was accomplishing. an ordeal and then move on from that to something
E: The boy is giving the mother a hard time. else.
W: And the mother is giving the boy a hard time, in a way. E: Well, did you see that movie of the chain gang where
E: Yes, but somehow or other that added up to his im- the white man and the negro are chained together, and
provement, so it was a joint achievement, a satisfac- they escaped.
tory relationship that was really approved and blessed W: I read about it, I didn’t set it.
by the father, wherein he did get recognition and ac- fe: I didn’t see it either; Betty did. The white man hated
ceptance from the father. the colored man, and they went through one ordeal
H: That’s the first one of these sort of punishment deals after another, being welded closer and closer into an
which involves two people getting up in the middle understanding, brother relationship. Betty said you
of the night, or morning. could literally see it growing. But then it has always
E: I used that procedure in quite a number of my cases. been in human history when you fight througha difH: Where you get two up? ficult thing with someone else, it welds you to the
E: Yes. other person. You've shared a very vital thing. Since

[PAGE 055]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents 101


J ohnny has a dry bed, his father has played ball with intentioned. Then my next question was, “How much
him, come home early from the office. further ought we to discuss the medicines that don’t
W: It would be important to have this ordeal one where work? Or can we forget about all the medicines that
they would get somewhere together as a result of it. don’t work? You've had it for two years, all the mediE: Yes. And usually you want the ordeal to lead to visible, cines from the broken bow and arrow to a selling of
attainable results. I can think of, let’s use the name your bicycle. Those are medicines that didn’t work.
Johnny all the time, Johnny had been picking at a What shall we do?” Johnny’s idea was that I should
small sore, a pimple on his forehead. He had picked take charge. I told him, “You won't like the way I take
at it for two years so that it was a continuous ulcer. 1
charge, because I’m going to do something that will
clear up the ulcer. You won't like one bit of it, all you'll
Se

His father had resorted to all manner of punishment.
So had his mother. So had his school teachers. Little like is when the ulcer is healed. That you'll really like.”
Johnny was picked on by his classmates, his school- I said, “I found out that your spelling is poor. Your
mates. He had been told all about cancer. Johnny ex- spelling is poor because when you write a word, you're
plained he just could not control the impulse to pick very likely to leave out letters.” I’d verified that. Be-
at it. His father had broken his bow and arrow. I don't cause always you check on their school work to see
know how many toys the father deprived him of. Then what’s there. Johnny left out letters when he wrote
finally the father brought him in to me. The first in- words. So I pointed out to him that every weekend
terview I spent with Johnny was defining ownership. was to be devoted to Johnny’s curing his ulcer on his
I picked out the bow and arrow right away to begin forehead. Father was to do the weekend chores for
with. Whose was it? The father admitted it was him. It was a rather triumphant glance that Johnny
Johnny’s. How was it Johnny’s? It had been given to gave me and his father. So I inquired about all week-
him for a birthday present; therefore it was his. In end chores — I’d ask the mother privately about them.
what way should an ulcer be treated? Bandaids, salve, Well, Johnny was supposed to mow the lawn; he was
medication of various sorts, yes? How would you use supposed to do weeding in the flowers. He did quite
a bow and arrow to treat it? How would breaking a a bit of watering. There were numerous little chores.
bow and arrow be treatment for this ulcer? The father Clean up the dog tags on the lawn. Everything that
was very embarrassed, and the son was eyeing his you would expect of a small boy with quite a good-
father with narrowed eyes. So the father flushed and sized lawn. There was a garden in the back. So we
squirmed quite a bit. I asked Johnny, who was about went over all of those chores. I wanted to know who
12 years old, if he did not think that he could honestly inspected the lawn when Johnny did it. The father did
credit father with at least good intentions, despite the that. I said. “Well, in between working on your ulcer,
stupid behavior. (Laughter) You see, both of them had because you can’t work on it steadily, in between the
to accept that. times when you’re working on your ulcer, curing it,
W: Yes. Saturday you go out and inspect to see how well your
E: So Johnny could call his father’s behavior stupid. He father is handling your chores. I think you ought to
could also credit him with being well-intentioned, best- start on Saturday morning on your ulcer about 6:00.

[PAGE 056]

102 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents 103


You know you'll take things much more seriously E: That’s what he asked me, “Why don’t you have me write
when you get up that early in the morning to do it, ‘I can stop...'?” See? Let him put in that correction.
because it is serious business.” Now, what I’m demon- Now how do I know that he would put in that correc-
strating here to you is the slow and aggravating, drag- tion? “I do not think..” is extra words. If he can only
ging out, shaggy dog technique of presenting the ther- cut down the length of that sentence. He pointed that
apeutic plan. Because, what happens to your patient: out to me. He said, “I’d love to write, ‘It is not a good
He just leans forward, wishing you'd come to the idea...’.” He wished it were shortened, and so he's em-
point of the whole thing. (Laughter) phasizing, “It is not a good idea.”
W: “For God’s sake, tell me what it is you want me to do, H: I see.
and let’s get it done.” E: So I told him to count each line when he had it done.
E: That’s right. He’s much more interested in finding out “Always check each line because you wouldn’t want
what on earth it is. He’s crediting you with being to leave out a single letter. You don’t want to leave
thoughtful, deliberate in your presentation, he knows out any of the little processes, or the parts of healing,
you're not trying to rush things over on him, and so that take place in an ulcer like that.” I had the most
he's waiting eagerly for you to come to the point. Well, tremendous stack of sheets of ruled paper containing
the point with Johnny was essentially this; 1 was that sentence. Written with pride and enjoyment. He
showing him a few little side issues, “You write with took a coffee break, which was essentially a fruit juice
a pen, you write with a pencil, some leads are colored, or water break, every two hours. I'd explained to him
but ordinary pencil lead would be all right. Ordinary he’d have an aching hand on the first forenoon. What
pen and ink or ballpoint pen would be all right.” ought he to do about that? I pointed out to him at
(Laughter) We've got that out of the way. “I suppose each fruit juice break he should do this sort of thing:
ruled paper would be better, and I think your father open and shut his hand rapidly to relax the muscles.
can get ruled paper so wide. 1 think probably about I told him that would increase the fatigue, but it
that wide would be the best. Now, this is what I think would keep the muscles limber. Johnny wrote on that
you ought to do starting at 6 o’clock. Of course, if it's every weekend, Saturday and Sunday; his father
only five minutes to six, you might as well start then didn’t have to urge him at all. The father said, “I knew
instead of waiting until 6 o’clock. Or, if it’s five what I had to do; I did the most beautiful job you
minutes after six, what’s the difference, five minutes.” could ever imagine on that lawn.” Johnny took such
(Laughter) Then you break the news to him. “This is pleasure in discovering a leaf on the lawn. He really
the sentence I think you ought to write, ‘I do not think got the lawn fixed up thoroughly, the garden fixed up
it is a good idea to pick at that sore on my forehead.’ thoroughly, the garden fence repaired. All the odd
‘I do not think it is a good idea to pick at that sore chores done, and Johnny wrote his sentences. In a
on my forehead.’ Now write it slowly, write it neatly, month’s time the ulcer was healed. A year later there’s
write it carefully. Count each line when you've got it been no recurrence. What did Johnny show me a year
done.” later? “There’s my stack of paper. Any time I pick on
H: Why did you have him write, “I do not think iLis a good that, Pm going to write another sentence.” Now, that
idea...” chronic, indolent, horrible ulecr-- you literally can’t see

[PAGE 057]

104 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents 105


the scar. It’s a beautiful case of healing. Now he had H: Yes. Now this was another situation where you used
had his head taped. His family doctor had bandaged two people; I gather you didn’t include the mother in
his head. Everything was done to prevent the boy this set of instructions, except for the breakfast.
from touching that. But he'd slide his finger up under E: Well, the mother had protested the breaking the bow
the adhesive tape. What did I do with that handwrit- and arrow. She had protested the selling of the bicy-
ing? I drew his attention to the fact that he did have cle. I’ve forgotten what other things. So she was on
a bad habit of dropping letters out of words. I took the boy’s side. But the boy’s resentment for the break-
his compulsive picking away to a compulsive writing ing of his bow and arrow—that was his property, it
accurately in which he could take a wholesome pride. was a birthday present to him. You see, it was taken
W: Did you do anything in particular about how they as the repository for all the resentments; and it was
would wind up this when and as the ulcer healed? Or the father who did it.
did you just leave that as something they would work H: You wouldn't assume here that a big problem in it
out? would be the conflict between mother and father
E: I had told him that I didn’t know how long it would take about this problem. That the perpetuation of the prob-
the ulcer to heal. It was my feeling, since he had had lem had something to do with the conflict between
it continuously for two years, that it really ought to mother and father.
take a month. That he could watch it from every E: J didn't even think about that. The primary question
three, four days to the next three or four days in the was how to get rid of that ulcer on the boy’s forehead.
mirror to see how it’s progressing. Not day by day. How to enlist his aid, enlist his father. I was simple
He would be able to find out when it was healed; then and matter-of-fact in telling father he was stupid. Get-
he might want to write an extra weekend after it was ting father and son cooperating in acknowledging the
healed. father had the best of intentions. Then taking all of
H: How many hours a day did he write on Saturday and that thing and equating it with poor medication, in-
Sunday? appropriate medication, mistaken medication.
E: He took his breaks. He started at 6 o’clock. I told his W: Then by your question, “How long should they go on
mother to be sure to be very dilatory in preparing his considering medicines that haven’t worked,” you real-
breakfast. (Laughter) So that he’d get a rest there. ly get that all in a bundle and get rid of it.
Then he’d write for another hour, take his coffee E: 1 got rid of that. Why bother with a complete analysis
break, inspect his father’s work, come back and write. of all the medication that didn’t work? Let’s go on to
My feeling was that after dinner time he should really something that will work. You see, the more he wrote,
be free of the day’s work. In fact, I really didn’t care the more justification he had for inspecting father’s
if he quit at four. work. The more he wrote, the more accurately he'd
H: That was very nice of you. have to write. All the dice were loaded in favor of
E: You see, you make the matter of quitting time a mat- progress.

ter of indifference to you. It takes away the punitive IT: Did the father inspect his work to see if he left out any
aspect. letters?

[PAGE 058]

106 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents 107


E: No, that belonged to me. That was made clear; that be- we notice more and more is that the parents have a
longed solely to me. If he wanted to show his writing certain sort of conflict which is about something that’s
to his parents, that would be all right with me; but a problem with the child. It can be a whole range of
I’m the one who wants to see it. I’m the one who'd things. But it’s almost as if they need him to have a
make comments on it. That father and mother were problem to fit the conflict they have with each other.
so utterly astonished at Johnny’s absolute pride in his Then they don’t deal with what they feel about each
handwriting, and the thousandth writing of that long other because what they fight about is the kid and
sentence was beautifully done. I'd put it in his case how he’s being mishandled by one, and so on.
record and asked him how long I should keep it. Be- E: Yes.
cause it would fill my file, which was much too full. H: So the kid almost has to produce a symptom in order
How long should I keep it? to keep this system going.
H: What did he say? E:Yes, and when you then correct the child, or cure the
E: Oh, Johnny said I might like to keep it for a number child, then they’ve got a new and unfamliar child.
of months. Then what should I do with it? He said, Then they have to go back to their own private war
“It’s just waste paper then.” I also examined every between themselves and not include the child He's
page. I told Johnny I could take a quick, hasty look a stranger now, and a pretty self-sufficient one.
at every page. Were there any particular pages that W: This means also, then, that after this the child is in a
he recalled that I should give more than a fast scru- better position to not get involved in their private
tiny to? Which made him absolve me from minute ex- wars. |
amination. Now that’s maneuvering him, manipulat- E: Yes. He’s learned how to get out of it. Father’s been in
ing him. But it gave him the role of an equal, of an too close contact with that child ever to want to get
earnest participant in seeking a common goal. in close contact with that child again. (Laughter)
H: Now, you said earlier you had talked to the mother Some years ago my son Allan and my son Robert,
about the chores. Did you anticipate that this was four years apart in age, had just reached that age at
what you were going to do? which each constituted a perfect foil for the other.
E: Oh no, I wanted to know something about the whole And Allan would say, “bad boy,” to Robert. And Rob-
family situation so that I could hastily look it over ert would enragedly scream back at him, “I’m not a
and pick out something. You see, you pick out some- bad boy!” and the row was on. I put up with it for a
thing in the family situation because that gives you while and then I told Robert and Allan that I was fed
the proper framework. The therapy is being accom- up with it; that I would teach them not to do that sort
plished in relationship to something within the home. of thing when they irritated one another. And just as
In relationship to certain values in the home, certain they picked unexpected times to start the brawling
obligations. When Johnny decided that he didn’t need between themselves, to my discomfort, I would pick
to write anymore, he told his father, “You can go back a totally unexpected time to teach them not to. I also
to your work; Tll take over mine.” told them that my method of teaching would be very
H: But now, you wouldn’t assume that—one of the things effective, that they didn’t really like fighting with each

[PAGE 059]

108 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents 109


other. While they wouldn’t like my method of teach- o'clock ll tell you whether or not you've done a good
ing, they would be very glad to learn better than to job.” “But the party!” “But the show!” I said, “I told
fight. I reminded them of that several days apart. you before, I didn’t know how fast you could learn.”
Robert had scheduled a party for that Sunday after- They went at it (Laughter) strongly for about five
noon. Allan had scheduled a show that he wanted to minutes and then they weakened. At four o’clock I
go to very much. They were about to leave at the same said, “Well, you really didn’t put on a good perform-
time. I called them into my office. I said, “You know, ance, but you've been at it long enough, so maybe you
I’ve been promising to teach you not to quarrel. It have learned. At all events, I’ll have a chance this next
would be awfully convenient for me right now. I’ve week to find out how much you've learned.”
had so much inconvenience with your quarreling in H You kept them at it 'til four o’clock?
the past, so I’m going to take this afternoon to teach E: Well certainly. The next day Allan got irritated with
you not to quarrel. Robert said, “I’ve got a party,” Robert and started to say, “Bad...” (Laughter) Burt
Allan said, “I’ve got a show.” I said, “I know, I’m sorry, and Lance went through this same sort of thing. Burt
but the teaching comes first, and I don’t know how is now 32, Lance is 30. They reminisce and recall some
fast you can learn.” (Laughter) So I took them into the of those situations I put them in. They'll tell you it
bedroom there. I said, “Now, Robert, in the past when was a pretty horrible experience because, as Burt and
Allan called you a bad boy, you screamed at him, ‘I’m Lance say, “First thing you do, you don’t want to say,
not, shut up!’ Then Allan said, ‘Bad boy,’ and you'd ‘Bad boy,’ and you don’t want to say ‘I’m not, shut up!’
scream that at him again. And Allan, you always tell You wish you'd never thought of those words ever.
him, ‘Bad boy, bad boy’; sometimes you whisper it, And you've got hours to think it over and wish steadi-
and sometimes you say it in a low voice, and some- ly for one hour, two hours, three hours, ‘I wish I hadn't
times you say it louder. Then you wait for him to said that, I don’t want to say that.”” Every repetition
scream at you.” I said, “All right. It’s now one o'clock. is a reinforcement of their feeling, “I don’t ever want
The two of you can start. Seems to me it doesn’t take to say that.”
many seconds to say, ‘Bad boy, bad boy,’ seems to me
it doesn’t take many seconds to say, ‘I’m not, shut up!’ * * *

So I'll be here in the office, you'll be there, and we'll
leave the door open so I'll know how thoroughly you're 1: Lance, my second son, announced very proudly at the
working hard to learn not to say that.” At the end of luncheon table one day, “Daddy, do I have to do what
15 minutes, they said, “Can't we stop now.” I said, you tell me to?” I said, “Within reason.” He said, “Do
“You did it awfully slowly; you didn’t seem to have I have to eat dinner?” I said, “You don’t have to, but
much interest in it, and not much spirit. You just said, it’s a good idea.” “Well, you can’t make me eat my din-
‘Bad boy, bad boy,’ but as if you didn’t mean it. Robert ner.” I said, “No, that’s right. You can eat it.” He said,
just said, tiredly, ‘I’m not, shut up,’ (Laughter) and “I'm not going to eat my dinner unless you make me,
he doesn’t seem to mean it. Now, I would like some and you can’t make me.” I said, “Why bother about
good, spirited honest-to-goodness rowing, and at 2 the dinner, you've got a glass of milk there. I can make

[PAGE 060]

110 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents 111


you drink your milk.” “You can’t make me drink my you tell him rather simply, “I really don't know if it
milk.” I said, “Oh, yes I can.” I said, “Go ahead and took much courage to say that. 1 think you have
eat your dinner because we don’t need to think about enough courage to repeat it.” He's hooked. He's got
dinner, let’s think about milk.” So he ate his dinner to repeat it, or he's got to admit he hasn't got enough
and said, “Make me drink my milk.” I said, “I will.” courage to say it. If he says it again, he feels silly. “All
“You can’t make me.” “Oh, yes I can.” And we kept right, you had courage enough to say it a second time;
up that interchange: “You can't.” “I can.” “You can’t.” I wonder if you've got courage enough to say it a third
“I can.” I said, “I can make you do anything I want time.” (Laughter) If he says it a third time, he's hooked
you to do.” “You can’t, you can’t even make me drink again. He wonders how on earth to get out of that.
this milk.” ‘You've got to do exactly what I say.” “I (Laughter) He starts wishing right then and there he
don’t.” “You have to do exactly what I say. You have had never, never said anything like that to you. You're
to drink your milk because I’m going to say. ‘Drink using the class as part of your background. Now he
your milk.’” “I don't have to do what you say, I won't knows you're using the class. It’s a miserable situa-
drink my milk.” I said, “You have to do what I say,” tion, and all he's doing is wishing and wishing, and
and I followed that and the broken record turned he's totally lost. I’ve had attendants, nurses, even doc-
around and around on that for a while. And I suddenly tors at Wayne County General Hospital become an-
came up with, “You have to do what I say.” “I don't.” gry enough to be willing to lose their job, and they’d
“You have to, don’t drink your milk!” He looked at me come into my office and really cuss me out. After that
in a startled fashion. I said, “Drink your milk,” he had happened a few times the word went around. Then
to put it down. “Don’t drink it, drink it, don’t drink only when new employees came, the old employees
it.” He had to do what I said, but he had to defy. I would try to get the new employee (Laughter) to come
said, “Spill your milk.” He couldn’t solve it by spill- in and tell me off. They would even prime the victim
ing his milk. “Put the glass on the table and leave it with what to say to me. I don’t know how well you
there.” He didn’t have to. There he was caught. He know hospital attendants, the way they can lose their
couldn't spill it, he couldn't drop it, he couldn't put it temper and things they can say. But they would come
down on the table. A horrible bind. “Don’t drink it, in and give me a complete resume of my character and
drink it.” my antecedents, and perhaps wind up by saying,
W: What was the outcome? “You're a G.D. S.O.B.” I'd be listening quietly, the
E: After a while he said, “Daddy, I’m in a fix. Let's quit,” whole time, attentively. Pd say, “All right, you've just
Yes, last time he was here he recalled the incident, and said I’m a G.D. S.O.B.; you would have been speaking
he said, “I hope you've worked that swindle of yours more accurately, don’t you think, if you had said Im
on the other kids because it really teaches you a lot.” a G.D. dirty S.O.B., a bastard. Now really, I think you
could have said that. I think it would have expressed
* * * your feelings more adequately. You could say I’m a
bloody bastard of a son of a bitch. There are a lot of
E: You treat the medical student who wants to be i mpu- other words you could have put in.”
dent. Hell make some impudent remark to you, and IT. This is the accepting bit again.

[PAGE 061]

112 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Ordeals of Children and Parents 113

E Yes. Where does it leave him? Because you have taken
his horrible denunciation of you. You have castrated
where students from the south side of the tracks and
the north side of the tracks had attended the same
him in the most helpful, thoughtful, considerate way.
high school. Sonny boy graduated number 112 in that
H. It’s that mixture of benevolence that does it.
class of 112. I pointed out to the father and the son
E: It’s that mixture of benevolence, or innocence, or simple
that I thought the father and mother had been horri-
stupidity, or naiveté that you put into it. Somebody,
bly wrong and mistaken in being irritated and dis-
unfortunately, told Allan, when he was in high school,
pleased by the son’s failure. That to graduate at the
he gave him a scathing denunciation and told him,
bottom of his class — in fact, he didn’t quite graduate
“You are the most stupid person I have ever seen.”
at the bottom of his class because he had to go to sum-
Allan roared, “If you think I’m stupid, you just ought
mer school in order to complete that one additional
to see my brother!” Allan said it was the funniest
hour. But that was well within the range of error, be-
thing in the world. This person just stood there and
cause nobody can judge things absolutely accurately.
stared stupidly; then he turned in disgust and walked
That the father and mother, instead of blaming their
away, completely whipped. Somebody tried to tell
son, should have congratulated him, because it must
Betty Alice that she was terribly stupid. She did it
have taken an awful lot of doing to always get a lit-
in very nasty, catty fashion. Betty Alice turned to the
tle bit lower mark than the morons in the class did.
woman and, in outraged tones, said, “That’s because
That took calculated study, thoughtfulness and very
I work at it!” (Laughter) It was the outraged tone that
keen judgmen — always t to come in underneath the
acknowledged that she worked at being stupid, that
morons in the class. The fact that he had to take an
she wanted credit for stupidity. That she demanded
extra hour, you couldn’t expect him to be always, ab-
it as her absolute right. That the woman wasn't really
solutely accurate on a thing as difficult as that. You
giving her enough credit. What can the assailant do in
should have seen that father’s face and that son’s face.
that case? You have joined with them, you are agree-
H: You said this to the father in the son’s presence?
ing with them, you are pointing out the inadequacy of
E: I turned to the son, and I said, “Now, don’t try to tell
their attack, you are making them wish they had never
me it was easy. (Laughter) Always to slide in under
attacked you with such an inadequate weapon.
H: Um sure they do.
the dumbest guy in the class.” I said, “Now, after you
graduated from summer school that year, you went
E: A father and a son were here. The father's a doctor. The
to the University of ‘X’ and enrolled. You took the full
son was a few days from being 21. The son graduated
allotment of cuts from every class, you handed in your
from high school in a class of 112 students. Quite a
work late, you tried always to get a ‘D’ grade, being
few of those students came from the other side of the
careful to avoid a ‘C’, careful to avoid an ‘F’. You knew
tracks. Father was a doctor, very brilliant man; his
it would enrage your father and mother if you flunked
wife's a brilliant woman. It's a talented family. There's
out. You finally figured out how to make them mad-
no question about the son's intelligence. A few quick
der than ever, even though you didn't flunk out. The
questions privately with the father told me something
week of examinations, you left school without permis-
about the high school makeup. It’s on the borderline
sion. You didn't take the exams, so you didn't flunk

[PAGE 062]

114 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents 115


them, you didn’t pass them. Your father and mother police, and told them there was an abandoned car in
still don’t know whether you would have passed them front of your house and you wish they’d come and pick
or not. Nobody knows. But they can’t say you failed it up. You gave them the address. So a stolen car was
them. Your father and mother decided that they returned before the owner knew it had been stolen. No
would really put you in a bind; your father got you laws really violated, except driving a car without per-
the appointment to Annapolis. You passed the en- mission, safely. And you got a job to prove to your
trance exams with one of the highest scores. There parents that you would work.” I said, “Now you're not
were 1,199 men in your class. That really gave you going to like the next thing I say, you've been smil-
some competition. (Laughter) You managed to get ing smugly, happily, giving delighted glances at your
position 1,169 in a class of 1,199. In 1,199 students, father. You're pleased about my analysis of Annapolis
there have to be at least 50 screwballs. But you man- Academy, and you've enjoyed that immensely, but
aged to get position 1,169 in spite of that competition. from now on you aren’t going to enjoy it. (Laughter)
After that, you forced the Academy to kick you out. Because all I’m going to do is state the simple truth,
After giving you the highest grade on the entrance and the madder you get, the more you're going to
examination, you forced them to kick you out for com- realize that I am speaking the truth. So, get ready to
plete inaptitude.” I said, “That wasn’t easy to get. Be- be mad. The thing is this, you got a job, and you
cause you had to go about it in such a careful way. thought you’d show your parents how you could be
You accidentally left this button unbuttoned. The up- self-supporting, and you met this girl and she was a
perclassmen would call your attention to it and give nice, cheap, easy lay. So you started living with her.
you a demerit slip. Somehow or other in buttoning You call her your finacée. You've talked to your par-
that, you loosened your belt, you got your tie crooked. ents about marrying the girl, and all she is is a cheap,
(Laughter) You ran your fingers through your hair but common tart, a whore. You know it, and I know it;
you ran your fingers through the hair the wrong way. and you'll be ready to kill me before you'll be ready
You salute by knocking your cap off your head. (Laugh- to admit it.” You should have seen that guy jump up
ter) It took ingenuity, intelligence, and never-failing waving his fists, grinding his teeth. He told me, “One
alertness to get that innumerable list of demerits that more word about my fiancée, one nasty word more,
added up to complete ineptitude. After you got the I'll disregard your age, your cane and I'll clobber you.”
highest grade in the entrance exam for that entire I said, “You mean that if I call that tart that you call
class. Then after that you went home and you showed your fiancée a whore, you will really clobber me?”
your father and mother that you were not a criminal. (Laughter) And he burst into tears and just burst out
You walked into a little parking lot 25 miles from of the office. His father said, “Now you've done it.” I
home, wandered around until you saw a car with a key said, “What do you think I’ve done?” He said to me,
in it. You carefully got the car out of the parking lot, “The boy’s going back East, home; he isn’t going to
drove 25 miles, while obeying the speed laws very go into therapy with you.” I said, “Do you want to bet
carefully. You parked the car at the top of the hill on it?” He said, “I know my boy, he’s going to go back
three blocks away from home, walked home, called the home.” That's exactly where he did go. He went home,

[PAGE 063]

116 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Ordeals of Children and Parents 117

broke off with that goddamned cheap, lousy, good-for-
nothing whore, and came back here for therapy.
H: This is the man who was going to mangle you. I remem-
(Laughs)
ber you told us about that. That’s the one you handled
f: One of the things that has come up several times in this
by defining the situation as one where he could be
very successful at that.
session is your unconcern about antagonizing a pa-
E: All I did was, I sat there and got his age, his weight,
his height. I pointed out that there'd be no satisfac-
tient. It doesn’t seem to bother you at all.
E: No, why should it?
A: Well, I just think it would most people.
tion in mangling me, messing up my office. I couldn't
E: You see, when you antagonize people, they are waiting,
even put up any kind of struggle.
looking for action. They're ready to defend them-
H: Now, that's a situation where somebody has come in
selves. They are so angry they want to hit. Their
to get you. When you have a husband who's scared
whole learning has been, “If I hit, I get hit back, so
to death of his wife, and therefore won't say what's
while I’m ready for offense, am I also ready for de-
on his mind, and you say to him, “I don’t think you
fense?” So you've got them in that situation. Now in
have the courage to say what’s on your mind,” now
order to be master in the situation, they’ve got to
this is needling the devil out of the guy.
know, “Is he going to slug me? Is he going to run?”
E: If he is too much of a weakling, you temper that. “I don't
And you sit there very quietly, passively, thought-
think you've got the courage to tell me what's on your
fully, verbalizing further insults. Or, a careful, de-
mind, but I’m very certain it's clear in your own mind.”
tailed analysis of the situation. They are waiting des-
He doesn’t like to admit he doesn't have the courage
perately for you to make some move. You haven't. The
to say it, but he is going to admit to himself that it's
longer they wait for a move on your part, the more
clear in his own mind. So he's started some honest-
they’re committed to waiting. Do you recognize that?
to-goodness thinking.
FH: I'm not sure I understand it. I mean I’m not sure I un- W: So how you would phrase that might depend on wheth-
derstand why you want them to be committed to wait-
er you could see he was really at the boiling point, in
which case you could make it stronger, or that he was
just sort of glum, in which case you'd given hima lit-
ing.

W: So they'll follow you, I think.
E: They're waiting, waiting for you to give them a lead to
tle more while putting a finger on it.
ki: Yes. You want him to function within his own capac-
follow.
ities.
H: The more they wait, the more they’re likely to follow
the lead.
1: Now it’s a similar situation where you say to the father
E; They'll follow the lead. Tll give you the example of the
that what he’s been doing has been stupied. This again
young man who came in here without an appointment
is risking antagonizing him.
lv: Yes.
one evening. He just walked right in, shut the door
pulled the curtain, sat down in the chair. He said, “You Il: You seem to not mind this a bit. This is not usual with
psychiatrists.
don’t know me, but I’ve come here tonight to mash
the hell out of you.”
Ir: Yes, | know the average psychiatrist is awfully afraid
of antagonizing: his patient. | think that in psychiatry,

[PAGE 064]

118 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents bys


as in medicine, you ought to be perfectly willing to patient, his mother, in her seventies, took him by the
palpate an abdomen and find out where the tender collar at the front door and dragged him in here and
pain is instead of keeping your fingers two feet above said, “I can’t stand him any longer.” So I shut the door
the abdomen when you palpate for fear you might and drew the curtain (over the door) and I said, “Now
hurt the patient. The patient’s entitled to know where sit down.” She said, “I can't stand it anymore, I can’t
he hurts. (Laughter) So are you. stand it. I can’t put up with him. His moaning and
H: Well, have you ever lost a patient because you antago- groaning and his saying that he’s suffering when he
nize them that way? isn’t suffering. I can’t stand it.” I said, “Now listen,
E: I’ve had them irately go home, and call me up may- mother, will you, for heaven sake, shut up. And ‘Tom,
be a week later, two weeks later, as long as a year do some deep squats. I know it will hurt your less,
later and say, “May I come back?” The only patients you're not used to them. Do 25 deep squats. Mother,
I’ve ever lost by that were patients I didn’t want to you count them for me.” (Laughter) I told her to shut.
keep. up, be quiet. Then I gave her the privilege of counting:
H: On this antagonizing business now, I wonder how rou- the punishments I was inflicting on her son. So when
tine it is with you, in the sense that I notice in most he had done 25 deep squats, I turned to his mother,
of your hypnotic inductions, a part of your challenge and I said, “Pm awfully sorry, he's going to have some
is to have the subject do something they don’t want awfully sore legs. But he’s been sitting around too
to do, antagonizing them somewhat. idle, too inactive. Now if he gets a little soreness im
E: Yes. his legs this afternoon in that irrigation ditch, it. may
H: 1 wonder if you parallel that in therapy. limber them up a bit. So Tom, get down and do some
E: I’ve got a nice, episodic schizophrenic. We're at swords’ push-ups. Mother count them.” So he did pusl-ups
points. I’m making him shovel out an irrigation ditch. and deep squats. And deep bends. Mother counted
I pointed out to him yesterday that he had done fully them.
five minutes’ work in an hour-and-a-half's time. My H: Well, what was that about? What were you after with
tendency is to berate him. Yesterday he did an hour’s that?
work in about three-hours’ time. This morning he E: Mother couldn’t stand it. She was at the end of her pa
stopped in here almost livid with rage. He said, tience. Her desire was simply to run back Mast. and
“You've got to admit I'm improving.” I said, “Yes, I abandon her son, which she would regret before she
do have to admit that you're improving; so is your got 200 miles away. She’d come tearing back full of
work performance, And boy, did that need improve- guilt and shame and distress and agony, which
ment!” I said his work performance had improved, and wouldn’t do her any good, which wouldn’t do the pa
he could feel happy about that. And did it need im- tient any good. Her other son, who's a psychiatrist,
provement. It did. He had to admit it needed improve- warned me in a long distance phone call to watch out
ment; it did improve. So he's got to admit both things. for mother's sudden mood changes. So | stopped
That it was bad work performance, and I’m giving mother from making one of her flights.

him credit for improved work performance. That same W: You found something they could do together.

[PAGE 065]

120 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals of Children and Parents 121


H: That's right. The patient was quite willing to do the E: She once picked him up by the nape of the neck and
deep squats and all if you told him to? brought him in here. She's a very forceful woman.
E: Yes. I don’t know why patients do what I tell them to H: Apparently. What you are doing is encouraging her to
do. (Laughter) This son irritated the life out of his help her son, just as she always has.
mother by sitting and moaning and groaning. She E: Yes. But this way, not in that old, soft, maternal way.
would much rather go to the library to read and spend But in a way that someone else says is good for her
the day. So I had her get a library book, drive her son son.
out on the desert, dump him out of the car, and drive W: And not to back out in the middle.
three miles down the road. She sat there and read un- E: That's right.
til, ragingly, he completed his walk to the car. The H: It also involves them both in an ordeal.
mother objected to it the first day I suggested it to E: I can assume that one way for that schizophrenic pa-
her. I told her, “Now listen, your son is going to fall tient to exercise would be to walk. As sure as I get
down, he's going to crawl on his hands and knees, he's him started walking, he’s going to find some other ex-
going to wait to stir up your sympathy. Take a de- ercise that’s much better, perhaps the bowling that
serted road in the desert where there will be no pass- his mother suggested. He very happily gave me his
ersby. He will try and punish you by making you sit mother’s note on bowling today. Well, I don’t care
there and wait for five hours, but remember he is out whether he walks or whether he bowls, but he’s go-
there on the ground for that length of time. He'll get ing to get fed up with that walking and do the thing
hungry.” The son tried everything, but his mother he wants to do.
obeyed my instructions. He walked three miles. His a
He
H: Well, you try to establish a class of things for them to
mother said, “You know, I’m getting to like this read- do, and then give them one item in that class which
ing out in the open.” He walked more and more brisk- they’re not going to be very happy to do, and you
ly. He sometimes volunteered to walk. That way he want them to “spontaneously” find another item in
can cut it down to one mile. (Laughter) But he’s vol- that class.
unteering, you see. His mother is so astonished at his E: Yes.
improvement. His psychiatrist brother said, “Put him
in a hospital, there’s no hope for him.” Mother didn’t
want to do that, and mother today wanted to know
when she could start him bowling. So you see, he is
improving.
W: Did you give that instruction to the mother alone, or
was the son there?
E: In the son’s presence. Because I wanted him to know
that I knew exactly how he could stumble and fall,
and faint, and anything else he wanted to do.
H: How did she get him out of the car?

[PAGE 066]

Directives and Joining Children 173


ornery kids, I’ve got a big, high fence around my or-
chard. I’ve got a mean dog in there. If I catch any of
you kids, I'll have that dog bite you, and Pl spank
you. I want you kids to keep out of my orchard.” You
CHAPTER 6 know what we did—there was the dog decoy detail
that went into the orchard (Laughter), the others pick-
ing the apples at this end, stuffing them in our shirts.
Directives and Those were our ammunition for birds and telephone
poles. Garrett’s apples we ate. We were very reason-
Joining Children able about Garrett. Poor John.
W: You took a lot of throwing apples.
E: We took a lot of throwing apples. But you see, that’s
human nature. Whenever you start depriving people
of anything, they are going to insist that you give it
1961. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland
. to them. When I instruct patients to do something,
the patients feel I’m ordering them. They want me to
E: One of my patients was asking last Saturday, “Why on
be in the unfortunate position of failing there. There-
earth have I ever done all the things you told me to
fore, they’ve got to keep me at the task of ordering
do?” She said, “You never made an issue of it. You Just
them. And when 1 stop ordering them, at the right
expected it in such a way that 1 had to do it. When
moment, then they substitute for me. But they don't
I balked or tried to avoid it, I always wanted you to
recognize that they're substituting for me. For exam-
try to force me. You always stopped short. I’d try a
ple, this one patient, it used to be that the worst
little harder to make you force me to do it.” Each time
punishment on earth was to take my stethoscope and
she tried a little harder to force me to do it, she'd come
listen to her heart. In the past it had always given her
closer to me-to the performance of what I wanted
an acute panic. 1 would say, “Now listen, stand up,
her to do. That psychology that Garrett and John
and here's my stethoscope. 1 want you to come over
worked on us grade school kids. Garrett in September
here and pull your blouse up so 1 can listen to your
would meet the school kids and greet us happily and
heart.” Then there was the defiance. And my passive
say, “Now kids, as you come past my orchard here,
indifference. 1 didn't seem to be demanding that she
there's lots of apples on the ground. Help yourselves.
take another step. 1 didn't seem to be putting up any
Eat all you want to. If there's some special big apple
fight at all. So she'd take a tentative step to order me
up in the tree that you would like, climb up careful-
to induce her to move more rapidly (Laughs) toward
ly, don't slip and fall or hurt yourself, and take it and
me. I’d seem to give some semblance that I was about
eat it. But I think you'll find plenty of apples on the
to tell her, “Come on.” But 1 wouldn't quite make it.
ground.” We always helped ourselves to eating apples
And she'd wait for me to say, “Come on.” The she'd
at Garrett's. John met us and said, “Now listen, you Lake another step toward me. (Laughs) Then again T’d


139

[PAGE 067]

124 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Directives and Joining Children 125


start as if I was going to order, “Come on.” Then she'd back in between them for another spanking’, until they
have to take another step. Until finally she'd be stand- gave up. He didn't enjoy sleeping witb them, they
ing by me. I'd say, “Well, I’m ready with the stetho- didn't enjoy it, and they all had broken sleep. I knew
scope.” She was waiting for me to tell her, “Get that the boy wouldn't go on Boy Scout hikes because he
blouse up.” She'd say, “Well, you want me to pull up wet the bed. 1 knew his parents had bribed him with
my blouse. Well, I’m ready.” (Laughs) The need to de-
pet rabbits, and I knew they had given him a collec-
fy, to resist, to insure the chance that you can defy,
tion of minerals and stones and he liked those. He also
that you can resist. And I’d start the situation devel- had a Boy Scout blanket. So I raised the question of
oping for her to resist. Then she had to develop it. But
this self-punishment. Regardless of what his parents
she always lost. When she would finally pull up her did he wet the bed and punished himself by lying in
blouse and I’d listen—that triumphant smile on her bed. Then, not satisfied with that punishment, he got
face. “All right, go ahead and listen.” “You've been so up and went into his parents' bedroom for more pun-
slow I’ve lost my interest.” But I told her, “Come over ishment, and they gave it to him. Why didn't he take
here and lift up your blouse so I can listen.” So I can. charge of his own punishments and deliberately and
She’s obeyed. She’s come over, she’s lifted her blouse. honestly and openly administer them to himself? We
So I can listen. That’s all I asked in the first place. finally agreed that he should spread his stones out
I didn’t promise her I was going to listen. (Laughter) over the concrete floor, draping the Boy Scout blanket
So it’s all her performance. Every time I pulled some over them, go to bed, wet the bed at midnight, awaken
other task on her, it always worked out in that same and instead of lying in a wet bed say, “Well, I want
way. Weasel wording. Exact wording. Literal word- punishment and I’m going to administer it to myself,”
ing. She had had, let’s see, 12 years of depth psycho- and get up and lie down on the blanket on the stones
analysis. She was the most horrible mess I ever saw. and sleep there the rest of the night. I am not ab-
She’s a very competent citizen now. I see her about solutely certain of the length of time, but it was under
once a month. Just to make certain after that long, a month. He gave up his rabbits because they were
long period of disability, that she isn’t going to rees- a bribe to him, kept his stones, and he continued for
tablish any of those habits. The diagnosis was hyste- approximately a month to sleep on the stones after
ria. (Pause) Is this meeting your needs? midnight. Finally, he decided that he’d had enough of
H: Yes. We'd like to move it more, as much as possible, that, he could sleep in his bed, the way he wanted to
to couples or families, but obviously how you handle with a dry bed, and that was that.
a patient is related to this anyhow. H: And you didn’t tell his parents about this suggestion
E: I can cite the case of a 12-year-old boy who, regardless to sleep on the floor? This was between you and him?
of what time his parents got him up, wet the bed at E: That was between the boy and myself. I told him that
12 o'clock. He would lie and rage at himself until if his mother found him sleeping on the stones, he
about 2 o'clock. Then he'd get up and simply walk in- should tell her that what he was doing was his own
to his parents’ bedroom and insist on sleeping between arrangement with the psychiatrist, and that she could
them. They spanked him repeatedly, but he went right talk to me but I wouldn't give her any satisfaction.

[PAGE 068]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Directives and Joining Children 127


I had in one of the parents and said, “You want me In fact, I don’t know anybody who has been there.
to take care of this boy? Let me do it my own way. How did I find out my information?
I'll send you a bill after the boy stops wetting his bed.” H: You read it.
FH: Once again you have him do something voluntarily to E: That's right. He showed me he knew a lot about this
solve an involuntary problem. city, that city. I never inquired how he got it. All I
know is he went into the proper grade. I never did get
* * *
around to teaching him how to read. 1 bragged about
my membership in AAA. How they send out maps
E: I had an 11-year-old boy who blocked completely on showing all the places of interest. I like those maps;
reading. I questioned him about his father’s summer that way I knew what to look for when I am in a cer-
vacation, and I had quite an argument with the kid. tain city. I never mentioned the descriptive material.
“You know L.A. is 750 miles,” I said. He said it was His father joined the AAA in preparation for that
not, he had been to L.A. in the car, with his father. summer trip. An entirely new route was mapped out.
He had been to Spokane. I knew that was 350 miles. The kid read up on all the data on every spot along
The kid and I had a horrible argument about it. I the trip, and the father obligingly mapped out a route
proved my point, or tried to, by getting out amap and that took him to this and that national park, to see
a ruler and getting the mileage, 200 miles per inch, this particular scenic thing, and that particular scenic
for 350 miles that made one inch and three-quarters. thing, and the kid did like the trip. Why should 1
I started looking for Spokane then, and he started bother with these first grade readers, second grade
looking elsewhere on the map. He couldn’t read the reader, third grade reader, fourth grade reader? In
word “cat.” Iknew Spokane was somewhere near Salt September, just before school began, I said, “I sup-
Lake City, he pointed out to me it was near Portland. pose you will have the same old idiotic argument with
He read all the names on the map. He said I might your teacher, but she'll lose it.” He wanted me to name
be a good doctor, but I sure was stupid about dis- the appropriate grade, the 7th or the 8th. His teacher
tances. (Laughter) knew darn well he belonged in the first grade. She lost
H: Once he was able to read the names on the map was he the argument. “She really thinks she knows it all. But
able to read other things? she is a teacher, and she has to think she knows it all,
E: “Well, maybe I am stupid on distance, but I can tell you until someone shows her. She really does have to know
a lot of things about Salt Lake City,” and I proceeded it all, that’s what she is hired for.”
to do so. “And tell you a lot of things about L.A.,” and
I proceeded to do so. “I haven't been to Cheyenne, but > * *

I can tell you a lot about that.” What's the implica-
tion? H: Do you ever see a children's problem that can’t be reH: That he could tell you a lot about the places he had been solved without bringing in the parents?
to? . lv: You bring in the parents without really bringing them
E: I can tell you a lot about Cheyenne, I haven't been there. in. That is, the parents called me up and told me about

[PAGE 069]

128 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Directives and Joining Children 129


little Johnny, ten years old, who wet the bed every enough punishment from his parents. So I stepped
night. They had done everything they could do to stop over on Johnny’s side of the fence by saying, “Who
him. They had shamed him. They had whipped him. do they think they are, ordering me around? I’d rather
They had deprived him. They had enlisted the aid of talk to you on a lot of other subjects. Let’s just drop
the schoolteacher. They had enlisted his classmates this talk about bedwetting. You know it. I know it.
in grade school. They made him wear a sandwich board They know it.” I said, “Now, how should I talk to a
saying, “I am a bed wetter.” They belonged to a small 10-year-old boy? You're going to grade school. You've
sectarian church, and they had the entire congrega- got a nice, compact wrist. Nice compact ankles. You
tion pray aloud that Johnny quit wetting the bed. know, I’m a doctor. A doctor is always interested in
They had an eight-year-old brother wear a sign, “I the way a man is built. You've got a nice, rounded,
don’t wet my bed, but Johnny my older brother does.” deep chest. You're not one of these hollow-chested,
The parents had gone all out. They gave me this his- slump-shouldered people. You have a nice, deep chest
tory over the phone. It was pretty horrible. So I told that sticks out. Ill wager anything that you're good
them I’d see Johnny, and so they explained to Johnny at running. With your small-sized build, you undoubt-
that they were taking him to see a nut doctor. In other edly have got good muscle coordination.” I explained
words, further degradation. They dragged him in to coordination. Sports that require skill, not just beef
see me. Father had him by one hand, mother had him and bone. Not the sort of stuff that any bonehead
by the other. Johnny was dragging his feet. They laid could play, but the games that would require skill.
him face down on the floor here. I shoved them out “What do you play?” “Baseball.” “Is there anything
of the room and closed the door. Johnny was yelling. else that you do?” “Bow and arrow.” I said, “How good
He had to pause to catch his breath to yell, so I yelled. are you at archery?” He said, “I’m pretty good.” I said,
He turned to look at me. I said, “It’s my turn. Now “Well, of course, that requires eye-hand, arm-body co-
it’s your turn.” So he yelled again; I yelled again. We ordination.” So I explained that and emphasized the
paused for breaths. 1 said, “It’s my turn, not your depth of his chest. It turned out his brother played
turn. You know, we can keep right on taking turns, football. His eight-year-old brother was much larger
but that can get awfully tiresome. I'd rather take my than he was. “Football is an awfully nice game if
turn by sitting down in that chair,” pointing to this you've got just muscle and bone. Very good. Lots of
chair. “There's a vacant one over there.” So I took my great big, overgrown guys like it.” The deprecation of
turn sitting down in this chair. Johnny got up and the larger eight-year-old brother in terms of the game.
took his turn sitting down on that chair. That expec- So we talked about that, and 1 talked about muscle
tation, you see. I had already established that we were coordination. “You know, when you draw back on
taking turns with that yelling; then I changed the your bow string and aim your arrow, what do you sup-
game to taking turns sitting down. Then I said, “You pose the pupil of the eye does? It closes down, tight-
know, your parents ordered me to cure you of bed- ens up. You see, there are muscles that are flat, mus-
wetting. Who do they think they are that they can cles that are round. Muscles that are short. Muscles
order me around?” In other words, Johnny had had that are long. And there are muscles that are circular.

[PAGE 070]

130 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Directives and Joining Children 131


Like the one at the bottom of your stomach. You
my patient. I took my turn, he took his. I took mine,
know when you eat food, it closes up. The food stays
he took his. And 1 took mine and he took his, to get
in your stomach until it’s all digested. Then when the
him in a chair.
stomach gets rid of it, the circular muscle opens up W: Well, was there any opposite to that? Is there anywhere
at the bottom of your stomach, empties out, closes
you feel that it would be absolutely essential to have
up, waits for the next meal to digest.” A muscle at the
some sort of direct dealing with the parents?
bottom of your stomach. Where’s the bottom of your E: Oh yes. 1 can think of another bedwetting case where
stomach when you're a small boy? So we discussed
I told the parents, “Absolutely don't you dare go in
that for an hour. The next Saturday he came in all
your son's room. Don't you make the bed. Don't you
alone, and we talked some more about sports, and this
change the linen. Don't do anything. Don't say any-
and that, never mentioning bedwetting. We talked
thing. I’m handling it.” So the parents really kept out
about Boy Scouts and camping. All the things of in- of it completely in that sort of a fashion. Sometimes
terest to a small kid. On the fourth interview he came in the bedwetting, you tell the child, “Now listen, you
in wearing a great big, wide smile. He said, “You
can't disappoint your parents all the time. They know
know, my ma has been trying for years to break her
darn well that you are going to wet the bed. That's
habit, but she can’t do it.” I said, “That's right. Some
what they honestly believe, and nothing is going to
people can break their habits quickly. Others make change their minds. They're going to hint that to you
great big talk about it and don't do anything about over and over and over again. Now listen, it isn't a
it.” Then we drifted on to other topics. About six
pleasing thing to ask of you, but it's a necessary thing.
months later he dropped in socially to see me. He
Now let's see, today is the third of December. Oh, I
dropped in when he entered into high school, social-
suppose, why not pick on December 13th. That'd be
ly. He's now in college. “Ma's been trying for years to
a good day. The thirteenth is considered an unlucky
break her habit. She can't break her habit.” number. So on the night of the thirteenth, just go
W: Did you find out what ma's habit was?
ahead and wet the bed. Even if you have to try pretE: Cigarette smoking.
ty hard to do it, but wet it. Don't disappoint your
W: She couldn't break her cigarette habit even though
parents. They know darn well you're going to do it,
she got the whole congregation to pray for that boy?
but you don’t have to do it every night. So you pick
(Laughter)
the night you doit.” As sure as he picks the night, he
E: Now all 1 did was talk about the circular muscle at the
is saying, “I have control.” But he doesn't know that.
bottom of the stomach closing up, holding contents
So he comes and tells you how hard it was to wet the
until we want to empty it out. Symbolic language, of
bed deliberately. 1 tell him, “Well, it was worth it for
course. But all that beautiful build-up about eye,
your mother’s sake. Now, the thirteenth. I suppose
hand, arm, body coordination, the praising of his chest, we could wait until the 13th of February, or January,
the praising of his wrists, ankles. Apologizing because or March, June or March.” You see, that juggling back
I’m a doctor and I notice that sort of thing. I didn’t
and forth, but you may have two deliberate bedwet-
even advise the parents to let their son alone. He was tines, sometimes even three, but you hold, primarily,

[PAGE 071]

182 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Directives and Joining Children 133


in reserve, that suggestion for February and January. time doing nothing with you than sit here and watch
You backed up, you see. June, March, you’ve gone you having a temper tantrum on the floor. So what
way ahead, you've backed up. March is way ahead of shall it be? Temper tantrum on the floor? Or shall we
February. You're making progress. sit here and waste time, or shall we get down to busFH: How do you determine which one to use with which kid? iness?” He said, “Not that way. We can waste time.
Is it possible to say at all? We can get down to business. And I can still have my
E: Well, it’s the reflection of the personality as you talk temper tantrums.” He was keen, wasn't he? He's never
to the child. A mother came in to tell me she wanted had a temper tantrum. I’ve had him very violently
me to take care of her son. She said, “He's a liar, he's angry, especially when he threw mud balls and water
a cheat, he governs the house by throwing temper tan- bombs at the neighbor’s house. I asked him to de-
trums, and he’s got the sharpest tongue imaginable.” scribe exactly how he felt, what pride and joy and hap-
So the mother was very, very bitter. She said his piness and triumph he felt when he smashed that
father was a sexual pervert. “I don’t know all the water bomb. And the mud balls on the neighbor’s
perverted activities his father engages in . Once in a house. That infuriated him. I said, “You're willing to
while he comes to bed with me, but he’s got a lot of have a temper tantrum here. You never have, of
solitary perversions. He uses clothes, my clothes, for course. Here’s a beautiful chance! Now what are you
his perversions. I think he dresses up in my clothes. going to do, have a temper tantrum or tell me?” He
I think he masturbates. I think he ejaculates on my told me how angry he was. His mother says that he
clothes because I have to take them to the cleaners. is tremendously improved. That he now has friends
So there’s not much relationship between the boy and in school, and he is popular there, well-adjusted and
his father. The father is short-tempered. He screams well-behaved at home. That’s what the boy says too.
at the boy, and the boy is unwilling to come in to see He laughs with a great deal of amusement over his
you. I told him I was going to bring him in forcibly previous behavior. All I saw of the mother was peri-
if I had to.” She said, “I don’t know if you can handle odically when she would drop in on her way home
him. I’ve taken him to other doctors, and he just from work to hand me a check. She soon got tired of
threw temper tantrums, and they would not have that and started sending the check by the boy. His
anything to do with him.” So she brought him in. This willingness to recognize that he could waste time,
very charming, sweet-faced soft-voiced boy. He said, work with me, or have a temper tantrum. See, what-
“I suppose mother’s told you everything about me.” ever a patient offers you, I think you should be will-
I said, “She’s told me some of the things she knows, ing to accept, without being disturbed.
but not everything about you, because there are a lot H: Well, have you ever had... . has it been a long time since
of things about you that only you know. And she you had a patient manage to disturb you in the office?
couldn’t tell me a solitary one of those. I’m wonder- : Oh no.
ing if you're going to tell me any of those things?” He 26
IT: How does that happen to you?
said, “I might not.” I said, “I know that. But let’s settle ¡: There was a 12-year-old boy. I knew his grandfather.
one thing right away. I’d rather sit here and waste my I knew his grandmother. T knew his father. I knew his

[PAGE 072]

134 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Directives and Joining Children 135


mother. I knew his stepmother. One morning he came
pleased, happy way in which he told me about it. The
downstairs, and the stepmother was there, and the
intonation said, “I know you don’t like it, I know you
baby was in one of these little chairs. He had a bicy-
hate it, but I’m top dog.” I don't like those patients.
cle chain in his hand, and he said to his stepmother,
I saw too many of them in prison.
“I want to see you dance.” She said, “Are you joking?”
H: There’s something else about families that I have been
He said, “Oh no. See the baby? Start dancing.” He
thinking of as you talked. I think you make a differ-
made her dance on the kitchen floor for one hour. His
entiation between the world of children and the world
father brought him to me. I never saw a more utter-
of adults, such as they are incompatible worlds. I
ly vicious child. Until finally I told him, “You know,
gather that when you work with kids, you make this
I don’t like you, and you don't like me, and you're
differentiation sharper for them, and with the parents.
deliberately speaking in intonations that even get
E: Have you ever thought of a small child’s point of view?
under my skin. So I’m going to ask your father to pick
When my daughter, Betty Alice, was here last Sep-
you up and take you home and take you to another
tember, she took Roxy, Margie and Christy for a ride
psychiatrist.” 1 wanted to beat that kid no end! His
in the car. The little girls were sitting in the back seat
intonation was marvelous for irritating people. It was
havinga little-girl conversation, and one of them hap-
a work of art that he pulled on me, and the guy knew
pened to ask a question. The little girls were debat-
he was pulling it on me. It was the most incredibly
ing what the answer was, and Betty Alice volunteered
beautiful, artistic job imaginable. My feeling was that
the answer, quite unthinkingly. Deep silence. Then
a kid of that age, keeping his stepmother dancing —
Christy spoke up rather clearly to the other two lit-
I’ve seen the grandfather, and the grandmother, and
tle girls and said, “See, it’s just like I told you. She’s
the father, and the mother, and the stepmother, all
just like a mother: listen, listen, listen.” (Laughter) So
as patients. I knew their personalities. But here’s an
when you consider how the poor little kids are stuck
utterly, completely vicious boy. The father did ask me,
with these adults who listen, listen, listen. And Betty
please, see him again. I found out that the father was
Alice said she felt so horribly ashamed and so outside
awfully unaware of the criminality of that kid: petty
of the little girls’ world.
thievery, torture killing of cats, torture killing of
H: She hasn’t been out of it very long.
puppies.
E: No, she’s only 23. It's such a clear statement.
Another patient bothered me no end. So I asked
H: Well, when you work with parents and kids, you work
him to go and see some other psychiatrist. He came
to get this differentiation more clear for them?
in and, taking his history, I found he liked wander-
E: Oh yes. You're perfectly willing to let the kid know that
ing the desert on horseback, and then I found out
you're an adult, but you let the child know that you
why. He had stolen several hundred pounds of dyna-
have at least an honest desire to understand his world.
mite, and he had made booby traps out in the desert.
Oh yes, Johnny was a very, very brilliant seven-year-
Periodically he'd go for a ride on the desert to see if
old boy. One spring he decided that he would demon-
he got a cow, a coyote, arabbit, a person. He was al-
strate his omnipotence. Mother was divorced. Mother
ways hoping to get a person. That horribly smug,
is a school-teacher. Johnny had a sister a year older

[PAGE 073]

136 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Directives and Joining Children 137


than he. Sister is well-behaved. One day at school den Johnny found himself flat on the floor, mother
Johnny defied the teacher. I think Johnny’s brighter sitting on top of him. Beside the telephone. Johnny
than that teacher was. Johnny did a good job. And yelled, “Get up off me.” Mother said, “I haven't fin-
Johnny decided to defy the whole school. Then to defy ished thinking things out yet.” Johnny kicked and
the neighborhood. His mother when she brought him struggled, but it was 160 pounds on a seven-year-old.
in to me said, “He’s a hell-raiser. I’ve got no author- After about an hour, Johnny said, “I'll be good.”
ity, nothing at all, the last straw was reached the Mother said, “Are you sure?” Johnny said, “Yes.”
other night when in the middle of the night Johnny Mother said, “I have not yet learned how to believe
got up and took a metal ashtray and battered a hole you.” Johnny raged and kicked and yelled obscenities
in the wall, knocking plaster off and the laths off. and profanities. He tried to get out from under that
Johnny says he’s going to show me that he’s going to 160 pounds of weight and couldn't. (Laughs) So after
be the toughest hoodlum in Arizona.” And Johnny a while he sobbed and said, “I'll be good.” Mother said,
said, “That's right. And an old man like you can’t do “You know, you told me that before, and then you
anything at all about it. My mother can’t.” So I said, kicked up a worse fuss than ever. So I have not yet
“Well, you really mean that? You think you can win?” learned how to believe you.” Johnny said, “I’m thirsty.”
Johnny said, “Yes, I can.” I said, “Then you're not Mother said, “Well, I put my water right here where
afraid of what your mother will do, are you?” Johnny it’s handy for me, and she reached up on the shelf and
said he wasn’t the least bit afraid of what mother did. took a drink of water. (Laughter) The telephone rang.
I said, “Well, you’re not afraid to have me give your His mother reached up and took the telephone and an-
mother advice?” “Give her all the advice you want.” swered her call. Johnny didn’t even think of yelling
So I asked Johnny when the tug-of-war should occur. into the phone. It took him by surprise. His mother
I said, “Today is Friday, tomorrow is Saturday. That was ready. About noon his mother said, “Well, Johnny,
would be a really good day to take your mother to the maybe you'd like to have a rest from your learning.
cleaners if you can.” He said, “I can, and I will.” So Of course, I’ve got bananas here, and I’ve got oranges
I talked to the mother. The next morning mother here. I’ve got sandwiches here. For my lunch, if you
awakened him and said, “Let’s wait until after break- don’t want to take a rest from learning.” Johnny said,
fast. I’d like you to have a good breakfast.” Johnny “Pd like my rest.” Mother said, “Well, can we start
threw the eggs on the floor and said, “I want bacon.” again at one o'clock?” He started to yell and scream.
Mother prepared the bacon. He threw some more stuff So she continued sitting there. Johnny took just one
on the floor. The mother let him get a good breakfast. lesson.
Then mother picked up a glass of water, a couple of H: That was a good one.
oranges, a couple of bananas, and put them on the E: His mother had sandwiches, bananas, oranges, milk,
bookshelf right along side their telephone. Johnny wather, the telephone. A handy book to read. She
wondered about that. Mother went to the bathroom. gave him a rest by letting him roll over on his back.
Mother weighs 160 pounds. Johnny was age seven. Gave him another rest by letting him roll over on his
Mother came back from the bathroom. All of a sud- tummy while she sat on him. He tried to bite her bot-

[PAGE 074]

138 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Directives and Joining Children 139


tom. She said, “Dr. Erickson told me to put on my it, and she could not jump over it. For that matter,
tightest girdle and lots and lots of petticoats.” Johnny neither could 1. It took two weeks for her to learn to
came in to see me. He said, “Some kids can learn, can’t jump rope. Then came the matter of the roller skates.
they.” That’s right. Some kids can learn. But that So I raised the question of one roller skate. Of course,
mother was so absolutely desperate. I can’t even use one roller skate. It took her a week
H: Well, how did you persuade her not to give in at the to learn to roller skate. She had a bicycle, bought at
crucial point? her request, and for six months she had not tried to
E: I pointed out to her that if she gave in at a crucial point, ride it. So I arranged with her to come to my office,
she was wipped — and the child was whipped. He was pushing her bicycle. 1 said 1 would race her home. She
already a neighborhood threat, and a neighborhood knew I could ride a bicycle. So we both got on our
nuisance, and she was going to have to move out of bicycles, and she was wobbling fearfully. But she saw
that neighborhood. The neighbors would not tolerate I was really trying to beat her home. What the little
it anymore. She had just, about a year before, pur- girl did not know was that if I ride a bicycle and real-
chased that new house. ly, purposely use my right leg, I cannot pedal fast. If
I merely pedal with my left leg, I am an expert at bi-
* * * cycling. But if I use my right leg, it slows up my per-
formance frightfully. She could see that I was honestH: You know, the Zen philosophy is that everyone gets ly trying hard and I really was (laughing). And she
caught up in neurotic patterns, the wheel of life, and beat me home. She had once seen me race her brother
you can suddenly, by dealing with right now, get out on a bicycle, and I used only my left leg, and I had
of it. Get out of the pattern. It strikes me that is beaten her brother. But she beat me. Before the end
similar to your attitude about therapy. of the year, she had won the jumping rope contest and
E: Some parents called me a long time ago. Their little girl the jacks contest, and she came out of school with fine
was failing in school. In spite of everything on earth grades. She was elected to the national honor society
they could do, she was failing. They wanted some in high school. She was an all around nice little girl.
child psychiatry done. They gave me an adequate Now she is married, and she has a child. Not bad for
description of the little girl, and I went over to see her an inadequate, helpless child. Success breeds success.
in her home. This little girl could not play jacks, and Of course, the little girl could really play jacks, and
she could not jump rope, and she could not roller she could really spell. She could jump rope. And she
skate. She could not spell, she could not write, and she could accept the fact that she had beat me on the bicy-
could not read. So I saw her almost every evening. cle. I never discussed her relationship with her par-
What did we do? We sat on the floor, and it became ents, nor did I give her parents any advice.
a game— which one of us could be clumsier about play- FH: When you say you don’t deal with the little girl on
ing jacks. It took three weeks before she really started “why,” you must have put some thought yourself on
playing jacks well. Then I spent two weeks on rope why the little girl was the way she was, either in rela-
jumping. I could tie a rope to the door knob and swing tion to her parents or to something.

[PAGE 075]

140 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


E: Well, it was apparent that the girl had lost all confidence
in herself. She never measured up to the parental
demands. So in a field where the parents could not
really be demanding, I let her achieve excellence. With
APPENDIX
that under her belt... (Laughs)
H: Okay.
E: Her parents did not believe in psychiatry. As a last
resort, a family doctor advised a psychiatrist. They A Biographical Conversation
were humiliated and ashamed at having to ask for
psychiatric help. They obviously disapproved of my
sitting on the floor and playing jacks. And I can be
just as awkward as any incompetent child. (This conversation took place in 1957 when I was gathering informaH: Did the parents’ disapproval influence the little girl? tion about the life of Milton Erickson for a biographical sketch.)
E: The fact that they were not quite satisfied with me
allowed the little girl to identify with me. I let her dis- Haley: I'd like to know about your parents. Were they born
cover her own capabilities. in this country?
Erickson: My mother is of old New England stock. On her
side of the family, one served in the war of 1812, and
one enlisted and served all through the Civil War.
That’s where I got my middle name, Hyland. Major
John Hyland in the war of 1812, originally from Ver-
mont, dating way back to the Pilgrim days. A great-
aunt of mine had a complete genealogy of our entire
family. One day in her dotage she burned it up. Her
statement was simply this: All the descendants should
be able to live on their own merits and not on the past.
So she burned it. I was given my second name when
my mother was 16. This great-aunt was commenting
on the Hylands, how much they had contributed to
gg

me


me
this country. She said that no descendant would ever
merit that name. My mother was a 16-year-old girl
Pasi


then. She said, “When I grow up and get married and
have a baby boy, I’m going to name him Hyland.” I
got my first name in another impulsive fashion. I was
born in a mining camp. A neighbor woman from way

[PAGE 076]

142 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 143


down the canyon came up and was holding me, look- went to work in the insane asylum in Juneau, Wiscon-
ing at me, and bursting into laughter. Finally, my sin. He worked there for a while, and then he decided
mother asked curiously, “Why do you laugh everytime to go west to seek his fortune. He’d been there before
you look at the baby?” She said, “I can’t help it, he’s as a cowboy, went again as a cowboy, a ranger, a
so homely. What are you naming him?” My mother miner, a prospector, and finally he and his partner
knew how proud that woman was of her son, and she located this rich vein of silver and lead. Had it all
said, “I’m going to name him Milton after your son.” developed and well mortgaged, and going to sell it,
My father was born in Chicago. His father was an when the panic broke overnight. So my father was
immigrant from Norway. His father died when he was financially ruined. That’s why he went east and bought
12. My father went to live with his brother. He was a 10-acre farm.
a street urchin, a newsboy, a boot black. He used to H: Could we run over a kind of chronology with dates?
wander around Chicago looking at vacant lots, declar- E: I was born December 5th, in Aurum, Nevada. It was
ing that he planned someday to be a farmer. At 15 he a mining camp that is now vanished. I was the first
pinned a note to his pillow saying that he had gone child born in Aurum. It was about 10,000 feet above
to seek his fortune. He went up to Wisconsin. At the sea level. My father was operating the Silver Bell
age of 16 he saw a farmer driving an old ox cart. He mine. I was a third child. I left Aurum when I was
stepped up to the farmer and said, “Don’t you want a about three years old in a covered wagon headed east.
nice, bright boy on your farm?” The farmer questioned Then my father bought a small farm in Wisconsin and
him, and my father gave him a false name: Charley proceeded to rear a total of nine children on a small
Roberts. Finally, my father talked the old farmer in- farm. One brother six years younger than I, the rest
to taking him. So the old farmer on the way home were sisters.
stopped at the farm and said, “You wait here. I have H: What was your mother’s name?
to see my son-in-law.” There wasa little girl in a red E: Clara Minor.
flannel dress playing in the yard. She hid behind a big H: And your father?
maple tree. She peeked out coyly from behind the tree, E: Albert Erickson.
and my father saw her and said, “Whose girl are you?” H: Is that their picture on the wall?
She coyly answered, “I’m my Daddy’s girl.” He said, E: Yes, on their 62nd wedding anniversary. They’ve had
“You're my girl now.” Seven years later they were mar- their 68rd and are looking forward to their 64th.
ried. Three months after the old farmer took “Charley H: Where are they living now? |
Roberts” into his home, he died suddenly. My father E: In Milwaukee. When my father was too old to work the
took over the farm, carried my mother’s books to farm, he retired and lived in Milwaukee. Nothing to
school, and fought her battles. Years later, when I was do after a busy life on the farm, so he hopped on a
on crutches, I finished out teaching a country school - streetcar and learned how to transfer from one line
term in the same schoolhouse where my father and to another. If there is any street in Milwaukee you
mother had gone to school. I was recovering from want to know, or if you want to know an old-timer
polio then. After my father married my mother, he keeping a secondhand store, he'll tell you. He knows

[PAGE 077]

144 . Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 145


the entire city. He's got a wealth of interest in every- arm. With polio, I lost my body sensation very com-
thing. My Dad had a wonderful discussion about cit- pletely. I didn’t know where my legs were, and the
rus trees with the old drunk who planted the orange nurse could put a towel over my face and then put my
tree in the front yard. That same week the chief jus- arm this way, and it was up to me to try to discover,
tice of the Supreme Court came over to visit him, and because that was my task, where my arm was. 1 didn't
my Dad had a wonderful discussion with him on Ari- know whether it was here, or here, or here. I had no
zona law, Arizona history, and the development of idea at all. Then in recovering my body sensations,
this state. I might locate my elbow before I located my wrist or
H: So you went to school in Wisconsin. my hand or my shoulder. And here would be an elbow
E: 1 went to grade school in Lowell, Wisconsin and high floating out in space somewhere out of relationship
school in Wishfield, which meant a four-and-a-half- with the rest of my body. I might locate my thigh but
mile walk daily to go to high school. 1 worked in the not know where my leg was. I might locate my leg but
summers on a farm, did my share of the farm work. be unaware of my foot. I might locate my big toe and
Learned to milk at eight years old. I graduated from locate my little toe, on the same foot that is, but have
high school in 1919 in June. My high school had 30 no real relationship. You see with your thumb and
students in it the year 1 graduated. My class had six your finger —here’s the thumb floating in space, and
in it. There were two boys. Ed is a professor of Physics here’s the little finger floating in space, but there’s no
at Washington State. Two of my classmates became connection such as you ordinarily have. Then I'd spend
rural school teachers. One became a switchboard oper- a good deal of time, morning, afternoon, and evening
ator and a housewife. The other one became a house- slowly building up, item by item, that sense of body
wife. The two teachers have since married and become orientation. Then as I began to recover from the paral-
housewives. Economically and socially the entire class ysis —how do you move this toe and how do you feel
was a success. (Laughs) My father and mother only it, and what does your shoulder have to do with a leg
graduated from the 8th grade. Yet because of the end- movement, because of the tension. Bear this in mind
less number of interests they had, and their willing- —on knee jerking, tense the hands and the arms and
ness to learn, they can converse readily with literal- you exaggerate the knee joint.
ly anybody. H: One of the things Gregory Bateson mentioned was that
H: Your mother had that many interests too. you discussed a speech of President Roosevelt as that
E: Yes, a tremendous number of interests. of a polio victim. He was talking about how to prepare
H: So you graduated from high school in 1919. for the war, and he said we had to do it this way, and
E: Yes, and in August of 1919 I developed infantile paral- this way. You said it was a statement of a polio vic-
ysis. Finally I began using crutches, and then two tim planning to climb some stairs, or planning some
canes, and then one cane. By the following summer physical activity. I wonder how much you think your
I had improved enough so that I could take a sitting polio affects this careful and thorough building up you
job in a pea canning factory to earn some money to do in hypnosis?
go to college. The polio hit the right leg and the right E: T spent hours lying in bed trying to locate, by a sense

[PAGE 078]

146 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 147


of feeling, my foot, my toes, because I'd been told that would complain about their aching shoulders. I asked
I would be bedridden for the rest of my life. I be- them why they didn’t pitch hay right and left hand-
came acutely aware of what movements were. Then, edly, to hoe right and left handedly, to use an axe
of course, going into medicine I became aware of what right and left handedly, and to do it with equal skill
muscles really are. It took me 10 years of time to merely as a matter of doing it more equally. A max-
develop an adequate limp, so that I could limp most imum number of approaches to the matter.
efficiently. It made me extremely aware of physical FH: After your first polio attack, you must have been in
movements, and that came in exceedingly handy in pretty good shape if you could work in a pea canning
the matter of psychiatry and the matter of hypnosis. factory.
Because there are these little telltale movements, these H: Not too good shape. But I also worked building high-
little adjusting movements. You watcha polio victim, ways, shoveling sand and gravel. The shoveling sand
the way he tends to measure distances and the feel- and gravel was out of a boxcar, and I would brace my-
ing of empathy that I have with him. That’s one rea- self against the side of the car, or kneel down, and
son that I could recognize the gait of any of my fel- shovel that way. By using a rhythmical pattern of
low employees at the hospital. Because so much of shoveling, I didn’t tire myself too much and I could
our communication is on bodily movements, not just produce.
speech. The fact that I’m tone deaf makes me pay at- After my first year of college, I was called in by the
tention to inflections and not to be distracted by the health department at the university and informed
content. My ability to recognize a good piano player, that I had to get a great deal of exercise, and be out
not by the noise he makes but by the ways his fingers in the open and not use my legs. So that first sum-
touch the keys. That sure touch, delicate touch, a mer, after that first year at college, I went on a canoe
forceful touch, but it’s so accurate. It’s such a nice trip that lasted from June 14 to September. I went
physical movement. through the lakes of Madison and down the O’hare
H: What you seem to have done is get the most out of a River, down the Rock River, down the Mississippi
handicap. River to a few miles above St. Louis, then turned back
E: Is it a handicap or an asset? and went up the Illinois River, then through the HenH: Yes. (Laughs) Something in the way you often approach nipen canal, back to the Rock River, up to the O’hare
a task somehow ranga bell for me in the way Gregory River and back to Madison. I covered about 1200
was describing what you said about Roosevelt. I’m miles in the canoe. I started out with 2 dollars and 32
wondering if you would know whether that kind of an cents capital to live on for that summer. I wore a knot-
approach existed prior or after the polio? ted handkerchief on my head, and a swimming suit.
E: For me? It would be pretty hard for me to tell. I did have a shirt and a pair of overalls and a pair of
H: It’s a maximum anticipation of what's going to happen, sneakers. Most of the time I was in the swimming suit
or what comes next. and wearing that knotted handkerchief. I started out
E: Yet, in a way, I did show some understanding. As a little in the 17-foot canoe with a small bag of beans and a
kid I watched the farmers pitching hay, and they small bag of rice. Tin pails, a canteen, and a skillet.

[PAGE 079]

148 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 149


A knife and fork, and a hatchet, and two blankets. I work and a bed, and all I could eat, and I got paid for
picked up my living along the river, fishing, wild it! After that, at another place, I watched cows while
plants. There are a lot of edible plants that grow along they were building a fence. It’s all I had to do was
the river bank. watch cows and milk them at night and the next
When I hit the Mississippi river, I was in clover morning, 16 cows. I got a bed and 50 cents a day. In
because the steamers there peeled potatoes by the that way I earned enough money to buy myself a pup
bushel basket. They dumped the peelings out, and tent, and some oatmeal and some cornmeal.
there are always a few potatoes lost in the peelings, Then one place on the Rock River, I was sitting at
and they float. The same with apples. Now and then the camp one night near the river shore, and a great
a banana would be floating, or some tomatoes. I big truck came along with two rough-looking, bearded
always harvested them. Another thing, I could also men. They stopped the truck and said, “What are you
paddle within hailing distance of a fishing boat. Since doing here, kid?” I said, “I’m setting up camp.” They
I wore that knotted handkerchief and I tan very deep- promptly told me there was no place to camp. I told
ly, a fisherman was always curious and would hail me them I was going to camp. They told me they wouldn't
and ask me a few questions. I’d tell him I was a pre- let me. I swung my hatchet and asked them why they
med student at the University of Wisconsin canoeing thought I couldn’t camp within 30 feet of a navigable
for my health. They wanted to know how the fishing river? They said, “No crippled kid like you is going to
was, and I would tell them the day was yet young. camp out like that. We live on an island up the stream
They invariably gave me fish without my asking. about a half mile. We got a bed there for you, and
Usually they tried to give me a catfish, I always re- that's where you're going to camp.” So I went up there
fused it. Catfish were much more expensive, and they and they turned out to be a couple of hoodlums with
made their living fishing. So they would give me about hearts of gold. They hauled my canoe out of the water,
double or three times the amount of Mississippi perch. fixed it up, practically carried me up and put me in
Another thing, along the river there's always pic- a rocking chair. They baked some biscuits and fried
nic grounds. You set up your camp there, because pic- some meat for me, furnished a bed for me, and insisted
nic parties always bring much more food than they I stay there all summer. Their history? They camped
can eat. And I’d cook up a pail full of oatmeal, or rice out during the summer. Marv fished for clam shells.
or beans. The picnic party would come over and look Pete bought cattle. When winter came, since they had
at it scornfully. I always inherited the extra food they no home and couldn’t live on the island, they usually
didn’t want to take home. Now and then camping went into Rockford, Illinois with a brick. They smashed
along the river U'd get a chance to work. One man was a plate glass window and got sentenced to 90 days at
cleaning up some secondhand brick, building a sor- the house of correction.
ghum mill. So he suggested that instead of camping in I stayed there two weeks, being well fed and get-
his pasture, why didn’t I come up and sit down on a ting in some swimming and some paddling around.
box and clean brick. He said, I'll pay you so much an Then 1 moved on down the river. They were disap-
hour, and you can sleep in a bed. So I got three days’ pointed to see me go but made me promise to stop in

[PAGE 080]

150 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 151


and see them if I came back. dent. That summer I started hypnotizing my sisters,
When I started out I couldn't pull my canoe out of my brother, and some of the kids in Lowell, Wiscon-
water. I could swim about 25 feet. I didn’t have a pup sin. Every spare bit of time 1 had spent hypnotizing,
tent. I just camped wherever I could. By the time I devising various techniques and various ways of get-
got back, my chest measurement had increased six ting hypnotic subjects to do things. When 1 got back
inches. I could paddle upstream 50 miles in a day, for my third year of college, Hull established a semi-
from 6 in the morning until 10 at night —50 miles up- nar on hypnosis. I reported in full on all the work I
stream against a four-mile current. I had a tremen- had done in my spare time during the summer. Hull
dous shoulder and chest development. I could swing and the graduate students in psychology discussed
up my canoe over my head and carry it up adam. And the meaning of it. Also during that year 1 did a lot
going downstream, when I came to a dam, there were of experimental work with college students as hyp-
always posts around them. I’d shinny up a post and notic subjects, and 1 would report on that each week
sit there in my trunks and my knotted handkerchief at the seminar. With the result, by the end of my third
on my head reading a German book that I took along. year in college I had hypnotized several hundred peo-
People would gather at that sight. Td always tell them ple and carried on quite a number of experiments in
I was waiting to get my canoe over the dam. It was the laboratory. I also demonstrated hypnosis at the
always volunteer service. (Laughter) Mendota State Hospital, and for various professors
H: You had decided early to go to medical school? in the medical school and the psychology department.
E: In deciding to be a doctor, I once suffered — at the age H: What year did you graduate from medical school?
of eight — a very severe toothache. I went to the family E: 1928. Getting a job was difficult. I had to take part-time
doctor who not only pulled that tooth and eased the my first year in medical school, and I worked with the
pain, but gave me a great big nickel, thereby making state board of control. I majored in psychology as a
me the richest man in the world and the happiest. pre-medical student, and Professor Clarke Powell had
Right then and there I swore that when I grew up I’d recommended me to the State Board of Control where
be a doctor and make people happy. Thereafter I ad- Frank Richmond headed the psychiatric field depart-
hered to that idea of being a doctor. ment. So I did psychological examinations in the prisH: When did you develop the interest in hypnosis? on system in Wisconsin, including Milwaukee, and the
E: At the age of 12, one of the local boys sent away for a orphanages.
cheap pamphlet on hypnosis. He wanted to hypnotize H: Giving examinations to the prisoners?
me. 1 told him I was going to wait until I was a man E: Yes, to ali the inmates. Boys’ industrial school, girls’
and knew something, and I'd learn hypnosis and really industrial school, Milwaukee County House of Cor-
learn it. I didn’t learn anything about hypnosis until rections, the women’s reformatory, the young men’s
at the close of my second year in college. I witnessed reformatory, the women’s state prison, and the men’s
Clark L. Hull demonstrate for the pre-medics. I took state prison. The state prison for the criminally in-
one of the subjects to my room and worked on him. sane. The state home for neglected and dependent
I hypnotized another student, and then another stu- children. And then various jails and orphanages.

[PAGE 081]

152 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 153


H: This was while you were going to medical school, or medical school. Plus the regular salary from the Board
after? of Control. I really had a very nice time.
E: While I was going. So I actually enrolled in medical H: Were you planning then to go into psychiatry?
school for five years. Getting through the first year, E: In high school they taught a course in psychology, and
when I wanted to be full-time in medical school, there I looked through the book and decided to wait until
was one serious difficulty —no job. So I went down to I got to the university before I studied psychology.
the State Board of Control, and beginning in Sep- It was too important a subject to try to study in high
tember, every week I had one or two statistical re- school. So when I got to the university, I started in
ports on criminality put on the desk of the President on psychology. That, of course, crystalized my inter-
of the State Board of Control. They were things he est in psychiatry. And throughout medical school 1
was interested in for getting better appropriations, knew I was going into psychiatry. I interned in Col-
getting news story releases. Then in November, the orado, a special internship at Colorado Psychopathic
first Monday, there was no report. The president was Hospital of three months’ duration. While looking for
furious, and he demanded that I be called in. He asked a placement, I did some special research work on child
me point blank what I was being paid for. Why didn't psychiatry, analyzing the case histories of about 1200
I have more reports? I told him I wasn't being paid children. I summarized it, got a job in Rhode Island
anything. So he said, “Well, if that's the case you're as Senior Psychiatrist, writing my thesis for my Bach-
on the payroll right now!” So that settled my job. In elor’s degree. I had postponed that, because I wanted
addition to that on every holiday, or vacation, 1 was to write a thesis that would be interesting rather than
paid my expenses and a per diem for some special ex- routine. In my State Board of Control work, examin-
amination the state board wanted. So I was steadily ing all the convicts gave me an opportunity to make
involved. Christmas vacation, if I remember correctly, a study of crime in various relationships. So I wrote
I was paid 10 dollars a day plus expenses to do ex- a thesis on that. Murchison had done a study on in-
aminations. So I managed to make enough money. telligence and crime, and I did another. Then I also
Also, my first year in medical school I arrived with wrote on feeble-mindedness, abandonment, and crime.
$75. I bicycled around Madison looking for some op- When I presented my Bachelor’s thesis, the commit-
portunity. I saw a house for rent at $70 per month. tee looked it over and offered me my choice. I had
I looked it over, saw the landlord, gave him $70, and enrolled in graduate school anyway, and the commit-
put up a sign, “Rooms for Students.” I talked the tee told me “we can give you an honors on your thesis,
registrar into delaying the payment of fees. I took in or we'll accept it as a combined Master’s and Bache-
students who were working their way through and lor’s thesis.” So I preferred to take the combined thesis
were delighted to furnish their own linens at a reduced rather than honors, because that gave me my Mas-
rent. I talked some secondhand storage companies ter’s degree.
into letting me store some beds and some furniture H: When you say you delayed the Bachelor’s, was it in
for them. So I had the place furnished, and the rooms medical school that you finished it?
rented out. That essentially paid my way through E: While | was in medical school.

[PAGE 082]

154 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 155


H: You mean you got your Master’s along the way while credit for them, I only got course credit in case |
you were getting your medical degree. wanted a Ph.D. also.
E: Yes. While I was in medical school, I lacked some cred- I paid for my room the first year in medical school
its for my Master’s degree. Mathematics, for one thing, by the simple process of rooming in a rooming house
trigonometry. So I went to the head of the depart- where the landlady was 70 years old. I did her cook-
ment of mathematics and explained I had physiology ing and her baking and her shopping and attended her
at the same hour trigonometry was given. Would he furnace. That way I got plenty of good food, and all
let me skip the trigonometry class if I could guarantee I wanted to eat.
to get a passing grade of 90. If it were 89, I’d take a That publication of my combined Master’s and
flunk. He was an awfully nice man, and he said that it Bachelor’s thesis was very helpful when I applied for
was against the university rules to permit cuts, but if a job at the Rhode Island State Hospital. Noyes, past
I wanted to take that chance I could. So I took make- president of the American Psychiatric Association,
up exams, and I came out with a grade of 90. I took was very much interested in someone who had just
my Latin the same way. I wanted to take some other completed his internship and who had already pub-
courses, and I had been studying while driving on the lished- some three papers I think it was I had pub-
milk route, during high school and during the sum- lished. So he hired me as senior on the service. When
mer. I purchased a Latin textbook and studied Latin I arrived there he outlined my duties and asked if I
throughout the summer for two summers, because knew of anybody who wanted a junior position. So I
Latin was not taught in the high school I went to. So looked over the junior position, and instead of taking
when I got to college, I asked permission from the $2,500 a year in the senior position, I took the $1,960
Latin department to enroll in the Latin class but just job and a junior position. First thing I did, I was as-
skip it. I guaranteed a grade of 93. I actually got a signed the reception service, and I started doing ex-
grade of 97. I took some German courses the same tensive mental examinations, and psychometric ex-
way. I didn’t want to waste time in German class, and aminations. Then there was a special project; to get
I knew the habit of the professor who taught the class. acquainted with psychiatric patients as quickly as
When she was through teaching that hour, she always possible, I started doing mental examinations on all
went to the German library. There she would find me the patients in the reception building, which made a
reading a German novel much more advanced than very good impression on Dr. Noyes.
was being given in German. It was a very difficult There was an opening on the research service at
way of learning German, but I had another class at Worchester State Hospital, and he recommended me
the German hour. I proved by my ability to read Ger- for that position. I had heard about Worchester State
man novels that it would be all right for me to skip Hospital when I was at Colorado. I was informed that
beginning German. One year in medical school, I car- anybody who ever wanted to learn something in psy-
ried 31 hours one semester and the next one I start- chiatry ought to spend some time there, because every
ed to carry 33 hours because there were a lot of ad- well-known psychiatrist in the United States had been
ditional courses I wanted to take. J didn’t get hourly al Worchester State Llospital at least some time. Adolf

[PAGE 083]

156 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 157


Meyer started there, Brill was there, and so on. When of Supervisors to improve this staff. With you here
Dr. Noyes recommended that I go there, I very gladly at a high salary, I can argue now that we've got to
took the job there as junior psychiatrist in the re- have a staff in keeping with you.” The result was that
search service. Soon I was senior psychiatrist and he was able to enforce his plan. The staff jumped from
then was made chief psychiatrist. seven men to 26 men, and the salaries went up all
I had not been allowed to do any work in hypnosis around. I went to Eloise in 1934 in the spring, and I
during my internship at Colorado General. I didn’t met the Professor of Psychiatry at the Wayne Univer-
dare mention it. They had investigated me when I ap- sity College of Medicine. We discussed psychiatry,
plied for the internship, to make certain I was a re- and he promptly asked me to substitute for him be-
spectable medical student. I was warned that I would cause he felt he was getting old. So I started in as an
lose my internship if I did any hypnosis. All through Instructor, and he promptly promoted me to Assist-
medical school I had been doing hypnotic work. The ant Professor. Then I got certified in psychiatry, so
department of pharmacology had sponsored me, Clark I was made Associate Professor in 1939. I had been
Hull had sponsored me. The dean of the medical school working in association with the Psychology Depart-
had sponsored me, and the Department of Internal ment instructing students, training psychology stu-
Medicine had favored it. So I had been well protected dents in clinical psychology. Every summer I had one
in medical school. When it came to the question of in- or two interns in clinical psychology. I supervised a
ternship, there was a lot of doubt because there had Master’s thesis, a Ph.D. thesis, for the psychology de-
been some newspaper publicity. When I got to Rhode partment, both at Wayne University and at the Uni-
Island, Dr. Noyes warned me that the Board of Super- versity of Michigan. I also taught in the Social Serv-
visors would not tolerate any hypnosis. So that had ice Department with the result that Wayne University
to be abandoned. But when I got to Worchester on named me full Professor in the graduate school. As
the research service, separate from the main hospital, a result of my hypnotic work, Michigan State College
the general attitude was, “anything goes.” From chiro- offered me a Professorship in Clinical Psychology. So
practic to hypnosis. So I published a number of papers I taught there in addition.
there and did a great deal of experimental work. H: In addition? All these simultaneously?
The Wayne County General Hospital, Eloise, Mich- E: Yes. With the development of the war, I also worked
igan, had been looking for several years for some- at the Induction Board. I worked in the wards sub-
one to head the department of psychiatric research stituting, so I could combine my Board work with the
and training. There was a staff of seven men and over teaching of medical students. I’d take the medical
3,000 patients, psychiatric patients. None of the staff students there and give them a course in applied,
was well trained in psychiatry. So they hired me as clinical psychiatry, discussing the inductees with them
the director of psychiatric research and training at a as they went through. The medical students were very
considerably greater salary than I was receiving at appreciative. I also took down students in clinical
Worchester and a considerably greater salary than psychology, so that they could have some actual clin-
the men on the staff had. The statement to me was, ical experience.
“You are window dressing. I want to force the Board TI: Just what, was “Wloise”?

[PAGE 084]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 159


E: Eloise was established over 100 years ago as the Wayne “You'll have to risk it.” So I took it, and seven days
County Poor Farm. They brought out a psychotic per- later I developed anaphylactic shock which required
son, and then they tended to bring out more. Finally repeated emergency treatment with adrenalin. For the
they had enough patients there so they needed a Post next 15 months I was up and down with serum
Office. The Superintendent was asked to supply a sickness. Joint pains, muscle pains, and sudden col-
name. He said he had list after list of names for the lapse from the serum sickness. The result was that
post office. Finally, as a joke, he added his grand- I became increasingly sensitive to pollen. Pd always
daughter's name, Eloise. That was the one the Post suffered from hay fever, and my sensitivity to pollens
Office accepted. At the time I was there, Eloise had increased tremendously, with the result that I land-
about 4,000 —over 3,000 when I arrived, and 4,000 by ed in the hospital several times in rather serious con-
the time I left — mentally ill patients in a 1,500 bed dition. I was advised to leave Michigan and seek
general hospital. And 3,000 to 5,000 poor farm in- another climate entirely. I studied the map, and that
mates, all under one general superintendency. So the led to the selection of Phoenix, Arizona. I came here
population ranged continuously from 7,000 to 11,000. in July, 1948. I spent the summer regaining my health
You had every conceivable kind of psychosis and phys- and then joined a friend of mine at the Arizona State
ical disorder imaginable. As a research place, I had Hospital. He was the superintendent. I had known
all the material you could ever imagine. Students of him in Detroit, Michigan. The Arizona State Hospital
anthropology would come in there and spend a few was badly understaffed. So we started planning to
weeks. build up the hospital. During the course of the six
H: Was it officially a state hospital? months I was there, I received letters from various
E: No, it's a county hospital. Then in the 1940s it was de- medical schools from students asking if they could
cided to change the name from the Eloise Hospital take their psychiatric residency here. But the Arizona
and Infirmary to the Wayne County General Hospital State Hospital up to that time had been famous for
and Infirmary. Because it was county property. The the political brawls that resulted in changes in ad-
Post Office still remained Eloise, Michigan. The en- ministration. I had been there from October until
tire town of Eloise is the hospital. April when the superintendent resigned and I reH: Did you live on the hospital grounds? signed and a couple of others. I went into private pracE: We lived on the hospital grounds, just as we had at Wor- tice here. It was my intention to stay at the Arizona
chester, Massachusetts. Rhode Island also. Then in State Hospital for about a year and work to build it
1947, I rode a bike, because walking was hard. I fell up and then go into private practice. I went into prac-
off the bike, and I got a very nasty gash in my tice six months earlier, as it was. 1 left Michigan on
forehead. A lot of dirt got thoroughly ground into it. July 1, arrived here on a leave of absence with pay.
I knewI was sensitive to horse serum, and I had not That was continued until I notified them that I was
taken any anti-tetanus toxin. So I spent a couple of resigning. I resigned, I think it was October 14, from
days deciding whether I should take the risk of the Eloise and assumed my duties at Arizona State
anti-tetanus serum or not. All the medical advice was, Hospital that same day. I joined it as a staff physi-

[PAGE 085]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 161


cian and very soon was the Clinical Director and Ac- the language, and the ideational content. Now of
ting Assistant Superintendent. course you get some historical data, but you would
H: Was this the first time you had gone into private prac- not necessarily get anything about the father, the
tice? mother, the brother or the sisters, the uncle, the aunts.
E: Even in Worchester, Massachusetts, I was not sup- Insight and judgment. The character of the affect.
posed to have private patients. I accepted private pa- H: You were married when?
tients, and it was condoned because I did not charge E: 1 married the first time in 1925. I was very idealistic.
them. Instead, in return for psychiatric help, they “I’m married and I’m going to be happy.” I soon found
served as experimental cases, or they gave permission out if I had any happiness it would be in the children.
to use the data for publication. So it was esentially Bert, Lance, and Carol came along. There was a di-
a research proposition. When I went to Michigan, I vorce, and to hell with idealistic ideas about marriage.
was not supposed to accept private patients, but it Then I saw a pretty girl walking across campus at the
was finally agreed that I could. Some for pay and University of Michigan in March. I decided I would
some for experimental investigation and exploratory marry that girl. In August, I got my divorce. The next
purposes. At Michigan, as a result of my publications week I dated that girl and got engaged to her.
and a lot of newspaper publicity my writings got, H: She became an assistant of yours?
there were a tremendous number of people who came E: Yes, I did not know her name. I called up Wayne Uni-
out there to see me. I could select interesting cases. versity and said I wanted an assistant to work with
Being Director of Psychiatric Research and Training, me in some research. They sent that girl I had seen
I always had my choice of the patients in the hospital. on the campus of the University of Michigan. She was
I would do a very careful mental examination of a attending the Academy of Arts there. So I hired her
new patient and avoid getting any historical material as an assistant on June 18. My divorce did not clear
at all. Just get his delusional content, his halluci- until August. As soon as I got my divorce, I dated
natory content, and a good description of his affec- her. Then she finished college. It was on June 18th
tive reactions. From that material I would go and that I got my Bachelor’s degree, my M.A. degree, and
write a social service history of him. The other thing my M.D. degree. I hired Betty as my assistant on
was to read the social service history on a patient, and June 18. She graduated on June 18 and we were mar-
then write, from speculation, the mental examination ried on June 18. Allan was an induced labor so he
on the patient. I did that extensively in order to com- would not arrive on June 18 and would have a birth-
pare my speculations with the actuality. The result day all his own.
was that it helped me to judge better all the time what FH: I take it that none of your children, like Bert and Lance,
really to expect from this hallucination or this delu- have shown any particular interest either in hypnosis
sion, or what to expect from this experiential thing. or medical school.
I did that for four years at Worchester. E: No. Both Bert and Lance said that a doctor works too
H: What did you include in a mental examination? hard. Because I did work hard. I spent my evenings
E: General behavior and attitude. Then the structure of doing research, studying, reading. Even though I did

[PAGE 086]

162 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 163


play with them. I used to tell the children “White ample, one paper I had written, and I had written it
Tummy” stories about a froggy with a green back and from memory rather than the case record. That night
a white tummy. I’ve taken “White Tummy” through when I went to bed, I was thinking, “Tomorrow I'll
thousands and thousands of adventures. With Bert, get out the record and compare my written account
Lance, Carol, Betty Alice, Allan, Bobby, Roxy, and with the actual case record.” That night, as I often do,
Kristy.* Since I’m color blind in large part, and pur- I had a dream. I was back in Michigan. I worked with
ple is one color I see, I use that. my patient there. J had all the data laid out, andI realH: Is your colorblindness around reds? ly went through every bit of it. Examining it to see
E: Red and green. what parts I would use when I wrote the paper. The
H: 1 take it you never had analysis as part of training. next day I got out the case record; I had really reE: ve consulted various analysts, some of the leading viewed it completely.
analysts in the country, discussing this possibility. H: And you consider that dream “auto hypnosis”?
There statement to me was, “Why don’t you follow E: Yes, because when I go to sleep I intend to have a dream
your own field of interest? You'll probably contribute in which Pll cover something. I never know exactly
more that way.” what it is that I will cover. Then maybe Pll have a
H: I notice even in your early paper, “Ejaculatio Praecox,” dream and not know it for a week. Then all of a sud-
in 1934, you were pretty psychoanalytic about it. den an idea will come to me that I better write this.
E: I’ve always been interested in psychoanalysis. I’ve read I don’t know what I’m going to write until I’ve fin-
extensively, but better than that I’ve discussed it with ished writing it, and then the dreams will come to me.
quite a few psychoanalysts. I dreamed it through, and maybe a week later
H: Were you ever a good subject for hypnosis? recorded it.
E: 1 learned about hypnosis by myself without reading any H: You can deliberately set out to have a dream and have
books, just trying it. I taught a lot of people. But they it?
were all my students. As the years went by, I’m still E: Yes, but not necessarily remember it the next morning.
in contact with my students. I’ve tried repeatedly to Sometimes [ll go three weeks, or a month. I’ll mislay
go into trance for somebody. I can do auto hypnosis, a manuscript unconsciously. I know better than to try
but I never developed a heterohypnotic trance. and find it. Maybe a month later, 1 find it accidentally.
H: I believe you mentioned at the seminar that you use What happens that day? A special patient that I want
auto hypnosis for pain. to include in that paper comes in that day. Of course,
E: For pain? That’s right. And to write papers. Not the en- T'd known a month ago that the patient was coming
tire paper, to check over what I have written. For ex- in a month. Here I discover my manuscript is very
fresh in my mind, see my patient, and recognize why
and how I should use the data from that patient.
*The Erickson children are as follows: Albert, born in 1929; Lance, born in H: When you do auto hypnosis, is it this kind of thing, like
1931; Carol, born in 1934; Betty Alice, born in 1938; Allan, born in 1941; Bobby, born in 1945; Roxy, born in 1949. Kristina, born in 1951, was'the only child
producing a dream, or do you manage to go into a
to become a physician. trance on your own?

[PAGE 087]

A Biographical Conversation 165
164 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


E: 1 can sit here at my desk and interview a patient and abdomen, the right leg, and the left leg. I was once

feel that I can understand the patient better if I were able to chin myself three times with my right arm,

in an auto hypnotic trance. I go into an auto hypnotic four or five with my left. I could chin myself 25 times

trance, and deal with the patient adequately enough in succession with both arms, especially after my canoe
so the patient returns. I dismiss the patient and then trip. But now it is difficult to just get my arm up. I’m

come out of the hypnotic trance, look at the clock, and a lot more unsteady on my feet since 1953.
H: This was another strain of polio?
realize that I must have completed the interview.
What are my notes? There are none, so I pick up my E: Yes.
FH: So you have had two of the three strains?
pen, and one by one the notes come.
H: You mean when you wake up you have amnesia for the E: One more to go.
H That's remarkable. Have you ever heard of people get-
interview?
E: I have amnesia for the interview. I merely pick up my ting them both?

pen and start writing. The first note. So I make a con- E: Oh yes. There's a girl over in Mesa. I think there have

scious note of that, and I write it down and read it. been several reported in the literature. I’m still learn-

It’s a very delightful experience. 1ng new movements with my arm and with my leg.
H: I notice when you smoke a cigarette, you keep it in your
H: (Laughs) Is this amnesia inevitable from your auto
right hand. Is that to keep it in use?
hypnosis?
E: Yes. I don't have an extension phone in here for a very
E: Not always.
deliberate reason. To walk from here to the telephone
H: If you always went that deep it would be?
E: A Professor of Psychiatry was my patient and suddenly repeatedly gives me a certain amount of necessary ex-

discovered that I was in a deep auto hypnotic trance. ercise. Or else P'd be sitting here too long. Yet a year

He got very alarmed. He started yelling at me to ago Easter, in spite of the second attack of polio, I

awaken. (Laughter) I tried to explain to him I was in made one of the difficult mountain climbs. With two

an auto hypnotic trance, but that didn’t satisfy him. canes.


So I had to interrupt my trance and wake up. I ex- H: You seem much improved from how you were at the

plained my use of it to him, that I could understand seminar in March of last year, so 1 gather the more

him better at an unconscious level. He’s about the you use the muscles the better.

only patient that ever recognized the auto hypnotic E: I was having a tremendous amount of pain in my mus-
cles at that seminar. Just an immense, horrible amount
trance.
of pain. At the present time I had to triple my intake
H: Was he a hypnotist himself?
of calcium to prevent muscle cramps. I can get musE: He had experience with hypnosis.
cle cramps that are so severe that they tear the musH: Have you ever used time distortion yourself?
cles. Not long ago I got a cramp in this muscle here,
E: I have unintentionally, accidentally.
H: 1 could use some of that to help organize this interview. and it caused an inter-muscular hemorrhage. That

E: My second attack of polio was in 1953. I lost a whole really hurt!
11: Can you influence the pain with an auto hypnotic trance?
lot more muscles in my arm, my back, my sides, my

[PAGE 088]

166 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Biographical Conversation 167


E: Often, if the cramp starts slowly enough, but when it Two in one week, and the pathological intoxication is
comes like that, it’s there, and all you can think of — relatively rare. I suppose it would be interesting to
well, you can’t really think. I’ve lost the muscles in set down the patients in order of diagnosis. At the in-
my mouth, my tongue. Perhaps you've noticed now duction board we didn’t see a single multiple sclerosis
and then my speech slurs? Have you noticed my facial for one whole year, and then one day we saw six of
paralysis? It shows up beautifully on photographs. them.
The right side is partially paralyzed. H: 1 gather from your papers that you did a lot of quick
H: I noticed when you were imitating anger you were us- therapy with some of the men being inducted, to help
ing both sides of your face. | them get in.
E: It’s not extended. But like wiggling your ears, I don’t E: 1 don’t know how many draft boards I was a consultant
know how. I had even wrestled in college. Because my for around Detroit. There were special cases, border-
movements were so very, very quick. I could substi- line cases; I saw a tremendous number. Peculiar ma-
tute quickness of movement for power of movement. terial.
I did a lot of wrestling — not in a gym, in a house. One H: Your papers show it.
of my favorite sports. E: I think you can write up a dozen or two dozen routine
H: Getting back to your work, one of the things that has schizophrenics and you haven't contributed any more
puzzled me a bit is where you--do you particularly get than the other fellow who has written up a dozen
a unique kind of patient? I mean you get more odd routine schizophrenics. But if you run across one case
patients than anyone I know. It might be because you that illustrates some point uniquely and clearly and
write them up that it’s interesting, or it might be they understandably, then you've actually contributed.
just come to you. I never heard of problems like hav- How many appendectomies are written up each year?
ing to pee through a tube and that sort of thing. They used a different kind of catgut. In teaching, all
E: Good heavens, I even encountered them when I was a the students always sent their odd friends to me. Of
kid on the farm. The average psychiatrist does not course, there’s a certain prestige that somebody known
ever try to find out those things. What’s odd and to hypnotize has, so it attracts people.
peculiar about you? What is the thing that you'd least H: One of the things Gregory Bateson has said, and I’m
like to tell me? And it’s perfectly amazing the things never sure what Gregory says about you, how much
that I hear. of it is fantasy and how much isn't, because he feels
H: I just wondered if those people seek out a hypnotist. there’s a magical quality in all this. He said that once
E: Yes, there’s a tendency for that. They consider them- when you were giving a lecture, there was a man in
selves so odd and so peculiar they seek out another the audience who disagreed with you. You knew about
odd one. (Laughs) Patients seem to run in cycles. I it beforehand. While you were giving a lecture on a
hadn’t had an alcoholic for a year; the same week I scientific subject you induced that man to agree with
got two beautiful alcoholics. Both pathological intox- you.

ications. That is, they drank infrequently but as soon E: Yes.
as they drank they were berserk, and I mean berserk. H: Can you tell me about that?

[PAGE 089]

168 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


E: The man is now a Professor of Psychology at Harvard
University. His theory of hypnosis was that the sub-
ject behaves as the operator defines. And Fremont-
Smith organized a seminar, something on emotions, INDEX
and I knew this man was there and that he disagreed
with me about hypnosis. I disagreed emphatically
with his theory. During the course of that lecture,
which had been prepared ahead of time—1 didn't know
Alliance, therapist and client, 5, in ripping plaster off wall,
that the man was going to be there —it finally wound 29 81-82

up with the man agreeing not only with my lecture Amnesia, 164 A case of well done steaks,
Analogies, 4, 12, 37, 88, 130 82-84
but agreeing that I was right in discrediting his book.
Anaphylactic shock, 159 The boy learning to shop difH: Well, now how did you manage this? What was the lec- Antagonism, and therapist, 115 ferently from mother and
ture on? Anxiety, 15 father, 88
The dawdling medical student
E: Damned if I remember now.
Bateson, G., 145, 167 asked to delay report, 91-92
H: Did you do it by an emphasis on certain words? The bedwetter who learned to
E: An emphasis on certain words. And in looking around Cases: improve his script with
at the group, fixing my eye on him. The girl who thought her feet mother, 94-98
were too large, 12-18 The boy who picked at an ulH: You didn’t induce a trance in him? The fat girl who discovered cer on his forehead, 100-106
E: Well, he was a bit afraid of me. 1 carefully directed a she was sexually attractive, The two boys who learned a
word, or a phrase, or a clause at him. Margaret Mead 18-21 better way to fight, 107-
The expectant grandmother, 109
thought that he went into a trance. Bateson thought 23-25 The boy required to drink his
that he went into a trance. Bateson and Mead were The young woman still at- milk, 109-110
very impressed with what I did to that man. tached to her parents, 35- The doctor's son who was at
37 the bottom of his class,
H: It impressed Gregory, I know that. It has made him
The parents who built an ad- 112-116
very uneasy. (Laughs) dition on the house, 42-44 The man who came to mangle
E: Well, of course the man had to be shaky in his own The family that insisted on the therapist, 116-117
beliefs to do that. Somewhere in my files I have a let- complete togetherness, 48- The schizophrenic who walked
49 while mother read, 118-121
ter from him written since I’ve been in Phoenix, prais- The family who took turns The woman who resisted lift-
ing me very highly and again expressing doubts about tearing each other down, ing her blouse, 123-124
his theory. It was written in conjunction with sending 49-50 The boy scout who slept on
The dual trance induction of stones, 124-126
one of his prize students to spend the summer with
two students, 54-55 The boy who learned to read
me. The boy in a trance trying to by therapist’s mistakes,
see a dog, 58-59 126-127
The woman who learned the The boy who learned about
scientific name for stomach muscle control for bedwet-
rumble, 71-72 ting, 127--1380
The little girl who was joined The boy who had to deliber-


160

[PAGE 090]

170 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Index 171


Cases (continued) Hull, Clark L., 150 Weight problems, 18 Zen, 138
ately wet his bed, 131-132 Hypnosis: 54, child, 58, and an- Withdrawal, 54
The boy who learned to laugh tagonizing, 118, Erickson's
at his temper tantrums, first use of, 150, autohypno-
132-133 sis and pain, 162, and
A vicious boy the therapist dreams, 163, and amnesia,
wouldn't treat, 133-134 164
The man who put dynamite Hurt feelings, 10
traps out in the desert, 134- Hysteria, 124
135
The who was sat on by his
Impotence, 85
mother, 135-138
Insight therapy, 31, 34, 39, 41,
The helpless girl who discov-
44, 45
ered her capabilities, 138-
Instrumentalizing children, 89
140
Interrupting, 9, 25
Change, and schizophrenia, 22,
in family, 45
Children, and parent conflict, Manipulation, in families, 90
80, 85, 92, 105, 107 Masturbation, 132
Communication, iii, restricting, Mental examinations, 160
26, recrimination, 28, and Muscle cramps, 165
body movements, 146
Compliments, therapeutic use Neurosis, and trauma, 14
of, 14, 20
Compulsion, 104 Ordeals, 94, 99, 101, 120
Contradictions, 57, 59, 65
Pain, 162, 165
Differentiation, 135 Paralysis, 144, 166
Directives: followed, 52, 55, 120, Polio, 144, 164
123, unexpected, 81, to quar- Psychoanalysis, 162
rel, 93, ordeals, 94, 99, 101,
120 Resistance, 54, 124
Discipline, of children, 37
Disengaging, 23, 28, 29, 34, 39, Schizoid personality, 33, 42
40, 47 Schizophrenia: and therapy,
Dreams and hypnosis, 163 and family therapy, 22, 31,
34, and mother, 33, 40, 45,
Enuresis, 94, 124, 128, 131 and separateness, 49, and
Erickson, biographical informa- systems, 84, 118
tion, 141-168 Self punishment, 125
Spatial position of clients, 2
Family interview technique, 2
Family therapy, ii Temper tantrums, 132, 137
Therapy, and present, 138
Goals, therapeutic, iii Time distortion, 164.
Transvestite, 132
Hallucination, 54 Trauma, therapeutic, 15, 19
