[PAGE 001]

CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION vI


CHAPTER 1 The Body Image


CHAPTER 2 Voice Problems, Enuresis,
Insomnia 34


CHAPTER 3 Headaches, Unconscious
Conversation, Self-assertiveness 62


CHAPTER 4 The Unconscious, Insight, and
Copyright © 1985 by Jay Haley the Use of Analogies 90

All rights reserved.
First Edition CHAPTER 5 Alcoholism and Giving Directives 109

No part. of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
CHAPTER 6 The Case of Inhibited Ann 123
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, or
otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
CHAPTER 7 Classifying a Person and
Printed in the United States of America Starting Therapy 150


CHAPTER 8 Failure, and What is Essential
for Change 198
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 84-052027
CHAPTER 9 Some Psychotic Problems 223
ISBN Q-9323513-01-4

Published by Triangle Press CHAPTER 10 Ordeals 254
Distributed by W. W. Norton & Co., Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue,
New York, N. Y. 10110
W. W. Norton & Co., Ltd., 37 Great Russell Street, London, CHAPTER Ll Substituting Symptoms, Puzzles,
WC1B3NU
Passing Examinations 265

[PAGE 002]

vi Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


CHAPTER 12 Brief Intervention into a
Performance Problem 277


APPENDICES Verbatim Interviews
INTRODUCTION
A Depressed Man 291
A Phantom Limb Pain 311


Index 327
Milton H. Erickson, M.D., was the first strategic thera-
pist. He might even be called the first therapist, since he
was the first major clinician to concentrate on how to
change people. Previously, clinicians devoted themselves
to understanding the human mind; they were explorers of
the nature of man. Changing people was of secondary in-
terest. In contrast, Erickson had one major concern in his
professional life —finding ways to influence people. Wheth-
er influencing people with hypnosis, persuasion, or direc-
tives, Erickson focused upon developing a variety of tech-
niques to relieve psychological and physical distress. He
seems to have been the first major therapist to expect clini-
cians to innovate ways to solve a wide range of problems
and to say that the responsibility for therapeutic change
lies with the therapist, rather than with the patient.
In the conversations contained in this volume, Dr. Erick-
son expresses his basic ideas about the theory and prac-
tice of therapy. It is extraordinary to be able to present
interviews with a master therapist describing all aspects
of his work at a time when he was most productive. Many
readers who met Dr. Erickson in his later years, and who
thought of him as a physically infirm old guru with almost
magical hypnotic powers, will be surprised by what he has
to say about therapy. During these conversations he was
in his prime, conducting a busy practice while also travel-
ing and teaching everywhere in the country. There is no
magic in his work: He was a man who trained carefully to
know his business and expected others to do the same.


vii

[PAGE 003]

Introduction ix
vill Conversatioas with Milton TL. Erickson


The conversations, beginning in 1955, continued through different from knowing how to change them with hypnosis.
1968. This is Volume 1, containing Dr. Erickson’s views
To better understand hypnosis and brief therapy tech-

on changing individuals. Volume 2 presents his therapy
niques I sought out Dr. Erickson as a consultant. At the

with married couples, and Volume 3 his ways of changing same time the Bateson project was beginning to study difchildren and families. Discussions with him about hypnosis ferent therapy techniques, and we also wished to include
have been selected out and will, it is hoped, be presented his special approach in that research.
in a later volume.
Besides the brief therapy conversations, this volume in-
These conversations were the product of Gregory Bate- cludes many conversations John Weakland and I had with
son’s research project on communication, which extend- Erickson over the years as part of our investigation of the
ed from 1952 to 1962.* John Weakland and I were research nature of communication in therapy. Gregory Bateson is
involved in some of these conversations, particularly the
associates on that project, and Don D. Jackson and William F. Fry were psychiatric consultants. These conver- ones on family issues. Also, to show Erickson at work, in
sations with Erickson were primarily about the nature of the Appendix to this volume I have included two verbatim
therapy, about hypnosis, and about ways of describing hu- interviews of patients done by Erickson. One of them is
man interaction, because the project focused upon those a consultation at a seminar in 1963, where difficult patients
topics. Bateson had introduced the cybernetic perspective were brought in for him to interview as a demonstration.
of the self-correcting system into the field of psychology The second is with Erickson and a patient he relieved of
and psychiatry after attending the Macy Foundation meet- pain, who talks about the experience of therapy with Erickings on that subject in the 1940s. By the mid-1950s our son. The identities of the patients have been disguised.
The conversations presented here were not conducted or
research project was attempting to explain schizophrenia
recorded with any idea of publication. Gregory Bateson’s reas a product of a family system, and we were beginning
search tradition was to film and record data. Audio recordto do therapy with whole families. We were also explain-
ings were an alternative to taking notes and allowed us to
ing other kinds of symptomatic behavior as systematic re-
listen at our leisure and consider the more subtle aspects
sponses to intimates, partly as the result of observations
of Erickson’s ideas. Since we did not anticipate publication,
in our private practices. In 1957 Jackson expressed this
the conversations were not designed with an audience in
view in a paper, “The Question of Family Homeostasis.”**
mind. John Weakland and I usually prepared questions in
This volume begins with conversations I had with Dr.
Erickson in 1957. In private practice, I was attempting to advance that were relevant to our special research interests
at that time; we went from topic to topic in a sequence
do brief therapy using hypnosis andI realized that I need-
which was important to us but would not interest a reader
ed to know more about it. Although I had made use of hyp-
today. Therefore, I have organized and selected the connosis in research and taught it in psychiatric seminars, I
versations with today’s reader in mind. When there is a
was finding that knowing how to hypnotize people is quite
break between sections of transcript, I have indicated it
*Haley, J. “Development of a Theory: The History of a Research Project.” with three asterisks (* * *), That also may indicate an inIn: Reflections on Therapy. Washington, D.C.: Family Therapy Institute, 1981.
terruption of an hour, or a day, or more. At times the
** Jackson, D. D. “The Question of Family Homeostasis,” Psychiat. Quart.
Suppl. 1957, 31, 79-90, Part 1. reader might find it disconcerting when a line of conver-

[PAGE 004]

X Conversations with Milton IH. Erickson Introduction Xi


sation is interrupted and not continued. In such instances therapy mystique of that time it was Dr. Erickson’s emwe never resumed where we left off after a break. phasis upon the real world and common sense that was par-
I might mention in passing that interviewing Erickson ticularly difficult to grasp.
required some skill. Not only did he have his own ideas Another problem for John Weakland and I at the time
about what should be discussed — nol necessarily our re- was the fact that we were developing a theory that sympsearch interests — but also the topics were complex. Our toms were functional in a family system. We were contask was to gather specific information about therapy, as cerned with elaborating the homeostatic idea that people
well as to stimulate him to free associate, so that what he governed each other’s behavior by their responses to one
had not presented previously in papers or lectures, or per- another. Inevitably, this view suggests that a family
haps even said before, might be expressed. He was develop- member reacts against, or must adapt to, a change in aning an approach to therapy which was new, and the prem- other family member. When we brought up this idea, Dr.
ises of it had not been articulated. Therefore, we needed Erickson responded as if we were presenting ideas that
to interview him about ideas and theory, as well as about would make therapy more difficult. He was interested in
cases which expressed his basic ideas and theory implicitly. change, not in how situations remain stable, which is the
It might be said that we were attempting to question a rev- systems view. That is, the homeostatic view is a way of
olutionary during a revolution, when all of us were unclear explaining how change does not occur; it is not a way of
about the direction in which the ideas and techniques were thinking about how to induce change. Today, when stuleading. dents talk to me about resistance, I feel the same irrita-
Reading these conversations, it seems obvious that at tion that Dr. Erickson must have felt. Thinking about retimes Dr. Erickson had to be patient with our obtuseness sistance is a handicap if one is seeking new ways to bring
and our difficulty in understanding some of his prem- about change, which was Erickson’s interest. Typically,
ises. Many readers today will find a similar difficulty with too, we were seeking theoretical generalizations and Dr.
Erickson’s ideas. In the 1950s he was particularly difficult Erickson was emphasizing the importance of recognizing
to understand because the therapy of that time was pri- the uniqueness of each person. It is hoped that the conmarily oriented toward the development of insight and un- versations that came out of our differences will be of value
covering of psychodynamics. The therapist was expected to a reader puzzling over these basic issues.
to be only an explorer with a patient of the ideas behind As we struggled in these conversations to understand
his problems and their roots in childhood. There was no Erickson’s approach, his ideas and cases often startled and
emphasis on changing people. Family therapy and behav- amazed us. They also delighted us because of their refreshior therapy were just beginning, and the idea of using a ing humor. The transcript does not fairly represent the
range of therapeutic techniques was unknown. Hypnosis laughter which so often took place as we enjoyed the abhad been essentially forbidden to the field for years, and surdity of some human problems and the absurdity of
so ideas based upon it were simply bewildering to the av- some of the solutions.
erage therapist at the time. Although every major psychi- The reader unfamiliar with Milton H. Erickson will find
atrist knew of Dr. Erickson, many of them thought he these conversations a lively presentation of his ideas and
came from another planet. It seems odd now, but in the approach to therapy. The reader who has read everything

[PAGE 005]

xii Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


written by and about Erickson will find the basic data on
his views here in his own words. Many of the case reports
will be familiar because I drew upon these conversations
for my book, Uncommon Therapy.* Some of these cases
Erickson told to other people, who then published them. CHAPTER 1
The Erickson scholar will have the opportunity to examine
these recordings of what Erickson actually said and compare them with the summaries of authors who considered The Body Image
themselves to be presenting his work.
Except for editorial corrections and the elimination of
side issues, the conversations are verbatim. Nothing is
changed in what Erickson or his interviewers said, although 1957. Present were Milton H. Erickson and Jay Haley.
at times there are guesses because of the quality of the recordings. The research-minded will find a copy of the orig- Haley: 1 have two reasons for being here. Our research
inal tape recordings of these conversations on file with The
project is about to begin an investigation of psychoMilton H. Erickson Foundation in Phoenix, Arizona.
therapy; were going to explain it. And I went into pri-
vate practice a few months ago doing brief hypnother-
apy on various kinds of symptoms. 1 find 1 don't know
enough about what I’m doing, so I want to find out
more about brief psychotherapy. I would like to pre-
sent you a description of about nine or ten patients,
which I think are typical, and have you tell me how
you would handle them.
Erickson: All right.
H: I have a whole week, so I expect I can learn all about
psychotherapy in that time. I wouldn’t expect that
anywhere else but here.
E: (Laughs) Well, we can have our dreams.
H: In my practice I get regular referrals of various kinds —
physical symptoms and some behavioral problems.
My difficulty is that I am referred to largely for hyp-
nosis, and I get quite a few people who are not very
good subjects. I'd like to help them even though they
are not good subjects, and I don’t know enough about
*Haley, J. Uncommon Therapy: The Psychiatrie Techniques of Milton H.
how to do brief therapy. I’ve been doing the more traErickson, M.D. New York: Norton, 1973.
ditional kind of therapy for three or four years. I know

[PAGE 006]

2 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Body Image 3


how to handle patients if I sit back and listen to them think that I can even persuade her that she is enough
and make comments once in a while. But when I have in a trance so that other kinds of suggestions can carry
people come to me expecting something in a hurry, the aura of hypnosis. Yet I feel that her problem isn’t
the hurry being anywhere from one or two to 20 ses- very complicated. She started to menstruate at 12—
sions, I don’t know enough about what sort of infor- perfectly normal. At 13 she was in a city during a
mation I need from them or what I need to do when bombing raid; she lived up on the hillside and saw the
I get that information. raid but she wasn’t injured in any way. For a year
[c: In brief therapy what are usually your problems? after that she didn’t menstruate. She returned to the
IT: Well, Lhave symptoms like headaches, menstrual pains, States with her mother, and at the age of 14 she began
a youth with a speech block, a woman who lost her to menstruate again. This was very painful. She has
voice, insomnia, and so on. I would really like to go menstruated painfully ever since.
over some of them one by one. Mostly I get problems E: Is she a pretty girl?
from doctors who think that hypnosis will cure like HT: Yes.
a miracle, you know, and they send them to me. In E: Does she think so?
my area there is no one working with hypnosis, ex- HT: Yes, she does. She is not by any means fully confident
cept the people John Weakland and I are teaching. that she is pretty. She works a little too hard at it.
The local medical folk are very reluctant to refer pa- E: What do you think about that?
tients who have somatic symptoms to psychiatrists, H: What do I think about it? Well I think she is 28 years
even when there is no physiological basis for the symp- old and isn't married for reasons she doesn't under-
tom. They don’t like the idea of long-term psychother- stand.
apy. So they send them to me expecting something E: Yet she is a pretty girl? And she works too hard at it.
quick. I know you often do very brief therapy, and I Y ou see, in brief psychotherapy one of the important
have a pretty good idea that this is the place I can considerations is the body image. Did I ever discuss
learn more about it than anywhere else. that with you?
I am actually using some of the techniques I have II: No, I don’t think so.
heard you mention in our conferences on hypnosis and I: By body image I mean how does the person look upon
finding them useful. I'll give you an example, begin- herself? What sort of an image do they have of them-
ning with a simple kind of problem, or one that should selves? She's a pretty girl; she works too hard at it.
be simple. This is a girl referred to me a couple of She is telling you she has a defective body image. It
weeks ago for severe premenstrual cramps. About is so tremendously important that she have a good
eight hours a day once a month she is incapacitated body image. A good body image implies not only the
and must go to bed with Seconal and aspirin and such. physical self as such, but the functional self, and the
She has been doing this since she was 14 years old. personality within the body. Does she know that it
She is not a good hypnotic subject. 1 have seen her is all right to know that she has very pretty eyes?
for two sessions. I don't think I can help her with hyp- Does she know that it is all right to be aware of the
nosis in a straight kind of direct suggestion. I don't fact that her chin is too heavy? Is it all right for her

[PAGE 007]

4 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Body Image 5


to have a pretty mouth, but to have her ears set un- ficiency does she think she has in her genitals? In her
evenly? Does she know that the individuality of her breasts, in her hips, in her figure, in her face?
face is the thing that gives her individual appeal? H: Well, how do the patients accept such an objective look
H: Is that the way you would put it to her? at their genitals? Do they take your discussion so obE: That's the way it should be put to her. You'll see these jectively?
pretty girls that absolutely depreciate themselves. E: They do for me.
They are unaware of the fact that they are trying to H: 1 think that might be difficult for me, but it might not.
classify their looks in terms of other people’s looks. E: You see a girl come in with a very crooked part in her
They usually think about some symptom of some sort hair. The next time she comes in, her hair is combed
that proves to them conclusively that they are not slightly differently, but with a crooked mid-line part.
adequate people. The girl with the painful menstrua- And you ought to wonder about her attitude towards
tion—exactly what does she think about her body? her genitals.
Are her hips too large? Or her ankles too large? Is her H: If the part is crooked you should go into that?
pubic hair too scarce, too straight, too curly? Or what E: Yes. Because you should bear in mind that our own
about it? It may be too painful a thing for her ever familiarity with ourselves, our physical selves, is so
to recognize consciously. Are her breasts too large? great that we never really appreciate that familiarity
Too small? The nipples not the right color? In brief —consciously.
psychotherapy, one of the first things you do, whether H: Hmm.
it’s a man or a woman, is try to find out what their E: How do you recognize that a woman is wearing falsies?
body image is. FH: I don’t know how I would recognize it, except in terms
H: How do you find this out? of the proportion with the rest of her body.
E: Sometimes, after a few minutes with a patient, with a E: Pll demonstrate to you. I ask a woman to sit up straight
girl in particular, I ask her what her best features are. and pretend that she has a mosquito on her right
And why. I make it a straightforward inquiry, in the shoulder, then I ask her to please swat it. First, I'll
same way that one would do a physical examination. show you how I swat it (demonstrates swatting with
You start to examine the scalp and you work down arm not touching chest). Now I'll exaggerate as I
to the soles of the feet. It’s purely an objective ex- show you how she swats it. You see, she detours her
amination. You really want to know what the body elbow in accord with the actual size of her breast.
image is, so you do a physical examination of the body H: Oh, I see, she brushes her breast with falsies.
image. E: Yes. If she’s got very small breasts, practically no
H: I see. What this girl does is work a little too hard at breasts, she tends to swat her shoulder in much the
looking feminine. Her curls are placed just so, her same way that I would. If she has got large breasts
makeup is just so, her earrings just so. she makes a large detour.
E: In other words, what does she lack in her body image H: That's a simple test.
that is feminine, so that she has to overdo, or overem- E: A very simple test. When 1 see a patient with a defec-
phasize, the external evidence of femininity? What de- tive body image, I usually say, “There are a number

[PAGE 008]

6 Conversation ith Million 14 Prucio.on The Body Image Y


of things that you don’t want me bo know about, that I: (Laughter) Is a play on the word “withheld”.
you don’t want to tell me. There are a lot of things i’: The unconscious does that. You've got to be aware of
about yourself that you don’t want to discuss. There- it. Therefore, you suggest that they withhold, and
fore, let’s discuss those things that you feel free to dis- they do. You also suggest that they tell, and they do.
cuss, and be sure that you don’t discuss those that But they withhold and they tell responsively. As long
you are unwilling to discuss.” She has blanket permis- as they are going to withhold you ought to encourage
sion to withhold anything and everything. But she did them to withhold. In discussing your body image—
come to discuss things. Therefore she starts discuss-
the way you view yourself, the way you appear in your
ing this, discussing that. It’s always, “Well, this is all mind’s eye, the way you think about your body — cer-
right to talk about.” Before she’s finished, she has
tainly you don’t want to tell me about certain parts
mentioned everything. of your body, and yet there are parts of your body you
FH: You made it safe. do want to discuss. For example, your chin and your
E: I made it safe. And each new item, ‘Well, this really isn’t
mouth. You may even think about your ankles. You
so important that I have to withhold it. I can use the
may think about your abdomen, the hair on your
withholding permission for more important matters.”
head. By saying “the hair on your head,” how many
Simply a hypnotic technique. To make them respond girls are aware of the maidenhead? The part in your
to the idea of withholding, and to respond to the idea hair, and how do you feel about it?
of communicating.
H: That’s the play on the word “part”?
H. I see.
E: No, it’s a play on the fact that there is a genital grove.
E: Their withholding is essentially a mere matter of shuf-
And there is a part in the hair.
fling the order in which they present, and that’s suf-
H: Those are also called “parts.” You do this, apparently,
ficient withholding. not just to get an idea of their body image, but to
H: It also forces them to think of what they would normal-
make them very conscious of their body.
ly withhold, which they probably hadn’t thought much
E: Make them conscious of their body. And, “As you sit
of before. there, you can think about what you ought to discuss
E: There is the girl who hada series of affairs and is too
about yourself.” “As you sit there,” seems to be a tran-
distressed to tell you about it. You have given her per- sitional phrase, but what do you sit on? “And what
mission to withhold. She knows you don’t know about
kind of a body do you want? The kind of a body that
the affairs. She starts thinking over
— well, number would please a woman with another type of personali-
one is all right to tell about. Number five is all right ty? Or the kind of a body that would please you with
to tell about. Not number two. And she tells about your personality? And how much do you know about
number four, number six, number three, number seven,
it?”
number two. She has withheld number two. In fact,
H: You assume that a menstrual pain is related to this kind
she has withheld all of them except number one. Be-
of difficulty?
cause she didn't give — one, two, three, four, five, six,
E: Yes, I do.
seven.
H: Naturally, with my background, I get curious about the

[PAGE 009]

The Body Image 9
8 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

excellent statement. Then all of a sudden it became
history. You can’t do brief therapy by dealing with the
transformed into what? And what became of that
patient’s past. This is something that keeps coming
grown-up, pleasurable feeling? It had been trans-
up again and again. As you say, it’s really irrelevant
formed into pain. Just consider how a woman thinks
since the problem must be solved in the present. But
about her 25th birthday. It isn’t a 25th birthday, it’s
I keep dealing with a patient’s past when talking to
a quarter of a century. How does she feel about her
them. It interests me that this girl lost her menstrual
30th birthday? She is forever leaving her 20s. Then
functions for a year, from age 13 to 14.
the horrible dread of leaving . . . leaving the 30s. That
E: Yes, and one of the first things I would want to know
25th birthday is a quarter of a century. The tremen-
about would be what she thought about the imperma-
dous emphasis that you find from Arizona to Massa-
nence of life, and the impermanence of the body, and
chusetts on the quarter of a century.
how a body can come to a sudden and violent end.
H: 1 haven't heard of that kind of emphasis on it. Once
And the threat of death. This body of hers is doomed
when I was inducinga trance, I had her do some auto-
to go only to dust, and every menstrual period brings
matic writing. I asked her hand what she lost during
her closer to death, and it’s a painful thing.
that bombing raid. She wrote a very interesting word
H: This is a different way to look at menstruation alto-
that she read as “security.” It also could have been
gether.
read as “family.” But she was quite impressed by the
E: But it does, you know.
fact that it said “security.” She was largely uprooted
H: Oh yes, it does, I know. But it also tells her she is a
for so many years.
woman, that she is not pregnant. That’s the sort of
E: What did you read in the writing?
thing I think about.
H: I read it as “family” when I looked at it, but she talked
E: But you think of menses in terms of male thinking, in
about it as “security” and let it go as that. I didn't
terms of biological thinking.
think of it until after she left.
H: How does a woman think about it differently? In terms
E: Even if it had been written as “security” with the plain
of aging?
letters, I would have asked her to spell the same word
E: What does every woman think about — when she gets
with another set of letters. So it would read like a dif-
old enough she won't menstruate. When she gets old
ferent word. I think probably she would have written
enough, she will cease to menstruate. Therefore it is
“family.”
a totally different thing to her as a person. Within the
H: 1 see. I was trying to think of a way to go further with
privacy, in the separateness of her own living, men-
that, and I couldn't think of that way. I knew “securi-
struation is a living thing.
ty” was too general for what was really on her mind.
H: This girl said that when she started to menstruate she
She lost her father when she was three, and at the
was quite proud of it. It meant she had grown up, and
bombing she lost her stepfather in the sense that he
there seemed to be no conflicts around it. She wasn't
went away to war. Then the mother divorced him
unhappy about it; she wasn't ashamed of it. She remem-
shortly after that.
bered walking down the street feeling quite grown-up.
E: Now when did she stop menstruating?
E: Feeling grown-up, which was a nice statement. An

[PAGE 010]

10 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Body Image 11


H: She not only stopped menstruating; she developed a down in the distance, and she was up on the hill and
morning sickness. She got sick every morning, dizzy could see the airplanes, and the fire. She was fright-
and nauseated. For a period of months. Almost as if ened, but her mother wasn’t particularly frightened,
she was trying to substitute a family of her own for she says.
the family she was losing. It was like a pregnancy sit- E: The little girl who was killed, how was she killed?
uation. FH: She says, “I saw schrapnel come down and hit the litE: She lost her father when she was three. And her step- tle girl.”
father after the bombing, by virture of his going in- E: Obviously she could reason out that the little girl bled.
to the service. If she were three years old then she H: That could be.
could look forward to the return—to having a step- E: Now you will agree that things equal to the same things
father. How could she resume her three-year-old sta- are equal to one another, isn’t that right?
tus? H: O.K.
I: 1 see, you look upon it as a regression. E: Death equals blood. Menstruation equals blood. And
E: Because at three, with her current memories and under- blood equals menstruation. Menstruation is hidden.
standing, she could really look forward to having a It’s concealed, it’s not seen. The little girl’s bleeding
Stepfather come into the home. was hidden, unlooked, unseen. It’s purely an individH: She had a stepfather she didn’t care much for, but I ual equation. And when you think of all the individual
think from the way she talked about him he was of equations.
more use to her than she realized. H: How do you deal with that with a patient? Or do you?
E: Your tendency was to apply general psychoanalytic con- E: You do, because you are thinking of all those possible
cepts. variations that might possibly apply to the individual
H: Yes, patient.
E: Without recognizing that this is an individual patient H: But what I mean by deal with it: Do you use this for
who may fit into those psychoanalytic concepts. But your own estimate of the problem, or do you discuss
let's find out what the individual concepts are. this with the patient?
H: She talked a great deal about how her girlfriend's fa- E: Something like that, yes.
thers became like fathers to her as she grew up. They H: So you would discuss the possibility of the little girl
always treated her like a daughter, so that there was bleeding and what's being hidden about it.
always some kind of father around, and she always E: No, I'd mention it casually. Not as an interpretation,
enjoyed this. but just as a casual mention. If it’s true, she'll show
E: How much blood did she see? How much did she hear it. Now with the bombing, the city didn't function,
about? everything in the home was thrown out of function.
H: The only thing she reported was that she heard about Her function was thrown out too. She is part of a to-
the death of a little girl in the neighborhood. A neigh- tality.
bor girl who got hit by something that fell. But she H: Yes, she describes it as if everything stopped function-
didn't see the girl. All she saw really was the city way ing, if not quite in those terms, very close to il. She

[PAGE 011]

12 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
The Body Image 13

was taken out of school, she was taken away from her
friends, she was taken away from her stepfather, and ly?” “Is it in the morning?” “In the afternoon, or at
so on.
night?” “Or just at random?”
E: She wasn’t big enough to go to school. She was taken H: Apparently regular and in the morning.
out of school. Not big enough to go to school, not big E: I would throw in the question “How many pads a day?”
enough to menstruate. because that really makes it an embarrassing intimate
H: Why would it begin again painfully? question. “Do you soak the pads through?” “Or do you
E: Why not assume a legitimate painfulness? change them as soon as they begin to get moist?” She
H: What do you mean by legitimate painfulness? has already told me that it’s regular, it’s in the mornE: The first beginning of menstruation could occur easi- ing. “And how would you feel if it happened a day be-
ly, naturally, without any particular associations. So fore you expected it? And not in the morning, but at
it could be painless. Then you interrupt a function for night? How would you feel about that?” The first
which you have learned all the sensations, and then thing I would want to do is displace the time of the
it occurs suddenly and unexpectedly. The loss of it has hurt.

been a painful thing. Here all of a sudden you are re- H: You mean displace the time, then you can do something
minded, by the reappearance of all the painfulness, of about the pain?
her loss of affection, plus the normal congestion of the E: If I can displace the time, then it’s not the expected pe-
tissues. So it’s a legitimate painfulness. You break riod, and the expected period is a painful period. The
your arm, it’s put in a cast. Gradually you become ac- unexpected period is not painful, because it happened
customed to the cast, the cast is taken off, and you unexpectedly. Then you have that implanted in her
try to bend you arm —it’s painful. mind. She is too intent on questions about, “How
H: Yes. many pads?” “Do you let them soak through?” She
E: It’s a legitimate pain too. The pain of disuse. Yet you isn’t paying too much attention consciously to the
want it to be a moveable arm. But it’s painful, not be- suggestions for displacement.
cause of conflicts. Why shouldn’t interrupted men- H: They are more effective if she gives less conscious at-
struation recur with pain? That in itself could frighten tention to them?
her and raise the question in her mind, “Is it always E: She is within hearing distance of you, she hears every-
going to be painful?” Then she could look forward to thing you said, she came in to talk to you, she is go-
painful menstruation. She will have a month’s time ing to listen with both her conscious mind and her un-
in which to anticipate painful menstruation, and ver- conscious mind. You just remain aware of that fact.
ify it. “And how would you feel if it occurred unexpectedly —
H: I am sure that’s exactly what she does in that way
— during the night?” But you see I use the word “feel,”
spends a month expecting it. but it has a different connotation than “pain.”
E: Yes, she has had added proof. And I would raise with H: Oh, I see.
her the question, “What is your cycle?” “How many E: So I have actually changed a feeling of menstruation
pads a day do you use?” “Does it always come regular- from pain into another kind of feeling. Now another
thing is to emphasize the handling of painful menstru-

[PAGE 012]

14 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Body Image 15


ation. So many therapists, medical men, overlook the her husband into buying her a new fur coat, you
have
patient’s rights. They try to relieve a girl of painful given her the privilege of keeping pain and not keep-
menstruation by a blanket removal. When any girl ing it. Then it’s her choice, you are not forcibly
tak-
comes to me to be relieved of painful menstruation 1 ing something away from her that she feels
belongs
make it very clear to her that she wants to be relieved to herself. You are just offering her the opportunity
of the pain of menstruation, as far as she knows. But of dropping it when it’s convenient, and keeping
it
there certainly is likely to occur, in her lifetime, an oc- when it’s convenient. Just as you let them withh
old.
casion in which she might want a painful period. She H: Well, that’s true of most symptoms, isn’t
it? It’s the
might like to escape some social engagements, by vir- proper attitude.
tue of complaining about her painful menstruation. E: It’s the proper attitude.A woman in her 30s sucked
She might like to skip the university examination. She her thumb, scratched her nipple until it was always
might like to get an extra day off from the office. So scabbed, and scratched her bellybutton until it
was
be realistic about it. She wants to be relieved of pain- scabbed. She had done it ever since childhood. She
ful menstruation when it’s convenient for her. The un- sought therapy for that, and I told her no, I would
n't
conscious is a lot more intelligent than the conscious. give her therapy for it, that I would just simply cure
The girl comes to you for relief of painful menstrua- it —in less than 30 seconds’ time. She knew that
was
tion, and you blandly, blithely, give her suggestions impossible. She wanted to know howI could cure it
to be free, and her unconscious knows that you don’t in 30 seconds’ time. I told her all she had to do
was
understand the problem. You are telling her now, as say “yes.” She knew that did not alter anything.
“To
a menstruating creature, to be free of pain, and she say yes and mean yes.” “The next time you want
to
knows very well that she’s going to get married, and scratch your nipple, I want you to do it. You can
come
she is going to have a baby, and she is going to have into this office, expose your breasts and your nipple
interruption of menstruation, and that not one of the and do it. Will you do it?” She said “Yes,” and then
suggestions you have given her is so worded that it said, “You know I'll never do it. I never will.” And
she
applies until after she begins a new history of men- meant, 7 never will do it.” She was talking about not
struation. She rejects your offering of relief because coming into the office.
you haven't taken in consideration the natural course H: Yes.
of events. She is acutely aware of that in her uncon- E: “That's right, you never will do it.” (Laug
hter) Her un-
scious and really scorns you because you just assume conscious knew and her unconscious took
all Of her
that she’s never really going to have an interruption. intensity, and transferred it to her.
But she is. She may get sick. Maybe in her past she H: Complicated. What about all the other purpo
ses that
did get sick and had to interrupt menses. And her un- it served? Whatever they may be?
conscious, seeking help from you, wants you to con- E: Your assumption is that it served other
purposes. Have
sider her as an individual who is going to encounter you ever thought about symptomatology
wearing out
such and such things. When you give her the privilege in serving purposes and becoming an habitu
al pat-
of having painful menstruations as a way of talking tern?

[PAGE 013]

The Body Image 17
16 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

to the last drawing? In the way of overcoming this
H: What about it?
defective body image?
E: What oral security does a 25-year-old gain by sucking
E: First I asked if she really wanted therapy. Would she
his thumb? When he sucked his thumb as an infant,
really cooperate with therapy? She said she had no
he was hungry. It serves no real purposes now. The
choice, and I agreed with her. She really had no choice,
extension of the symptom into habit.
except in the matter of therapist. Since she had come
H: Yes, that kind of a symptom. There is a nice phrase,
to me and had made that first difficult step, it would
“Often people need a graceful exit out of a symptom
even be worse to have to find another, because she’d
that no longer serves a purpose.”
have to make the first step all over. That insured her
E: In brief psychotherapy you always give them the grace-
staying with me.
ful exit. In prolonged therapy you also do the same
H: 1 see.
thing. You have to prolong therapy often because
E: She didn’t recognize that I was putting a barrier into
they fight so desperately against accepting a graceful
her seeking someone else.
exit.
H: That's slippery all right.
H: They sure do. To get back to the body image and think-
E: But it was there, and I told her that if she wanted ther-
ing about this girl again: When you get an idea of the
apy it would be in relationship to all of her functions
defects of the body image, what do you then do in the
as a person, which included not only the way she
way of revising this? Or is merely the act of discover-
worked, and walked in the streets, but in the matter
ing that they have defective areas in their body im-
of eating and sleeping, and recreation. Eating implies
age enough?
what? Urination, defecation too. Try to eat without
E: What do you do? A girl came in to see me because she
including those — you have to. Every little child learns
was nervous. She was fearful, tremulous, uncertain.
She didn’t like people and they didn’t like her. She was that you eat, and sooner or later you move your bow-
so shaky it was hard for her to walk. She was afraid els. That’s one of the fundamental learnings, and you
always retain that.
of people and when she ate in a restaurant she brought
H: That's true enough.
a newspaper to hide behind it. She went home by ways
of alleys to avoid being seen. She always went to the E: And I had mentioned it to her through eating. All of
her functions as a person—not as a personality, but
cheapest restaurants, so people could look at her and
as a person. A person who ate, slept, worked, and en-
despise her. Besides, she wasn't fit to look at. 1 had
gaged in recreation. So that was inclusive of every-
her draw her portrait. She tested out her sketching
thing. And I would have to know all the things that
ability, and there is her portrait. You see it? (Shows
she could tell me. And all the things that 1 could think
drawing.)
about.
H: It’s obscure. Merely unrelated parts.
H: That's a tricky phrase there. You would have to know
E: Finally she drew this calendar picture of herself in the
all the things that she could tell you. That's an endan-
nude. First, a head with no body, and then her final
gering statement with the danger suddenly taken
picture of herself.
H: Now, what did you do with her from the first drawing
away.

[PAGE 014]

18 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Body Image 19


E: And all the things that I could think about, and I dared room, and I wanted to know if she took a drink before
to think about a lot of things. (Laughter) Which ac- she dried herself, after she dried herself, before she put
tually signified to her nothing— absolutely nothing — on her pajamas. She would have to visualize herself.
won’t be included. Everything will be included. All I am keeping her in the nude right in front of me, am
that she can tell about, all that I can think about. And I not?
I am a doctor, and I can really think, and I really FH: (Laughs) You sure are, and without ever mentioning it.
know. Yet it is said so gently ... but every bit of E: Without asking her to really.
knowledge that she could ascribe to her physician was H: By very carefully not mentioning it.
put out in front right there. And one of the first things E: But she was in the nude, and once having been in the
I wanted to know about her was, how did she think nude for me, then, “Now if you were to see your body
about herself as a person. Or perhaps the best way to in the nude, without your head being visible, would
tell me would be to tell me what she felt she looked you recognize your body? You know it is awfully hard
like. “Well” she said, “I am a blonde.” “And you have to recognize your voice on a tape.”
two eyes, and two ears, and one mouth, and one nose, H: What answer do you get to that? Did she recognize it
and two nostrils, and two lips and one chin. What do or what?
you think about those? And you are blonde you stat- E: She started to think about recognizing her body in the
ed. What kind of a blonde?” “A dirty dishwater blonde. nude, but there she was again nude.
What more do you need? And my teeth are crooked, H: Yes, I can see. I never heard that question before; it’s
my ears are too large, my nose is too small. All I can interesting.
say is that I am just a very ordinary girl.” “Very or- E: “Now I can tell you something about your body that
dinary” implies what? When she went from her face you don’t know, and I never have seen it. You un-
to “very ordinary girl” she was describing herself. All doubtedly are pretty sure that you know the color of
the rest of her body was implied by “very ordinary your pubic hair. I’ve never seen it; I never expect to
girl.” Then I wanted to know if she would tell me see it. I don’t think that you know the color of it.” Now
whether she took a tub bath or a shower. I asked her that’s one thing she’s certain about.
to describe to me in detail how she got into the show- F: That not only makes her think about it, but it makes
er, to describe in detail what she did, and what she her go home and check it.
did after she turned off the shower. She stepped out E: Her first answer was, “Naturally the same color as the
of the tub, took the towel, dried herself, took off her ‘hair on my head, a dishwater blonde.” With the natu-
shower cap, put on her pajamas, and went to bed. You ral normal pigmentation of the body, your pubic hair
see, I had her in the nude, in all of her thinking, and is going to be darker than the hair on the head, that
I allowed her to dress in pajamas and to go to bed. I know. Therefore, I can tell her, “You say your pubic
It’s so very much easier then to discuss the details of hair is the same color as the hair on your head, and
the bath, when she is in the nude. I wanted to know I say it isn’t.” She checks it, and she finds out that
if she stood on the bathmat, where the towel was, I am right. I’ve really demonstrated my knowledge.
whether it was handy or on the other side of the bath- I’ve given her a chance to take issue with me. Disput-

[PAGE 015]

I
i


20 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
The Body Image 21

ing her knowledge of her body. But what about my
E: I’m presenting the male point of view. It’s nothing per-
impolite mentioning of her pubic hair? That isn’t the
sonal.
issue. The issue is that I’ve challenged her knowledge.
H: Yes, and you've made it so general that it can’t be just
She’s going to prove to herself that I am ignorant, not
you.
that I am intrusive. So she’s fighting a false battle.
E: Um talking about her lips, am I not?
FH: (Laughs) You're right.
H: Yes.
E: She can't tell me I am right or wrong without bringing
E: That is the sort of thing one does in brief psychotherapy.
up the subject of pubic hair. “And what color are your
H: Well, one of the problems in brief psychotherapy, it
nipples? I wonder if you really know.” They can’t miss
seems to me, is getting the patient to feel that this
the issue of intellectual awareness, “I wonder if you
isn’t just your personal opinion, but that everybody
really know.” “Naturally, the color of my skin.” “T don’t
else would have the same opinion, or at least other
think they are, that’s something you'll find out, that
men would.
they aren’t the color of your skin.” So she’s got an is-
E: Not that every man will have the same opinion, but that
sue there to fight on, a purely intellectual one. She's
men have a masculine point of view. That women have
going to fight, but fighting on my territory.
a feminine point of view. Few men want to kiss a musH: Yes, she is. And the fact that you were right about the
tache, and very often women do. (Laughter)
color of the pubic hair must make it all the more clear
H: But that’s a nice twist there. If you pay her a compli-
that she has been in the nude with you.
ment on how she has attractive lips, she can either
E: Oh, yes. And the fact that I am right about her nipples.
deny it, thinking you were wrong, or accept it, think-
When she tells me that her hips are too large, I can
ing this was your opinion but not the opinion of men
flippantly tell her, “The only use they have for you is
in general.
to sit upon.” How can you dispute that without get-
E: That's right.
ting into an awful mess of arguments? They are made
H: The tricky thing is to use the male point of view on it.
up of muscles and fat, and that’s an unmentionable
E: “Now, you don't know whether I think you are pretty
topic. But they are useful in climbing stairs.
or not, but every man has his individual taste as well
H: And useful in attracting men?
as his general masculine views.” Some men like fat
E: That I mention later. Then I can point out later that
wives, and some like skinny wives, and they're real-
people view things differently. Who is it? Which wom-
ly in love with their wives. For example, I know a man
an is it in Africa that has the duck bill? I can't re-
who thinks his wife is something sent from heaven.
member the name; you know, the duck bill women
She's 5'8” and she weighs 90 lbs. To me she's a col-
with their lips sticking way out with platters in their
lection of bones and the most unattractive thing, and
lips. “And do you know that the men in that tribe
he thinks she's beautiful. I am glad he does. I know
think those are beautiful, and they’re astonished that
a 6 footer, who thinks his 5' wife, who weighs 170 lbs,
the American men would consider the kind of lips that
is beautiful. I think she's a lard tub, but he thinks
you have as beautiful.” What have I said?
she’s beautiful, and I am glad he does. Yet both men,
H: You slipped in a very nice compliment there. the man who is in love with his lard tub and the man

[PAGE 016]

22 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Body Image 23


who's in love with his living skeleton, are tremendous- “But your change, Miss.” But my patient was outside
ly attracted by the very feminine things that both the store. She went home and squalled and squalled.
women have in common. They are females in the first Four long hours of anger. What do you do with per-
place. They both like to wear silky, satiny, pretty un- fume? You put it on the body, don’t you?
derthings. No man in his right mind wants to wear H: Yes.
those things himself, but he likes to look at them. E: And the mere acquisition.
That’s the masculine point of view. I’m not telling you H: That's extreme.
anything you don’t know already. E: Then I told her that she had to get herself a box of powH: Not a thing? You're telling me an approach I don't der. She got that without much difficulty. Just walked
know. in, hesitantly, asked for a box of powder, took it home,
E: Yes, but just the things you already know. and put it beside the perfume. She dreaded to come
H: I wish I was seeing this girl with the menstrual prob- to the next session. 1 told her 1 wanted her to take
lem all over again. My difficulty is this: Since she was a shower, to dry herself carefully, and then to put pow-
not capable of a deep enough trance, and she came der under her arms and here, and here, across her ab-
specifically for that, I saw her a couple of times and domen and on her hips. “You put a dab of perfume
I told her I didn’t think I’d be able to help her. I felt here, here, here, here, here.” She told me that was sil-
very disappointed, and she felt very disappointed. I ly. I said, “All right, it’s silly. Those are medical
don’t think I can help her with deep hypnosis, you orders. You'll find out whether it's silly.” She went
know, but I think I can with some kind of an approach home, took a shower, stepped out of the tub, dried her-
like this. self very, very carefully, reached for the powder can,
E: Now this girl whose portrait you saw, I asked her if and collapsed on the floor, and squalled for hours, un-
she'd really like to find out how afraid she was of her til exhausted. It wasn't so silly was it? When she final-
body, just how afraid. She said she didn’t think she ly cried herself out of every thought, she got up, put
was afraid of her body, but she’d do whatever I told the powder and the perfume on the body, didn't even
her. “All right, Saturday at 1 o’clock sharp, be at the bother to put on her pajamas. She just collapsed shud-
door of one of the downtown stores where they sell dering, shivering.
perfume. At 1 o’clock, turn and walk in and buya bot- Then she came in and said, “I know, there's lots
tle of perfume.” She was there on the street, looking wrong with me.” I teach the functions of the body.
at her watch. At 1 o'clock she tried to go in the store. “Y ou eat. What kind of stomach trouble do you have?
I told her also to have it purchased by 5 o’clock. But What kind of constipation do you have? How well do
she couldn't walk in. She paced up and down the street you eat? What respect have you got for your stom-
trying to walk in the store. At ten minutes to 5 she ach? Do you eat good food or do you insult it with
dashed in, handed the girl at the perfume counter a anything that's handy?” With that sort of a frontal
$20.00 bill, and said, “Give me a bottle of perfume.” attack, which cannot be objected to, it was possible
The girl said, “What kind?” She said, “Any kind, any Lo inquire what is the attitude she should have to-
kind. Here I'll take this. Is that enough?” The girl said, wards her breasts, her genitals, her hips, her thighs,

[PAGE 017]

24 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Body Image 25


her ankles, her knees, her abdomen. Were her teeth an attitude of expectation and willingness allows an-

too crooked? Were they really? How would a man other to approach, and that romance was just around

looking at her smile react to it? Would his eyesight the corner for her. Then I took up this matter of dis-

be so deficient that he could see only those too crook- placement of symptoms. I don’t need to explain to you

ed teeth, or would he see her lips? Would he see her displacement of symptoms.
chin? Would he like her smile? Did he have the right FH: You could explain to me how you took it up with her.

to see what he wanted to see? What he liked to see? E: Well, she knew that symptoms could be displaced, and

Did she have the right to say, “I’m now smiling, and that worry over the mortgage could be transformed

look at my crooked teeth?” He might prefer to notice into a stomach ulcer. It was really a pocketbook ache.
I told her that if people could spontaneously, unwit-
the shape and the thickness of her lips.
H: You try to get her interested in the possibility of feel- tingly, displace one thing, they could displace another.
She had the idea that because she was paralyzed from
ing attractive, is that it?
E: No. To recognize that any man who chooses can look the waist down, she was sexless. Then I told her that

upon her and behold something beautiful. And men the genitals were like the rest of the body. That the

vary in their taste. I don’t know if I told you about toe bone is connected with the foot bone. The foot

Dottie. Back broken, age 21, her fiance asked to be bone with the ankle bone. Until finally the neck bone
released from the engagement. No sense of feeling is connected with the head bone. That I thought that
a woman’s external genitalia were connected with the
from the waist down, complete paralysis, incontinent,
urine and feces. Age 31, living in a wheelchair, tak- vagina, which is connected with the uterus, which is

ing her Ph.D. in psychology for lack of anything else connected with the ovary, which was connected with
to do. Sought psychotherapy for one of two things. the adrenal, which was connected with the hormone

A philosophy of life that would make her want to live system, which is connected with the breast, which is

or an acceptable reason to satisfy her for committing connected with the thyroid, which is connected with

suicide. Since she was a psychologist and had studied the pituitary. In fact, everything we knew about phys-

clinical psychology, about the first thing I mentioned iology indicated that was the case. I was quite certain

was the giraffe neck women of Siam. How when their that the paralysis, the lack of sensation, hadn't inter-

rings are taken off their heads collapse over —they fered with the adrenals. They weren’t paralyzed. The

have lost their muscles for the support of the neck. kidneys weren’t paralyzed, even though they were

And the duck bill women of Africa, the steatopygous connected with the adrenals. The adrenals and the kid-
neys were connected with the bladder. Her own wet-
Hottentot women.
ting of herself proved that her kidneys weren’t paraH: Which kind?
E: Steatopygous. Those enormous fat buttock women. I lyzed. While she had lost the external genitalia, still

stated that men have a variety of tastes. What made the internal genitalia were connected.

her think that, because she was incontinent with feces That was in 1947. I did a lot of therapy on Dottie,

and urine, there wasn’t some nice guy in the world laying that foundation, knowing that I could trust her

who would find her attractive if she were she? That Lo carry it out to its completion. She married a pathol-

[PAGE 018]

26 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Body Image 27


ogist who was doing research in urine and feces. He you when you first said someone was around the cor-
is anice guy. Nothing wrong with the guy. I checked ner.

him too. I didn’t see Dottie again until last October E: But I emphasized the attitude of willingness and ex-
when I was in her city. I got the opinion of about 20 pectancy. The only way not to believe me is to have
doctors on the subject of Dottie’s husband. Exceed- the attitude of willingness and expectancy — which
ingly popular chap, everybody respects him, he’s got was the essential thing.
an utterly delightful wife. At their social meetings H: You mean, not to believe you?
back home they called him by his first name, which E: Because that would prove that willingness and expect-
is another good indication. They called her “Dottie,” ancy in itself was useless, because there was no ro-
another good indication. Of course, she’s got two chil- mance around the corner.
dren by Caesarian. H: She could only disapprove by expecting it.
Dottie took me out to lunch. I asked her how she E: That’s right, isn’t that right?
felt toward me. She said, “Look, it’s odd. I know that H: It certainly is. This is related to another thing you often
I knew you in Michigan. I know that you tried to hyp- do, particularly in brief therapy, and that’s tell pa-
notize me; it didn’t work very well. I know I came to tients what to do, like telling the girl to go get the per-
you because I was depressed. I don’t remember much fume, or to go get the powder.
about that. I don’t remember what we talked about. E: Yes.
I don’t know what you said. All I know is that I am IH: Y have often wondered how you set it up so that they
profoundly grateful to you, and that you are a doc- do what you tell them to do. How you commit them
tor of doctors to me. I don’t know why, and I am to it.
curious.” I said, “Your amnesia is rather interesting, 17: “You want to know how afraid you are of your body,
Dottie. Suppose I ask you one simple little question.” go and buya bottle of perfume.” She obviously knew
She said, “You can ask me.” I said, “Will you tell me I was stupid, so she proved it by going. Then she dis-
all the intimate details of your sexual life.” Dottie’s covered differently.
reply was, “My first reaction to the question is a no, II: She does it to prove that you are wrong.
but my second reaction is to you. That is, you are en- 17: Because it gives them contest, really. A contest between
titled to know. Sex relations? Three, four, five times her neurosis and me as a therapist. I'll give you another
a week. I have excellent orgasms. I have plenty of or- patient —not getting along in her job, all the usual
gasms in my breast, I have a separate one in each nip- complaints. The first three times that she came in I
ple. I get a very warm, rosy feeling of engorgement noticed that her hair was very, very poorly combed.
in my thyroid, and my lips swell up quite a bit when She noticed me looking at her hair and said, “Don’t
I have an orgasm, the lobes of my ears. I have the do what my boss does, he keeps telling me to comb
most peculiar feeling between my shoulder blades. I my hair and I do my level best.” I said, “You want to
rock involuntarily, uncontrollably, I get so excited. get along better in your job, and you do your level
H: That's quite a case. I’m sure she must not have believed best with your hair, but I wonder how afraid you are

[PAGE 019]

28 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The-Body Image 29


of looking your best?” So I told her, “You can find that deal, but I do want some help with the transvestism.”
out by going home, and taking a shower and washing Exceedingly compulsive about it. “I am married, got
your hair. You are going to find out a number of a couple of kids, a nice wife. I have suitcases that lock.
things about yourself.” In addition to that I put straps around them, and I
H: Leaving it that open? have little locks on the straps. I drag those around.
E: That open. I get to a hotel, I lock the door very carefully, take
H: What did she find out? off my clothes, and I put on a bra and I put on panE: She says, “I came to comb my hair nicely.” I said, “You ties and stay in front of the mirror. I put on dresses
can take a better attitude towards the rest of you too, and stay in front of the mirror, and I really enjoy it.
can’t you?” She told me later that she took a shower, I keep standing in front of the mirror looking at my-
dried herself very carefully, stood in front of a mir- self.” He was 35 years old. I don’t even know how long
ror, got her hand mirror out so she could get a back- he had done this, since... . all his life? I never inquired
view, and she spent an awful lot of time examining when it started, nor how it started, nor what caused
her body. Examining it against the background of her it. My statement was very simple, “You stay in front
boss finding fault with the way she combed her hair. of the mirror, looking at yourself, wearing feminine
She resented her boss criticizing her. The more she clothes, and you're looking at yourself and you are see-
scrutinized herself, with that background of her re- ing neither yourself nor the clothes. You're seeing a
sentment towards her boss, she kept on approving of combination of them. But you can't see yourself be-
her body. cause you are partly covered, and you can't see the
H: It’s extraordinary the way you manage to turn opposi- clothes because you are looking at the total. When you
tion in a contest to something productive for the per- leave this office, go to some restaurant, and see if you
son rather than something destructive to the person. can discover how a woman wears her clothes. Try to
E: But all you are doing is using the narcissism with which find a waitress with stockings on, and see how she
you are born. wears her clothes.” “Are her clothes the only thing?”
H: You could have a contest with a patient, in which the “You've got to examine the clothes and you have got
patient proves you are wrong by staying sick. But you to examine every feminine gesture in order to appre-
ask them to turn it around so they prove you are ciate the clothes.” You should have heard the rapture
wrong by doing something beneficial to them. he gave me about the beautifully dressed women. He
E: am losing a battle with one of my patients who insists sat that night and watched them, and watched and
on remaining fat. So far I haven’t devised any way. watched them.
But you take a patient’s own narcissism and you ma- It: Did he give up putting on women's clothes?
neuver it around until it is useful to him. lv: Then I told him after watching them that one of the
H: (Laughter) It sounds easy. things he could really do is take his collection of femiE: I spent less than five hours with a 35-year-old transves- nine apparel and really look at it, examine it. Look at
tite male. A traveling salesman. He came for brief il, examine it, and feel it. Then wonder how a woman
psychotherapy. “I am not expecting you Lo do a great would really wear those panties; look at her shoulder

[PAGE 020]

30 Conversation unth Alltan dl Pro bon The Body Image 31


movements, arm movements, hand movements, head Il’ No, how these clothes would feel on a woman’s body.
movements, leg movements, she would make wearing Ht Whe was feeling a woman's body under these clothes,
those clothes. The same with the bra. To feel the cloth is hat what you mean?
of her dresses, and her slips. To wonder how it would FE No, How a woman would feel wearing those pretty
feel to a woman’s skin. The first session was three things. How they would feel to her skin.
hours, the second session two hours. He came in later, I: Isn't that a way of getting him to deny that he has any
said that he had been absurd, that he had been trans- feminine feelings like that?
vesticising himself for so many years and that it 17: Bul he hasn't got any.
didn’t make sense. I said it didn’t make sense. Unfor- II: | know. He just thought he had feminine feelings.
tunately that set of apparel he had wouldn't fit his Mv: Ile just thought he had. I introduced him to the real
wife; he didn’t know what to do with it. He gave it to ones.
the Good Will. Said his wife had become tremendous- II: That's a tricky one that.
ly more attractive to him sexually. 7: He only thought he had; he couldn't have—he has the
H: And that was using his narcissism? wrong shape of body.
E: No. II: The question is how you get them to think differently.
FH: Isn't that an example of what you were trying to say That's what I am getting at. One of the ways you got
about the girl? him to think differently was to imagine how a woman
E: There he was using his narcissism in a distorted way, would feel in these, thus making it impossible to a
by using feminine clothes on a male body. I was us- man.
ing his narcissism in a different way. He could really eS] : I gave him the permission to feel the cloth of the dress.
feel the clothes, he could really see the clothes, and Isn’t that a nice thing to do? (Laughter) Being a man
that should be his narcissistic experience. Instead of they really ought to feel it this way. Not feel the tex-
the distorted thing of wearing them. His capacity to ture of the cloth here on this thigh but with his fin-
appreciate feminine clothes was when it started to be gers, and to look at the panties that he is holding with
narcissism. Let me show you how to really handle a his hand, not that he is wearing but that he is han-
rifle said a friend of mine. He showed me the feel of it. dling.
H: You were doing a little more than that with this guy. H: You make it sound simple, but a lot of complicated
You were getting the guy to deny. things happen there again in that little sequence.
E: Deny what? What’s most interesting to me about it is how you disH: To deny what tendencies he has by having him think miss the whole etiology of it. This is what I have dif-
how a woman would feel these clothes. ficulty doing. In brief therapy, my first impulse is,
E: All he does is look in the mirror at that body of his. when did it start, what purpose did it serve, and so on.
There was no sense in trying to insist on femininity. E: Tf you want to work out with a man his difficulty in
He has got all the evidence to the contrary. working a correlation in statistics, would you start
H: Why do you ask him then to think about how a woman with his difficulty in school in adding one and one, and
would feel with these clothes? two and two, and would you laboriously go through

[PAGE 021]

abit Coneernatias seth Atidtou IT brn boa Ple Hody Image A


the addition of one place numbers, Che addition of two p


You know, I had one patient this last July who had four
place numbers? The addition and subtraction. or five years of psychoanalysis and got nowhere.
H: My idea was the fact that his older brother was a mathe- Someone who knows her said, “How much attention
matician. did you give Lo the past?” I said, “You know, I comE: Yes, but you wouldn't go through addition and subtrac- pletely forgot about that.” That patient is, I think, a
tion of one digit numbers, two digit numbers, three reasonably cured person. You can imagine what it was
digit numbers, four digit numbers. You wouldn’t take a washing compulsion, as much as 20 hours a day.
up the multiplication of one digit number, and two '"remendous mother hostility. Utterly tremendous
digit numbers, and you wouldn't take up short divi- mother hostilities, brother hostilities, father hostili-
sion, and then long division, and fractions — all of this Lies. I said, “Do you know your mother is psychotic?
difficulty. You'd really tend to stick to this matter of You are not going to believe me about your mother.
the correlation. Isn’t that right? Your father? I think he is a weakling, for the simple
H: That’s right. reason that he hasn’t divorced your mother, and he
E: But what is the etiology anyway? Mathematics begins won't admit that she is psychotic. He isn't man enough
with how do you make the figure one. How do you to divorce her, and he isn’t man enough to tell her that
make the figure of two? How does the three differ he is living apart, living with a mistress. So let’s drop
from the four? And how come you say that two plus him. Your brother, he is a pain in the neck so far as
two equals four, and then you change your mind and I am concerned. I don't know him. Very glad I don't.”
say, five minus one is four. Just don’t go into that. I haven't gone into the cause or the etiology, the only
But psychotherapy, so often, goes way back to out- searching question I asked was this, “When you get
grown, outmoded, literally forgotten non-surfaceable in the shower to scrub your self for hours, tell me, do
experiences. you start at the top of your head, or the soles of your
H: I agree with that. feet, or in the middle? Do you wash from the neck
E: Virtually searching the history. This man was 35, and down or do you start with your feet and wash up? Or
he was wearing panties and a bra, and slips and do you start with your head and wash down?”
dresses, looking at himself in the mirror. But he was H: Why did you ask that?
35 years old; he was married and a father of kids. E: So that she knew I was really interested...
Looking at himself wearing feminine apparel. Age 35. H: So that you could join her in this?
He couldn’t possibly see himself as a little kid play- E: No, so that she knew I was really interested.
ing with his mother’s panties. I could spend months
and perhaps years building up that scene. (Laughter)
But as long as he wanted to look at the wearing of
feminine apparel, put him where he can see it worn.
FH: I am not disagreeing with what you are doing. I am try-
ing to get it clear in my own mind how much of the
past is necessary in order to do brief therapy.

[PAGE 022]

Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 35


“Do you want to say something agreeable? Do you
want to say something unpleasant? Do you want to
say ‘yes,’ or do you want to say ‘no’? Do you want to
speak aloud expectedly, or do you want to speak unex-
CHAPTER 2 pectedly?” I would treat this situation as I would with
a patient with a psychiatric pain and they want an op-
eration; the best orientation of the patient is, “Where
Voice Problems, is your pain, and what do you think you want to be
operated on for?” Might as well clear that up. Then
Enuresis, Insomnia I could do a physical if need be.
II: This woman had worked for the government for 30
years, and then she got a son of a bitch of a boss over
her who made her life very miserable, and she lost her
1957. Present were Milton H. Erickson and Jay Haley. voice. In discussing him, she says, “Nothing I said had
an effect on him.” She also had a public speaking
H: Td like to find out what information you want to get course the year before she lost her voice. When she
from a patient. For example, a 55-year-old woman got up in front of the class to speak, the teacher crit-
came to me because three years ago she lost her voice icized her breathing and she quit the class. This same
and can’t speak above a whisper now. If she does try difficulty in breathing came up when she lost her
to speak above a whisper, she goes into very heavy voice. In the last three years she has had speech ther-
breathing. Now what do you want to know about her apy. She has had breathing exercises where the teach-
to deal with this problem? er tried to teach her to sing and to hum. She has spent
E: What do I want to know about that woman? I want to some time with a psychiatrist who antagonized her
pose her, first of all, some very simple questions. ‘Do by telling her that her father made a coward of her,
you want to talk? Do you want to talk aloud? When? and then he tried to hypnotize her and failed.
What do you want to say?” I absolutely mean these I’: What did she seek therapy for? Humming, singing,
Pa


questions because the answer to them puts her in a breathing, standing in front of people? Was she seek-
spot where she is committing herself. ing therapy for speaking?
H: I see. IT: Yes, for speaking.

E: It puts all the burden of responsibility on her shoulders. Ir: Then why all these other approaches?
This idea of coming to me and saying, “I wish I had II: They were handed to her, I think. She went to the clinic

my voice.” Does she really want to talk? How well? and stated her difficulty and they sent her to the
When does she want to talk? Today, tomorrow, next speech clinic—the woman can speak. In fact, some
year? What does she want to say? When you have days she'll be almost perfectly all right. Then at work
that problem, define her thinking clearly by asking, she'll have some annoyance and she'll lose her voice

[PAGE 023]

36 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 37


again. But she has eight months to go before she re- E: That if she would not say one four-letter word — volun-
tires on a pension. Even though she’s very hostile to tarily would not —there are also two four-letter words
work she wants to finish there. The boss who treated she would not say. In fact, there are four. In fact there
her badly is gone, but a new administrator is in, so are eight. Actually there are 16 four-letter words she
she doesn’t deal directly with the new boss anymore. would not say — voluntarily. But she would and could
They also put in a secretary who is a very ambitious say one polite word, in fact two, in fact four, in fact
girl, and she has to talk to the secretary rather than eight, in fact 16. In fact, if we could pick up 16 more
the administrator. She is a supervisor and has worked obscene words, that would be 32 that she wouldn't
her way up from the bottom. But she feels now that voluntarily say. If there were 32 other terms she could
she doesn’t get any rewards for anything she does. For say, she would be very happy to say them instead of
example, she wrote a complicated manual on proce- the 32 obscene terms. In fact there probably are 64.
dures, put it on the administrator’s desk, and he didn’t So you are taking the attitude of voluntarily wouldn't
look at it for two months. This sort of thing is go- say, voluntarily could say, and you are building it up.
ing on in her office all the time. She’s lost interest H: 1 gather you are dealing with two different meanings
in her job, and all she wants to do is ride out her eight of the word could say. “Could say” because it’s prop-
months. She thinks she'd like to talk while riding out er, and “could say” because she is able to speak.
her eight months. But she isn’t very anxious to talk : I wouldn't define that for her.
really. She has the feeling that nothing she says is : Yes, I see.
very important anymore. Sis I just wouldn’t be bothered with that. I would have her
E: Do you know arithmetical progression? One, two, four, attention on the progression. I would choose obscene
eight, 16, 32, 64, and then 128 and so on? words because they have such a tremendous emotionH: Yes. al endowment. They are very strong. They are distracE: 1 think I would give this woman the concept of arith- tive.
metical progression. When she understood the pro- 8 Would you have her merely think of the obscene words?
gression, then I would point out to her that there are Or say them? Or discuss them? Or what?
some words you just wouldn't say. I’d have her think & I would tell her those are the words she voluntarily
about all the words that she just wouldn't say
— and would not say.
let her make a deliberate choice, of one word, two : And you wouldn’t name which words they were.
words, four words, eight words, 16, and so on. Oh no.
H: Her own choice of words she wouldn't say —or would : I want to make sure of that. (Laughing)
say? This is simply a maneuver from “could” into “would.”
E: Words she wouldn't say of her own free choice. And the : I see.
words she would say. 1 would emphasize her volun- SNS With arithmetical progression added, it really goes
tary refusal to say an obscene word, and her recogni- along.
tion that she could and would say the polite term. ee Mn : That is an interesting approach. You aren’t concerned
H: How do you tie them together in the arithmetical pro- with the function of this in her life?
gression? Mn,
Ms : How can you best find out the function in her life if she

[PAGE 024]

38 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 39


can’t function at that level first? When she maps out Youre still levitating her hand, but you're making her
in her own mind all those words that she wouldn't say, think and giving her your use of the words “higher and
and the words that she could say, then of course she higher.” And she has to think “left.”
comes up with what words would actually be appro- H: What does that do?
priate even though she wouldn't say them. One can E: It relates speech and the movement of the hand. The
think freely about the descriptive terms for that boss. same thing can happen to the left hand. Only that
One can think about the inflection. Take inflection —is time when you say higher it's “right.” Then 1 would
inflection speech to her? It isn't. shift her chair around and put her in a different posiH: I see. tion. In a different geographical relationship. She can
E: The pause in utterances, those aren't speech. Just like say “left” and she can say “right” in a variety of cir-
the magician—he'l say, “You can see me put my hand cumstances.
here, and you can see me put my hand there. The rab- H: You mean have her say left or think left?
bits are going to show up there.” The pause, then a E: Think left, think right. But think it with intensity.
word here, a word there, and the pause. She is really You're going to have subliminal speech.
going to look for that pause. The pause is not speech, H: I begin to see what you're after. (Laugh) Producing sub-
and she can pause. But to pause she has to say a word, liminal speech will produce speech?
and then pause, and then say another word to define E: Yes. You can say “yes.” You can say “yes” (louder), you
the pause. But the pause is emphasized as the impor- can say “yes” (louder), and you can say “yes” (louder),
tant thing. and get more and more insistent. I told a patient that
H: You'd teach her the importance of pauses? she could think just as strongly, just as forcibly, as
E: That inflection which is not speech to her conscious she can speak the word “yes,” but the only answer to
thinking; inflection, tone qualities, pauses, are not me was “no,” “no,” “NO.” I kept insisting, “you can say
speech. yes,” and finally her subliminal speech exploded into
H: I am rather obligated to use hypnosis with her since “NO.” She was convinced that she was absolutely
she came for that, and 1 find she goes into a pretty aphonic. So aphonic that she could not even whisper.
good trance, once she got over the resistance she de- But she prided herself on her intelligence and her abili-
veloped after seeing that psychiatrist. She can at least ty to think. So 1 built up her pride in her thinking, and
levitate her hand. How would you use hypnosis with the more insistent I became, the more I kept on say-
her? ing “yes,” the more she was thinking “no.” And subE: How well can she levitate her hands? liminal speech became speech.
H: It goes up slowly— about six inches. H: You don't seem at all concerned about, for example,
E: And she can think while you are levitating her hand. what function this has in relationship to her husband.
When you tell her “lifting higher and higher,” she can In other words, in your thinking, what’s the purpose
think, “It's not going up higher, it's moving to the behind losing the speech?
left.” Everytime you say the word “higher,” she can E: The purpose behind her losing her speech is very nar-
think “left.” What have you done with the levitation? rowed and constricted to you, and the purpose of

[PAGE 025]

40 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 41


speech is very wide and comprehensive. Now, why H: What do you mean by blanking out thoughts?
give all your attention to that very, very narrow se- E: How often in normal, everyday life, do we have the ex-
quence of it? Because she is entitled not to say some- perience of being introduced to somebody and we re-
thing to her husband, she is entitled to defeat her hus- peat the name, “Pleased to meet you, Mrs. Jones.” Ten
band. But she is not entitled to defeat herself in all seconds later, what was that name? We blanked it
the rest of the areas of her life. Therefore, you try to out. And she can blank out the various things in rela-
limit her aphonia to the things where the aphonia be- tionship to her husband, if her aphonia is in relation-
longs. Just because strawberries give you hives, that’s ship to her husband.
no reason why you shouldn't eat potatoes and broc- H: Here’s what happens with her husband. When she be-
coli, and meat —right? If there’s going to be any die- gins an argument with him, he gets up and leaves the
tary restriction, let’s make it strawberries. The gen- room, comes back in a little while, and talks as if they
eral reaction of these patients is to react to strawberry hadn’t an argument. So she has the feeling that noth-
hives by cutting out all the diet. ing she says makes any difference.
H: Well, if she does this for a reason — let us say hypothet- E: So he wins?
ically because she wanted to defeat her husband — H: Yes.
then she couldn't have aphonia for that purpose with- E: Why can't she take that over?
out making it quite explicit in their relationship unless H: How would she take it over?
she lost her voice completely. As an excuse for losing E: During the next argument with her husband, get her
it with her husband, she'd have to lose it also at work. to notice and appreciate all those minimal movements
E: Yd be perfectly willing to teach her that she could blank he is making in preparation to leaving the room. Have
out thoughts, that she could say the inappropriate her really note them, memorize them, because there
thing. I could teach her the art of misunderstanding. are going to be certain minimal movements that tell
To give you an illustration, I was rushing to class in her when her husband is going to get up and leave the
college on a windy day, and I was really hurrying. I room. She waits for a certain number of them, and
rushed around the corridor and crashed into some- then she says, “I'm leaving the room,” and exits. What
body. That person said, “You goddamned clumsy happens? Now and then some obstreperous intern or
fool,” and I hauled my watch out and said, “Quarter resident nurse or attendant lost their temper with me.
past two,” and went on. He stood there looking, won- They'd come into the office and cuss me out. Some
dering (laugh), “Quarter past two,” and he'd called me would resort to profanity. “I think you’re a goddamn
“soddamn clumsy fool.” “Quarter past two.” What dirty stinkin’ son of a bitch.” He’d wait for my blast
could he do? It’s quarter past two. to reply, but I would say, “But you omitted a couple
H: That’s the art of misunderstanding? (Laugh) of words there. What you meant to say was, “You're
E: What could the guy do? It would take a long involved a goddamn stinkin’ bloody dirty son of a bitch of a
explanation to tell me that he hadn’t asked me what bastard.” Where was he?
time it was. He couldn’t cuss me out any longer. He H: He was in the one-down position.
was completely helpless. lc: Very thoroughly, very helplessly so. He couldn't say

[PAGE 026]

42 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 43


“no,” and he couldn't say “yes.” If he said “yes,” he had H: You make the issue not the contest between them but
to admit he was incomplete. (Laughing) If he said “no,” the satisfaction of something else.
he had to dispute himself. E: The contest should be an incidental part of a greater
H: That's a double bind. whole.
E: Why shouldn't a woman tell her husband, “Now it's my H: Well, it seems most psychopathology comes when the
turn to leave the room,” and she herself interrupt the relationship is the contest and there is nothing else.
argument. She herself put an end to it. I can assure E: I know, and it is overemphasized in psychopathology.
you that they can get great glee out of it. (Laughter) “Yesterday my husband put me down, today I put
“Every time I get in an argument with my husband, him down —so we are equal.” But they aren’t equal.
he listens just so long, then he goes out and smokes He put her down in relationship to the argument by
a pipe, and he comes back after he smokes his pipe. walking out on her and then returning to the room in
He acts as we didn't have an argument.” I'd point out relationship to the closed argument. That’s as far as
to that particular woman, “Yes, you have flowers in he went. She put her husband down by walking out
your front yard. Watch him carefully. When he starts of the room. She came back in relationship to the flow-
fumbling for his pipe, you know he's going to walk out ers that she arranges in a vase, which is a totally dif-
in the yard. Say something scorching to him, and add ferent type of return.
to it, Now, it's my turn to go out in the yard. Then H: Yes, it certainly is.
go out and get some flowers. You'll like your flowers; E: And those flowers are her complete satisfaction. She's
you'll enjoy your flowers.” put her husband down again. She's beautified the room.
H: 1 see, you train people how to deal with a relationship. Her husband only returns to the room—with a siE: Yes, because out of that relatonship will come the ad- lenced argument.
justment they want. When you instruct a woman how H: Yes. You teach a patient how to take charge in a pos-
to handle her husband, you are showing her how to itive way. What I admire about your work is how suc-
change a relationship which is unsatisfactory to her, cessfully you do that yourself with patients. It seems
in the sense that she is left feeling one-down, into a to me taking charge is an essential aspect of therapy.
more symmetrical relationship in which she can han- E: But you must be willing to put the patient one-up.
dle her husband. But I add to it, “Pick some flowers.” FH: When you put the patient one-up, the patient isn’t one-
She likes her flowers. up.
H: What does that add? E: The patient believes that, he feels it. But to maintain
E: Her total integrity. Those flowers are hers. She is the that feeling, that belief, the patient has to put me one-
one who is taking care of the flowers and she is the up.
one who plants them and is interested in them. And H: I see. I notice you sometimes tell a patient that you can
so her superiority over her husband is but a mere in- solve his problems and that it is simple. Do you con-
cidental thing in that total life situation. The impor- sistently present that?
tant thing is that she has put her husband down as E: Oh no.
a part of going out and really enjoying her flowers and FH: I just wondered.
picking some. fc. With some patients I point out that this is an exceeding-

[PAGE 027]

44 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 45


ly difficult complicated thing and it isn’t going to be You merely get across to them the idea of handling
easy.
it in a more competent way. And the willingness to
H: Here is another thing I want to ask you about relation- do so. 1 remember a woman who couldn't stand her
ships. I find that symptoms seem to arise whena rela- in-laws visiting her three or four times a week and she
tionship shifts. For example, an insomnia patient of developed a stomach ulcer. She had a stomach pain
mine seemed to develop insomnia at a time when his which incapacitated her at work, in her own family re-
wife got sick. I think before that he had a relationship lationships, and in her social relationships. My state-
where she tended to take care of him. She developed ment was, “You really can't stand your in-laws, but
a variety of afflictions: bursitis, and some stomach you can stand church.”
trouble and a couple of operations for this and that, A: You can stand what?
and some lumps that might have been cancer, all in E: Church.
a period of a year, and he began to have insomnia. It H: Oh.
seems to me that he began to compete for the one- E: “Y
ou can stand the card games with the neighbors. You
down position with her as if he would feel better if she like your work, but you really don't like your relatives.
was taking care of him because he developed some in- They’re a pain in the belly. Why not have the pain in
firmity like being unable to sleep. I find consistently your belly everytime they come? It ought to be useful-
that when a relationship is established a certain way, ly developed; they certainly can't expect you to mop
when something affects it so that it’s changed, then up the floor if you vomit.” (Laughter) She hears that
the person tries to reestablish it back the way it was statement, “They can't expect you to mop up the floor
with a symptom of some kind. That is one of the rea- if you vomit when they come.” What did she do? She
sons I am interested in the kind of instruction you vomited when they came, and she weakly and piteous-
would give to a wife to get one-up on her husband, or ly had them mop up the floor.
to win an argument, or to change the relationship. FH: (Laughter) Did they come back again?
That is, this woman handles her husband by not be- E: She would hear them drive in the yard, she’d rush to
ing able to talk. If she could handle him better in other the refrigerator, and drink a glass of milk. They’d
ways, she wouldn't need this symptom. come in and she'd greet them, start talking, get sick
E: Yes, she needs to handle him comfortably, rather than to her stomach, and vomit. She had her wherewithal,
handle him in a helpless way. she just wasn't sure if she had the wherewithal to
H: Yes. vomit.
E: Therefore, you can teach her how to handle him com- H: And she did this every time they came?
fortably and there is no reason why she should be E: They quit coming. They started calling up to find out
helpless. Not only helpless in relationship to him, but if she were well enough. “Not today, not today, not
helpless in relationship to all the other areas of her life. today.” Then she might say, “I think I’m all right toH: You have to know quite a bit about relationships in day,” but unfortunately she made an error.
order to help people handle relationships in more com- H: Now that's teaching her to handle them in a weak way
petent ways. and helpless way, isn't it?
E: You don't have to know. They know the relationships. E: As long as she wanted to be helpless and have a stom-

[PAGE 028]

46 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 47

ach ulcer, fine— go along with her. The relatives got
which he tries to say a word, and the harder he tries
sick and tired of mopping up that floor. (Laughter)
to say it the more he can't say it. He has to make a
She had her way, and she saved all her pain in the bel-
substitute word and he can say that. He's had this for
ly for their visits and had her own satisfaction. It is
years. It developed when he and his twin were young
an awfully good stomach she had; it could throw the
and had a private language. It was more of an accent
relatives out. (Laughter) That reversed pride.
than an actual language and they still have it some.
HH: Pride on the usefulness of the stomach you mean?
No one could understand them but their sister. They
E: The goodness of it, and the usefulness and the effective-
went to school and no one could understand them at
ness.
school, including the teacher. They were given speech
H: She gave up the stomach ulcer?
therapy to teach them to speak more clearly. When
E: Oh certainly. She didn’t need to keep it. So much simpler
they were kids the teacher couldn't understand them,
to vomit and make them clean up the mess. After they
and this boy started to block. They stopped the
stopped coming for a couple of months she invited
speech therapy and he stopped blocking. Then when
them to come over for the afternoon. They came wari-
he was about 12 or 13 they gave them speech therapy.
ly. She could control them. After they'd been there the
Once again he started to block and they stopped the
afternoon and she wanted them to leave, she mere-
speech therapy, but he continued blocking. Now it
ly had a distressed look on her face and her rubbing
seems to me, looking at the problem, that blocking
on her abdomen. They were very ready to leave. She
serves some function with him in the sense of sepa-
hadn't asked them. Why should they mop up the floor
rating him from his twin. It’s the only thing that real-
again? (Laughter) Was it a weak way, or was it a
ly identifies him. His difficulty is that anything he
strong way? Anyway, the relatives were whipped by it.
does, any talent he develops or any skill he develops,
H: It was weak in the sense that it inflicted the punish-
he immediately teaches his twin, so that he never has
ment without taking responsibility for the punish-
anything that is his own that he can do and that his
ment, and her husband couldn’t get mad at her for in-
twin can't do. Except block. That appears to me to
flicting punishment on his relatives because this was
be the problem.
a helpless thing she was doing.
E: That he won’t develop a personal identity?
E: But it was a strong thing when she kept that glass of
H: Yes. He's doing better with it. He has his girl friend he
milk handy in the refrigerator. That was deliberate,
goes steady with and so he doesn’t double date with
intentional. The old joke about the person who always
his twin, and he has somewhata life apart from him,
dropped in for Sunday dinner and was always served
but not really. I think they were very close as little
sponge cake- until he finally caught on. (Laughter)
kids and they sort of hung on to each other as the
And the enjoyment of asking that courteous question,
mother went through a divorce and was separated
until finally he understood.
from the father for some years, and so on. When I try
H: Let's talk about another case that I am faced with. It’s
to think of some substitute, or something 1 can de-
kind of a complicated one. It is a boy who is 17 who
velop in him, it's very difficult because he feels guil-
is an identical twin. He developed a speech block in
ty if he doesn't teach his twin how to do it. I had an

[PAGE 029]

48 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 49

idea you would know mechanically how to handle this,
meaning of the sentence I read to you? It's a mish-
as well as finding a substitute. He blocks badly when
mash, isn’t that right? (Laughter)
he reads because he can't substitute any words then.
H: That's right.
One day in a trance 1 had him develop the feeling he
E: It is as meaningless as if I remain silent, unable to read
was his brother and had him read something and he
the sentence, isn’t that right? Yet it was more enter-
read it perfectly without any blocking at all. Of
taining. But the important thing is the acknowledg-
course, his brother doesn’t block. But he is capable of
ment I can read this way—I can read backwards.
doing just about anything in a trance I think.
H: This boy can read. I had him cover up the words followE: This is something that happened yesterday with a pa-
ing. He can read one word at a time.
tient who blocks. A musician blocks on reading bass
E: That’s right.
in music. She just can't possibly read bass because the
HR: The anticipation is where he blocks. He sees a “p” com-
blocking developed in the late teens. Yet she can read
ing and he knows he’s going to have difficulty saying
all music except the bass. She says that it's ridiculous,
“p.” When he doesn’t see it coming he doesn’t block
but she has to read what's in between and all around
when he gets to it.
and she just blocks out. Listen to this. (Reads a para-
E: He can read the individual words. What does he block
graph backwards)
on? The succession of words. You read a sentence
H: Reading backwards?
backwards and the succession of words is already
E: Reading a sentence backwards. It makes no sense at
defeated by virtue of reading backwards. He doesn’t
all does it? It was read to you and it was not read to
have to block; it’s already been done for him — and he
you. Right?
can read a succession of words. (Laughs) “Table the
H: Yes.
on.” An intelligent man could reverse that, “on the
E: You'll have to admit it was reading, you'll have to ad-
table.” He doesn’t have to, but he can’t avoid it. And
mit it was not reading. I think my patient is going to
the fun of reading a story backwards and then tell-
read the bass backwards. With these reading prob-
ing it. Now, not having it typed out I can’t do it. But
lems that now and then come in, I show them they
I ran across a story that I would use for grade school
can read and not read. It’s marvelous sport. It's as
kids and high school kids that can read, and that
ridiculous as can be. It's funny. You read a story back-
would be redoing the story of the painting of “Custer’s
wards. Á nice little joke. You memorize it, then you
Last Thoughts.” The artist was instructed to make
tell it to someone backwards. (Laughter) They look
a picture portraying Custer’s last thoughts. In great
at you. (Laughter) What are you talking about?
secrecy the artist painted it but did not tell anybody
H: What does this achieve?
what the painting was until the day of unveiling.
E: What does it achieve? A child just simply can't read.
When the picture was unveiled the audience stood
He doesn't read by virtue of his blocking. He's perfect-
horrified in bewilderment. Because it was a painting
ly willing to do anything else. So you teach him the
of a fish wearing a halo, and Indians with flowers
trick of reading backwards. That's really not reading
growing out of their heads. He was asked to explain
you know, because there's no meaning. What was the
and he said, “Custer’s last thoughts were, ‘Holy mack-

[PAGE 030]

50 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 51


erel, the blooming Indians are coming’.” (Laughter) The twin would not recognize what I was doing. But
You teach that to a kid reading it to him backwards — he and his twin can sit side by side; his twin would
and what a practical joke, what a charming joke it see me from one angle, and he would see me from an-
would be to tell that backwards to somebody. At other angle. Right?
grade school level, freshman and sophomore in high H: Yes.
school, that story is irresistible. It would be a prac- E: And the first dawning of realization that his point of
tical joke. It would be as charming as can be, as won- view is different. He could really wonder what the dif-
derful as all of this bee-bop language and all the other ference was, and then I could point out, “You sit there,
languages they invent. But you know you have to you see me, and while you're describing me a chain of
read that story to enjoy it—he wouldn’t know that. stray thoughts go through your mind because of this
Because he’d have to read the story in order to mem- position. Leftness would be more predominant. When
orize it backwards. you sit over there rightness would be more predomiH: He can read it to himself without blocking. nant. Even within yourself, when your twin is sitting
E: Yes. over there and you're sitting here, over there you'll
H: It’s the reading aloud that is his difficulty. have a different point of view and your twin will have
E: Yes, but in reciting that backwards he would be vocaliz- a different point of view sitting there.” That's some-
ing aloud with a full knowledge of a complete story thing that he can understand and it is a separateness
forwards. Aloud, and he wouldn’t know that. and a difference, and the nucleus of individual orienH: 1 see. tation. “You can put your twin in your seat, but I’ve
H: How do you give a twin a personal identity? shifted my hand and your twin has to see something
E: I certainly would go into the physiological growth, the totally different. And he never will see this because
sexual growth, physical experiences, physiological ex- I haven’t got my hand back in the same position. I
periences. Then I would acquaint him very thoroughly don’t remember how I had it. The next appointment
with point of view. For example, if I asked you to de- I want you to come after eating a good meal and see
scribe me as I sit here, you could. If I asked for a de- how differently you feel. Then come to see me with
tailed description, you would describe everything. I an empty belly. Because you're a constantly changing
can ask you to remember. Having done that, I ask you person. You change in relationship to a full belly or
to pick up your chair, put it over in the alcove there, to an empty belly. When you come out before your
and then proceed to describe me. See how many dif- evening meal you'll still be thinking about eating and
ferent ways, how many differences there would be in what you would like to eat. When you come after a
the description. In this position you see the left side meal you'll think how good what you had eaten was
of my face much better than the right side. You see or how disappointed you were that it didn’t taste as
all the digits of my left hand, only part of the digits good as you hoped. A totally different person before
of my right hand. You can see my left shoulder; you eating, after eating.” And the build-up in here of a
can’t see my right one anywhere near as well. Over on sense of personal identity. “I light this cigarette
— and
the other side of the room you get a different view. will your twin certainly think the same thoughts as

[PAGE 031]

52 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 53


you think when I light a cigarette? You're sitting over than they have. Does that mean they do then sleep
there, he is sitting there. He’s going to see froma dif- longer than they have?
ferent angle.” Until at that very simple level I demon- E: Isn't that what you want them to believe? Because
strate that he had a personal orientation that was in- they'll make good on that sleep. They are always mak-
dividual with him. ing good on the belief that they don’t sleep. “I only
H: Here's one of the difficulties. I find now there are ex- sleep one hour, that’s all the sleep I get at night!” “I
amples of those who can’t do things, but also people only sleep two hours.” “I only sleep an hour anda half.”
who can do them at times. Now this twin who blocks “I only sleep three hours. I’d give anything if I could
can, at times, not block, and at other times he blocks. sleep eight hours.” I am not asking them very much
So it isn’t that he doesn’t know that he can do some- when I ask them to sleep one hour plus one second
thing without blocking. He does know this. tonight. One hour plus two seconds tomorrow night.
E: This arithmetical progression is so easily comprehended H: You are not asking them to sleep that long; you are ask-
by patients. Sometimes with the insomnias I ask if ing them to believe they have slept that long. You as-
there is anything wrong in believing that they slept sume that’s the same thing?
one second longer than they actually did. One second E: They're going to put their belief into action, you know
longer tonight, two seconds longer tomorrow night. that.
H: Believing that they slept that much longer than they H: Then in a week do they report to you that they've slept
actually did? one hour plus whatever the increment?
E: Yes. E: Yes. One second, two seconds, four seconds, eight secH: What does that do? onds, 16 seconds, 32 seconds, 64 seconds. It’s a whole
E: Two seconds longer tomorrow night, four seconds week of accumulated belief, accumulated perform-
longer than the next night and they have comprehend- ance, and tremendous alteration in their thinking
ed the arithmetical progression because they have about their sleep. “Of course, I don’t really know if I
worked out the old arithmetical problem: A black- slept, I don’t really know.” But whether they express
smith has horseshoe nails, 32 nails for a set of shoes it or not, there’s an equal probability that they did
for a horse. One cent for the first set of horseshoe sleep as well as a probability that they were awake.
nails, two cents for the second four —the farmer dis- Previously there had been no probability of their be-
covers that he owes 28 million dollars. (Laughter) Pa- ing asleep, and they do want to sleep, and you've given
tients can understand that. And to think that they them a probability. A completely acceptable probabili-
slept one second longer tonight and two seconds ty. They’ve had a whole week in which to emphasize
longer tomorrow night, and four seconds longer the one minute and four seconds. It’s such an insidious
next night. ] am not asking very much of them. But thing that they can’t fight against it. You have arith-
there’s arithmetical progression. And they can go to metical progression by constantly doubling it, and at
bed, toying with that idea of arithmetical progression. one minute and four seconds you can halve the dou-
It’s very sedative. bling, so it’s only one minute and 30 seconds and just
H: What happens when they think they have slept longer add another 30 seconds every night. Just add 30 sec-

[PAGE 032]

54 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 55


onds. Anybody can do that. It really is just a game, I told him that it meant work and he agreed that he
you know, but it’s a cumulative thing. Then they dis- could do the work. So I explained to him that instead
cover that they are adding hours. of going to bed tonight at 8 o'clock, he was to get out
H: Is that the way you usually treat insomnia? the can of Johnson floor wax and some rags. “It will
E: Oh, no. I had a 65-year-old man come to me who had only cost you one hour and a half of sleep, or two
suffered a little insomnia 15 years previously and the hours at the most. And you start polishing those
physician gave him sodium amytal. As the years went floors. You'll hate it, you'll hate me and you won't
by he became habituated to sodium amytal. Three think well of me as the hours drag along. But you
months previously his wife had died, and left him polish those hardwood floors all night long and go to
alone living with his unmarried son. The man had the real estate office the next morning at 8 o'clock.
been regularly taking 15 capsules, three grains each. Stop polishing on the floor at 7 o'clock, which will give
A dosage of 45 grains of sodium amytal. He went to you a whole hour for rising. Then the next night at
bed at 8 o'clock, rolled and tossed until midnight, then 8 o'clock get up and wax the floor. You'll really polish
he'd take his 15 capsules, 45 grains, a couple of glasses those floors all over again, and you won't like it. But
of water, lie down and get about an hour and a half you'll lose at most two hours of sleep. The third night,
to two hours’ sleep. Then he'd rouse up and roll and do the same, and the fourth night do the same.”
toss until getting up time. The 15 capsules no longer He polished those floors the first night, the second
worked since his wife died. He’d gone to the family night, the third night. The fourth night he said, “I’m
physician and asked for a prescription for 18 capsules. so weary following that crazy psychiatrist’s orders,
The family physician got frightened and apologized but I suppose I might as well.” He lost six hours of
for ever allowing him to become a barbiturate addict. sleep, he had two more to lose before I cured him real-
He sent him to me. I asked the old man if he really ly. He said to himself, “I think I'll lie down in bed and
wanted to get over his insomnia, if he really wanted rest my eyes for half an hour.” (Laughter) He woke
to get over his drug addicton. He said he did and he up at 7 the next morning. That night he was con-
was very honest and very sincere. I told him he could fronted with a dilemma. Should he go to bed when he
do it easily. still owed me two hours of sleep? He reached a com-
In taking his history I learned he lived in a large promise. He'd get ready for bed and get out the John-
house, with hardwood floors, and that he did most of son floor wax and the polishing rags at 8 o'clock. If
the cooking and the dishwashing, while the son did he could read 8:15 on the clock, he'd get up and polish
the housework, especially the waxing of the floors the floors all night. A year later he told me he had
which the old man hated. He hated the smell of John- been sleeping every night. In fact, he says, “You know
son’s floor wax and his son didn’t mind. So I explained I don’t dare suffer from insomnia. I look at that clock
to the old man that I could cure him, that it would and I say if I’m awake in 16 minutes I’ve got to polish
cost him at the most eight hours’ sleep, and that’s all, the floors all over, and I mean it too!” You know, the
which would be a small price to pay. Would he will- old man would do anything to get out of polishing the
ingly give up eight hours’ sleep to recover from his floors—even sleep. He didn't dare to stay awake.
insomnia? The old man promised me that he would. I had a 29-year-old man who wet the bed every

[PAGE 033]

56 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 57


night, for 29 years. He came to me for therapy one for two weeks. Then I'll go to sleep, and if I wet the
winter and said he wanted quick therapy, brief ther- bed that will mean one whole week of walking 40
apy, nothing more. Would I take him on. I asked him blocks whether I’ve a wet or dry bed.” He came back
what his symptom was. His routine was to go to bed, to report to me that he had a dry bed. He still has his
and by midnight or half past 12 he would have the bed week’s walking in reserve. He came back to report to
wet. He would get up, change the linen completely, me again, “I haven't had to put in that other week's
go back to bed and sleep the rest of the night. Next walking. I'll tell you something else you might be in-
night he would come home, wash out the linen, hang terested in. I’ve worked at a job I’ve hated for nine
it up to dry, go to bed, at 12:30 get up and change the years. Since I quit wetting the bed, I developed an im-
linen, stack it up, go back to bed and sleep. The next pulse to ask my boss for a raise. He gave it to me, and
day he’d wash out that linen and fold the other pair was very generous. He told me I should have asked
of sheets. for it before. I took the raise and was grateful about
I said to him, “Since you get up at 12:00, 12:30 or it for a couple of weeks, and then I got mad as hell.
1:00 o’clock, whatever it is when you wet the bed, all I still didn’t like my job. So I went to my boss and
you have to dois change the linen, prepare your bed, said I want a transfer. He said, ‘Well, I think it’s about
dress completely, walk 20 blocks down the street, and time you ask for a transfer.’ So now I’ve got a job at
turn around and walk back.” He would be glad that even higher pay from the raise I got. What happened
he had that much of the night left to sleep since he’d to me?” “Since you have a dry bed, you respect your-
be tired walking that 40 blocks. He refused to accept self.” As he worded it, “You mean as a bed pisser I
this suggestion, saying he preferred to wet the bed didn’t dare ask for a raise?” I said, “That’s right. A nor-
to walking the 40 blocks. Three months later he came mal man, sleeping normally, is man enough to ask for
back and said, “How does that go?” I told him again what he wants. When he was nothing more than a
and he said, “You know it’s wortha trial.” I said, “All piss-the-bed, he wasn’t entitled to anything.”
right, you rejected it once. So you can give it a trial H: Why did you choose that suggestion in this case?
and reject it again. I'll add something to it. Regardless E: Wouldn’t you do anything to have your bed dry to avoid
of whether you wet the bed or not, you set your alarm walking 40 blocks, at midnight in the wintertime?
clock every night to arouse you at 12:30. Whether the H: What you're dealing with in both insomnia and bedwet-
bed is wet or not you walk 20 blocks. After you have ting is an involuntary thing, and you get them to over-
done that every night for two weeks, you'll do any- come an involuntary thing by voluntary behavior.
thing to have a dry bed. Promise yourself absolutely
= : That's right, voluntary behavior. They'll resort to any-
that if at any time you ever wet the bed for which you thing to escape that voluntary behavior, even control
cannot get a medical excuse from me— such as uncon- involuntary behavior.
sciousness, cold, or pneumonia, or something like that II: You first get them thoroughly commited to how much
—then you'll walk every night 40 blocks for one whole they want to get rid of the problem.
week.” 17: That's right. Do they really want to? How much sleep
He said, “I’m fed up with it. I’m going to do that would the old man give up? Eight hours wasn’t asking

[PAGE 034]

58 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 59


very much, only one hour and a half, two hours at the mind. He did that and had a good night’s sleep. The
most. He gave up plenty of sleep every night anyhow. following week he came in cured and he still is six
I wasn’t asking him for much. But boy, it was effec- months later. I don’t know whether it was my assign-
tive. ing him this or not.
H: Well, this brings up a case I had of insomnia which I E: It was your assigning him that.
cured, and I didn’t know why it was cured. That’s one H: I could have done that three weeks earlier.
of the reasons I decided to come and see you. He is E: One of my professional cases had insomnia, never got
a successful attorney. Last May he went on a trip and to sleep before two, always awakened at four. He was
had difficulty sleeping. For seven months he got a hurried man, and had erratic working hours. He
about two hours of sleep per night. A couple of nights hadn’t been reading for years. This insomnia had been
he'd stay awake all night. When I saw him he had been going on for some 12 years, and I led him out on all
on about six grains of amytal a night, as well as on the books he had promised himself to read since col-
a tranquilizer, and still he wasn't sleeping. He was one lege. He named this book and that book. He did want
of these guys who insisted he had nothing wrong with to go through Dickens, and he did want to go through
him — perfectly happy with his work, perfectly happy Scott. In college he had promised himself to read some
with his wife and children —the only thing wrong was other set of books. I asked him what he thought about
he couldn’t sleep. I helped him in a few sessions, and all these book reading promises that he had renewed
I have no idea why he really was better. We did a lot and broken throughout the years. I made him feel as
of talking about his life. I didn’t really know what to guilty as I could, and I told him there was a cure for
do to get him over this, except to reassure him about his insomnia. He was to go to bed at 11:00 o'clock and,
some of the things that were on his mind. But I did if he was not asleep at 11:30, he was to get up and
some things related to what you're talking about. He keep his promises one by one. But he could not sit in
was saying that every time he was going to sleep, a chair and read because he'd fall asleep. He was to
something would pull him awake. I thought that it fix up the lamp on the mantel and lean on the mantel
was some kind of a thought that he had on his mind, and read for the rest of the night. (Laughter) He went
but he couldn't get anywhere near it because every- to sleep at 11:30 very shortly, because he knew if he'd
thing was perfectly all right with him. So I suggested waken at 2, or 3, or 4, he'd be up for the rest of the
that he think about all the most horrible things that night standing against the mantel reading and have
he could do, or could see himself doing. He couldn’t the guilt feeling for not keeping his promises. That
think of any, so I had him think of all the horrible was an evasion for him. He was in to see me a year
things Mr. Smith, some hypothetical person, might later, laughing at the “swindle” I had worked on him.
have on his mind. He then thought of murder, homo- But he said, “It’s a good swindle. My practice is much
sexuality, putting his wife in a whorehouse, and vari- better, my income is much better. I am healthy, I am
ous things like that. I told him to go home that night, happier, I sleep nights. I am reading some of those
and before he went to sleep he must deliberately try books, but I’ve got a whole set of Dickens waiting in
to think of all the horrible things he could bring to his case my insomnia comes back.” (Laughter)

[PAGE 035]

60 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Voice Problems, Enuresis, Insomnia 61

F: Is that what you typically do— assign them something to a respect of his doubts. You let the correction of
that they don’t want to do, that’s very difficult for his doubts come from within him. 1 don't think you
them to do? should say, “Now that 1 have taught you to sleep eight
E: Yet in some way they want to do it. hours a night, I can straighten out the rest of your
H: When would you use arithmetic progression with a pa- problems.” No, you say, “Do you suppose you have
tient rather than the scrub the floor approach? any other problem that might be worked on?” “I supE: Some people haven't got enough strength of character pose you could straighten out some of my marital
to scrub the floor, so you present them with this arith- problems.”
metical progression. Also, a patient can come in and H: When they say that, they're committing themselves to
tell you, “I sleep a great deal, eight hours at night; I the sleep problem being solved?
wouldn't have believed it was possible.” Then you can E: Why yes.
ask him, “Well, since that’s solved, are there some H: I see.
other problems of personality that really need solv- E: That's no longer an issue. How many patients have I
ing?” A negative approach, yes. “Well, I suppose you done brief therapy on for some definite problem, pre-
can work on my sex adjustments with my wife. I sup- senting problem, and have them come back, “You han-
pose you can work on my relationships with my in- dled that so well, I think I better have you discuss
laws.” this with me.” 1 knew that she'd discuss it with me
H: Why would you say that’s a negative approach? anyway.
E: What did I say?
H: “Are there some other problems of personality that
could be worked on?”
E: “That could be worked on.” It’s a negative approach.
You're just raising this as an unimportant question.
“Do you suppose there are problems that could be
worked on?”
H: It doesn’t sound very negative to me. (Laughter)
E: “That’s a beautiful job that you have done on the lawn.
Do you suppose you could clip the hedge?” I’m rais-
ing the doubt.
H: 1 see.
E: But the goodness of the job on the lawn is going to over-
weight the negativeness of the quesiton, “Do you sup-
pose you could clip the hedge?” “The devil, I did a good
job on the lawn; of course, I could clip the hedge and
do just as good a job.” You're reinforcing the goodness
of the lawn job. And your patient is always entitled

[PAGE 036]

Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 63


that reason be satisfied by having the headaches at
a time most convenient for her and for the shortest
length of time that satisfies the reason? Need the
headache be continuously sharp and painful or could
CHAPTER 3 it be a slow dull headache culminating in a brief period
of pain and then trailing off in a slow dull headache?
Thereby I emphasize that she has the headaches, that
Headaches, she can keep the headache, the duration, the sever-
ity. I would put it to her in such a way that she is not
Unconscious Conversation, going to confront me with the idea, “But I can’t get
rid of the headache.” I am just suggesting a modifica-

Assertiveness tion, and she is going to accept that. She can’t help
herself. She knows I am not overpromising her, that
I am taking a completely reasonable attitude. She
knows that I am being definitively too conservative.
She wants me to be less conservative
—but it’s her
1957. Present were Milton H. Erickson and Jay Haley. want, not my insistence. When she has these head-
aches, is it really necessary for her to have other soH: Once again I would like to present to you a type of case matic manifestations with them or are the headaches
and ask you what information you would want from in themselves enough? Does she need any special emo-
the patient. What would you want to know about a tional components or are the headaches in themselves
patient who is referred to you because she had severe enough?
headaches once every two weeks, often once a week. H: That’s an interesting way to handle a headache.
These headaches last about three days and she has E: It’s often a very, very effective way. I had a patient with
to be knocked out with drugs to get some sleep. a headache for three days every week. The first interE: The first thing I would make clear to the patient is this: view I introduced that systematic presentation of
She undoubtedly has those headaches for a reason. those ideas. She skipped the next three weeks, and
The first important consideration is how many of then came in and told me that this fourth week she was
these headaches she needs for that unknown reason. going to have a headache. I asked her to outline her
Does she really need them every week, or every two program for the week. When would be the most con-
weeks? Does she really need to have them last three venient time to have the headache? Would it be possi-
days? Would it be sufficient for whatever the reason ble for her to precipitate the headache a few hours in
is to have the headache last only two and a half days advance, or even a day in advance? Or could she delay
instead of three? Or, since she has some unknown it a few hours or even a day? For how long a time did
reason for the headaches, is it necessary for her to she want it, and did she really feel, since she skipped
have the headaches at an inconvenient time? Could three weeks, that she ought to make this headache


62

[PAGE 037]

64 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 65


more severe than usual, or did she want to make it E: In what way would it add anything?
less severe as a possible result of her learning during H: Well, for example, this particular woman I am talk-
the past three weeks? All I was asking her to do really ing about with headaches, they follow certain se-
was to take some kind of control over the headache, quences...

which she didn’t really consciously recognize as voli- E: (Interrupting) No, what I mean is, would it add any-
tional control. No matter what she did she could make thing to my happiness?
it more severe, or less severe. She could speed it up, H: Oh, you're talking about you and Betty.
or she could delay it. Whatever she did to the E: Yes. Would it add anything to know the real reason why
headache was an expression of her control. Her reac- I fell in love with her?
tion was, “It might as well be just the usual headache,” H: No, I don’t think it would.
which was deliberate control. E: WhenI first saw Betty walking across the campus at
H: I see. the University of Michigan, she was about 60 feet
E: “And it might just as well last the usual three days. It away from me and I looked at her and I thought, Tl
might just as well occur unexpectedly, the way it sit beside her at the luncheon meeting of the Academy
usually did.” I said, “That would be a sensible thing, of Michigan Arts and Sciences, because that’s the girl
because a month from now you might want to alter that I’m going to marry. I managed to get a place be-
it. You'd really like to study this headache thoroughly, side her, and I was determined that I was going to
so a month from now you can put into force any spe- marry her. I didn’t see her again from March until
cial alterations you want to make.” What was I telling June. Then I really knew I was going to marry her.
her? —Skip another three weeks. Now, what did I see in that girl some 60 feet away
H: You were? from me walking down the sidewalk?
E: She didn’t know I was saying that, just as you didn’t H: 1 don't quite understand why you equate an incapaci-
realize it. tating physical symptom with love.
H: No. (Laughter) Now you presented it as an unknown E: Because they both influence your life so tremendously.
reason for the headaches. Do you try to find out the H: All right.
reason? E: Whatever the reasons were, they certainly have govE: No. You tell me, because if you can, you will be the only erned and controlled me in so many ways. How many
one who can tell me: How did I fall in love with Betty? incapacitating symptoms and problems do you get for
It seems to have lasted a good number of years, now utterly irrelevant reasons?
why? Do I need to know the reason? IT: I wouldn't agree that they were ever for irrelevant
H: 1 don't think you need to know the reason for that, no. reasons.

E: Yet it has altered and changed and influenced and direct- ly: Just because you saw your father beat your mother over
ed my life so very, very extensively. How important her head and knock her around, and you were a little
is it for one to know? Will it add anything? child, and then years later you happen to have a bitH: Well, to my mind it would, but it doesn’t if it doesn’t ter quarrel with your husband, and thereafter you
to you. have periodic headaches. It develops on Friday, it last

[PAGE 038]

66 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 67


three days; finally the psychiatrist digs out that the Why couldn’t an enjoyment of classical music be a
mother got her head beaten on Friday. It scared the substitute? You'll use your head, you'll listen to it, you
daylights out of you; your mother didn't seem to get like classical music, you would like to include it in a
over it until late Sunday evening. Then you knew you rather systematic fashion in your day-by-day life, and
could still have your mother. You dig that out and why not that way? It’s pleasurable, it’s going to alter
your patient stops having a headache. all of your thinking and all of your feeling, all of your
H: Well, I don’t think that’s a fair presentation of insight attitudes toward yourself to sit and listen to the clas-
therapy. Usually you find that if somebody has a sical music that you like. You're inspired, it changes
headache it is a way of handling a situation they’re your mood, even as your headache does. You've al-
in, and usually they have done this all their life in ways wanted to make provision for a fairly good pro-
some form or another with some kind of infirmity. gram of listening to classical music, but you’ve never
Perhaps a headache, perhaps not, but something that really organized your daily routine to fit it in. You’ve
makes them withdraw. It may be because their mother just organized your daily routine to have a weekly
got beat over the head, or it may be that they learned three-day headache. Your unconscious can use a head-
from their mother this was a good way to get away ache, use a bellyache, use constipation, use classical
from the husband for a period of time. music, it can use a bestseller, it can use a trip out to
E: Yes, and they keep on having the headache. the park. Your unconscious is capable of using so
H: When they get in a similar situation, yes. Now you can many things, either for your profit or for a loss. The
teach them to control the headache, or you can change headache is a loss.”
the situation that provokes it. H: Now when you put it that way, are you suggesting a
E: Yes. substitute or are you suggesting a kind of substitute?
H: To me the latter would tend to be a more productive E: A kind of substitute
— because how long is it going to
way than just getting and keeping control of the head- take to find out the cause of the headache and the
ache. I don’t know whether you assume that when special purposes it serves? If you can get that same
they get control of the headache they also get control amount of energy devoted to something useful, con-
of the situation or not. structive, pleasant. Against that background they can
E: And, “What are you going to do in place of your handle these situations much more adequately.
headache, because it serves some purpose? Can that II: One of the reasons I bring up this headache case is
purpose be served adequately, pleasantly, competent- because it’s another one of those where I cured with-
ly by something else that’s not so painful, that’s not out knowing why or what happened. This woman had
so distressing, that’s not so destructive as the head- these headaches three days at a time, and I saw her
ache?” for about six weeks, and she didn’t have any headH: The patient will say, “I don’t know. I don’t know what aches from the day I saw her. That was three months
purpose it serves.” ago. She has had these headaches since she was 14
E: “You don’t even know what purpose the headache serves, years old and she has a number of other problems. She
but it serves some purpose. And it’s a physical thing. had previously seen a psychiatrist for three years

[PAGE 039]

68 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 69


without relief. She’s been married to a man now for H: Interestingly enough, when she has the headache, she
some years and she has a lot of boy friends, but she objects to the drugs they give her because they take
doesn’t have any affairs. The boy friends just hang away the pain but they don’t put her to sleep. She’s
around her. She’s really setting up a situation that still awake and she can still feel the headache some-
could involve murder, because she attracts the kind where in her head, but she can’t control her thoughts
of men who want an affair but not an affair, you know, with the drugs, and she experiences something like
and she drives her husband to distraction with this. an hallucination. She sees her mother standing over
She was handling this kind of a situation by having her saying, “You're doing wrong, you're doing wrong.”
these headaches about three days a week. She'd have E: Yes.
an argument with her husband and two days later H: She’s a very interesting woman in many ways. She
she'd come up with the headache. Before she devel- wears too much makeup, and she combines this with
oped it she'd become very perfectionistic around the sort of a helpless, withdrawing way. If she attends a
house. She would scrub the walls and clean the house party, men swarm to her even though she is merely
beautifully. sitting.
E: You say she does how around the house? Perfectionist? E: That aggressive promise and that weak yieldingness.
H: Perfectionist. Everything had to be just right. H: One of her unfortunate difficulties is she doesn’t feel
E: Yes. she is a woman. She avoided ever being in the nude.
H: Then she developed this headache. The first day would I suggested that she go in the bathroom, get in the
be perfectionism, the second day would be a headache nude, examine herself, and see if she could accept
and she'd go to bed with it and couldn't move. Then herself. What she most objected to was hair down
about the third or fourth day the headache would let there, pubic hair. She didn’t like that at all. Until she
up and she would become very sloppy, just sit around was about 12 or 13, she took showers with her father,
and do nothing. Then for a few days she would be all and it was about the only time he paid any attention
right and back she'd go into the routine. It was just to her, and they had a fine time in the showers. She
like this week after week after week. grew pubic hair and the showers stopped. So she cut
E: 1 would want to see her husband. off the pubic hair, hoping the showers would continue,
H: Which I did. but they didn’t continue anyhow. Her body image of
E: And I would want to see her. Those boy friends of hers, herself is a very unfortunate one, and I was led to that
that she sets up so carefully to tantalize. She thinks almost immediately by the way she talked.
she's tantalizing them, but she's only tantalizing E: How do you introduce a person to the idea, when they
herself. Isn't that right? don't dare to get into the nude and look at themselves?
H: Yes. H: How do you?
E: That's where 1 would start. In tantalizing herself, what E: The patient tells you, “I can't possibly get in the nude
is she doing? Consciously she lets her thinking go just and look at myself in the mirror.” Then there may be
so far — and her unconscious thinking goes a bit fur- many efforts and they can't possibly do it as a de-
ther. Then she really cleans house, externally, but liberate, motivated thing. “I can't stand in front of the
symbolically she is cleaning her own head out. mirror and look at myself. I can't possibly do it.” So

[PAGE 040]

70 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 7I


they won't undress, and they can’t. How would you E: He's the one that needs therapy.
get them to do it? H: 1 think she has quite a good potential for therapy.
H: 1 don't know. E: 1 think she's going to wait until he gets it before she
E: You get them to do it on their own terms. They tell you, takes it.
“I cant possibly get in the nude, stand in front of the H: Possibly.
mirror, and look at myself, I can't possibly do it.” You E: Tm treating a husband and wife. The husband knows
say, “That's right, I am going to make you prove it. darn well his wife needs the therapy. I know he needs
I think you'll laugh at me whenI tell you what to do. the therapy, so 1 am talking to him about the manage-
On a very dark night, with the curtains drawn and the ment of his wife. His wife really wants to be managed.
lights out, undress and stand in front of the mirror She's trying to force him in every conceivable way to
and look at yourself, and you can't possibly see your- manage her. The ways she has hit upon are to be nerv-
self in the nude. You can do that because you can't ous, to be underweight, to spend recklessly, to have
possibly see yourself in the nude.” Once they’ve done to rest instead of washing the dishes. And he is a guy
it— “See what you've done?” You've got them to do it with great potentialities.
and they can't possibly do it, and they’ve done the H: Tm still interested in the way you approach symptoms.
thing they can't possibly do. (Laughter) So you've put You seem concerned solely with the symptom and
a completely different construction on it. how to handle the symptom rather than what’s behind
H: Yes. it.
E: Once they go through that, they agree it is a silly thing E: Remember the symptom is the handle to the patient.
to do; they might as well do it with the lights on the What are you going to do with the pot? You take hold
next time. of the handle.
H: Well, I saw her husband. She described him as a very H: (Laughter) OK.
rugged, strong guy, quite a rigid guy who wouldn't E: You keep your hand on the handle, and whatever you
give in on anything. I spent an hour with him and he do with the pot you still have your hand on the handle.
seemed to me frightened and unable to handle his H: If someone comes in with a constant nervous stomach
wife. or stomach upset, do you handle that the same way
E: The husband really needs the therapy? you would a headache? Do you deal with it in terms
FH: He does, and he won't accept it. He keeps insisting she's of whether the stomach needs to be upset every day,
the one who needs a psychiatrist. or every other day, and so on?
E: Then 1 would tell him, “Your wife needs a great deal of E: Well, that’s my first approach. You sooner or later
management, much more than I can give her, the kind discover either that they have an upset stomach or
of management that 1 would have to rely on you to that’s the way they like to think about themselves,
give her.” How often do they have sexual relations, and that’s the way they want you to talk to them.
and when? When you talk about an upset stomach your patient.
H: Very rarely now. Apparently when they were first mar- knows very, very well, just as you do, thal you are
ried it wasn't so. not talking about an upset stomach. Bven though

[PAGE 041]

bo Conversation wath Malton IE Kriekson
Heatuhes, Uncunserons Conversation, Assertiveness 13


those are the exact words that you say, you're really
school would be the fact that they use silence to get
talking about an upset sexual life. Let’s call sex the
the patient Lo shift languages.
stomach, and you politely stick to stomach as another
i; They use silence, they use passive resistance to the pa-
way of saying sex.
Lient, and they wait the patient out. The patient who
FH: How do they really know you are talking about their
had the phobia for going into drugstores. Not always
sexual life? You mean, because that’s what is on their
present, not always the same drugstore, but a very
mind?
definite phobia. She goes into the drugstore and the
E: That's what is on their mind.
bright lights, the big windows, all that stuff affects
HH: So instead of talking directly about their sexual life, you
her. Yet sometimes she can go in easily, comfortably.
deal with it in terms of their stomach. Is this easier,
What are the things you can buy in a drugstore? I
or what?
E: A woman came to me because of the tastelessness of
could run over in my mind all the things that you can
food. She couldn't get any satisfaction out of her food,
buy in a drugstore, and I know what a woman could
buy in a drugstore. I wonder if she is raising the ques-
couldn't taste it, didn't feel it. She wasn't the least bit
tion of menstruation. “In six months’ time how many
regular about her food. I talked about the size of the
drugstores do you suppose you could have a phobia
bolus of food, and the movement of food in the oral
for?” She thinks I’m talking about half a year; I am
cavity. What was I talking about and what did she
actually talking about six monthly periods. I said six
know I was talking about? We both kept up that po-
months. She says, “Five or six.” “About how long do
lite pretense, and she knew darn well that I under-
you think it will be before that horrible feeling will
stood. But if she wanted that kind of language, why
come over you again?” What am I talking about?
not discuss a bolus of food instead of a stool?
H: Yes.
H: You deal in whatever language the patient brings to
E: The unconscious picks it up. I also know what I am talk-
you, and if they shift to another language you deal
ing about. When she says, “In about a month’s time,”
with that then?
I say, “Have you ever noted the very special purchase
E: But it is awfully easy to shift from bolus of food and
that you may have made?” Now that’s getting down
tastelessness of food, and no satisfaction with food,
to definitive language: “the very special purchase you
to the question of constipation, about the size of the
may have made.” That choice of words: “very special.”
stool, the odor of the stool, the color of the stool, but
And she is a woman, it is a drugstore, and a very spe-
what is the patient really doing? They are testing.
cial purchase that she made last month and a month
And I measure up to that test. But I make it so aw-
ago and was making this month. What does her un-
fully easy for them to shift to the real language.
conscious think and feel about that? The topic is beH: I see.
ing discussed, safely so, and I am giving her every
E: Why should 1 tell them, “Stop this nonsense, talking
opportunity of saying the things clearly but unrecog-
about the tastelessness of food. You are really con-
nizably, to herself.
cerned about your spastic constipation.”
H: If the patient never deals explicitly with the problem,
FH: One of the differences between you and the analytic
do you work entirely in terms of the drugstore?

[PAGE 042]

74 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 75


E: I am thinking of a patient where we never did call think I ought to know about sex?” And I tell them
spades spades. At the termination it was so charm- that the French language, the Italian, the Chinese, the
ing — the patient’s statement was, “We never did really English — all serve to communicate meanings, and as
talk about the thing that troubled me. We just had long as the meanings are communicated that’s suffi-
an understanding with each other, and we still don't cient. As long as she understood, that was the impor-
need to talk about that openly.” The understanding tant thing. “Sometimes it’s interesting to shift into
is sufficient. I have had patients describe in detail to another language; there might be some nuances of
me how they felt they ought to cook dinner for their meaning, some special connotations, that are better
husband, and they go into a tremendous wealth of de- expressed in another language, and if you have any
tail about preparing the meat for the evening meal. other questions about sex you can discuss those.”
“What kind of spices should I use? How do you really That makes it very very easy. “Nuances and meanings
season it? What about the natural juices or should and other connotations” — best expressed in English.
you put in flour and cornstarch and make a jelly-like FH: Would you feel that merely the understanding of what's
gravy?” You talk about the preparation of the evening on their mind is therapeutic?
meal. And she can state, “I like steak — rare —or rare- E: Yes. I think that too many therapists think that their
ly.” What does she mean by “rare”? Just plain steak. understanding is the important thing. They want to
No comment. What does she mean: “natural juices” understand, and then they want to present their un-
or “jelly-like gravy”? derstanding to the patient. The patient is another
H: You don’t ever make a shift to let her know that what breed of cats.
she’s really talking about is a parallel with sex? H: Youre talking about therapeutic change now. If a woman
E: I make it very easy for her. discusses dinner in a way that is obviously discussing
H: In analytic therapy an interpretation would be made sex, if you accept this discussion of dinner and say,
that would, later perhaps, put these two together. “We understand each other,” has some therapeutic
E: Yes. And what would I say after I have answered all change been produced?
of her questions, resolved her problem for her, and we E: I can discuss the preparation of a meal, a roast of meat,
are still talking about the evening meal? When I have a steak, the feel of the steak, the texture of the steak,
made it very, very easy for her to say something the appearance of the steak.
about sex, and she still hasn’t, and I don’t think it H: The therapy comes in making the steak attractive then?
safe, my interpretation is, “Now we really understand E: Yes. They know what I’m talking about.
each other. You yourself understand — and I hope you'll H: What I am trying to get at is this: It’s more than merely
come back sometime to tell me how things are going a common understanding; it’s a shift in the attitude
along.” I have had patients come back to tell me bold- towards the steak.
ly, frankly, “My sex life has been completely read- E: Yes. I approve of it. I like steak. I like roast beef. I like
justed, thanks to you. I don’t know whyI was so silly to handle it, I like to enjoy it. And you can really see
that I wouldn’t come out and tell you what I was talk- your roast beef if you like it. But you always make
ing about. Now I can, and is there anything more you your own choice. Theoretically it might not be any

[PAGE 043]

Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 77
76 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


better than the others, but it's your choice, and it real- ened out. She just was not going to solve her problem
ly is because it is your choice, not because it’s steak, on a religious basis.
U.S. choice beef. You can always use words that sym- H: One of the things that I am curious about is how you
bolize a tremendous amount, if you are willing. A pa- handle the patient who tends to belittle himself. He
tient who came to me and launched into a diatribe, takes back everything that he says, derogates every-
vituperative as could be, about her father, and her thing that he says. This is so common among some
mother, and her brother. The longer she discussed it of these patients. The patient sits down and says, “Oh,
the more I realized that she couldn’t possibly be talk- I've been thinking, if you can call what I do thinking.”
ing about her father, her mother, and her brother. E: “What would happen, if you did call it thinking? Would
Then what was it she was talking about? the walls crash in? You are here to get an understandH: You're asking me? ing of problems. I think you recognize that your thinkE: Yes. What was she talking about: father, mother, and ing isn’t good. At least that’s the interpretation that
brother. Her father’s god-like dictatorial ways. Her I placed on your statement, ‘I’ve been thinking, if you
mother’s assumption she was the mother of all man- call what I do thinking.’ From my point of view I am
kind. Her brother seemed to be a little Jesus. I final- going to call it at least an honest striving towards it,
ly told her, “I don’t quite understand your criticism an earnest striving toward thinking.” That permits

of your father, mother, and brother. You seem to be him the failure of thinking, but credits him his trying.
trying to talk about a trilogy but that’s the wrong FH: (Laughter) That's nice all right.

word. I can’t think of the right word.” Trilogy? That’s E: So he gets credit, and he can't possibly reject that credit.
a three: father, mother, and brother. Father and his Because he’s always doing thinking, if you can call
god-like ways, mother the mother of all mankind, it thinking. He is always striving, striving in real
brother the little Jesus. Her boy friend wanted her to earnest.

become a Catholic, and there was her religious con- H: What you do is take a positive point of view about what
flicts about the Trinity. She was Protestant, and a he is doing.
very doubtful Protestant. Protestant doubtful, Catho- E: Yes, and place a validity on it, a wealth of significance.
lic doubtful. She really wanted that religious question Sooner or later he’s going to tell you, “I’ve been do-
straightened out. She did not want to think that Ca- ing some thinking. This time, I think it’s thinking.”

tholicism had something to do with her doubts about So this time I think it’s thinking. “And what was it
her boy friend. She just was going to exclude religion this time?” And by saying that I shift it.
from all discussion of her boy friend. Trilogy? Trinity? H: You do?
And I admitted that trilogy was the wrong word. I E: “What was it this time?” What does “this time” mean?
couldn’t think of the right one. “This time” is really selected out of a number of times,
FH: Sounds like your statement about hypnosis. Sometimes isn't it?
you hesitate, seeking for a word so the subject will H: Yes.

supply it. Is: So I’ve conveyed another idea to him.

E: That's right. But we got that entire situation straight- IT: Well that's an interesting one. You emphasize this spe-

[PAGE 044]

78 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 79


cial time and so indicate this is happening continu- H: I guess it is.
ously, is that it? E: He presumably has made a free choice. You don’t want
E: That’s right. to discuss your problem as you sit there in that chair.
H: Tl be damned! You certainly don’t want to discuss it standing up.
E: Well, it’s correct, isn’t it? You agree, don’t you? But if you move your chair to
H: That’s one of those tricky ones where the patient can the other side of the room it would give a different
accept it as, “This is a special time,” and not realize view of the whole situation, wouldn’t it?
that he is accepting it, because this is happening con- FH: (Laughter) Did you ever have them actually move the
sistently. chair over?
E: And you are awfully undecided, and not very much in- E: Oh yes. “I just can’t tell you about my homosexual ac-
terested in, taking a cigarette when I offer you one. tivities last night. I just can’t do it. I’m too ashamed,
You can say, “No, thank you.” I can say to you, “There too humiliated, I can’t tell you.” “I don’t blame you.
are three cigarettes here—this one, this one, and this You are sitting there in the chair. You know you ought
one. This one sticks out partly, this one less far, and to tell me, but as you sit there you know you can't tell
this the least. Now do you want this one, this one, or me, and you really know that as you sit there. Why
this one?” It’s no longer a question of rejecting. don’t you sit in that chair over there? I can bring one
H: It’s a question of choosing. in or you can move that chair over there, that will give
E: It's a question of accepting, but only which one. The you a different view of the whole thing.” (Laughter)
patient must accept an idea, and this one seems to be Then you get that nice account of last night’s experi-
appropriate this way, this other idea seems to be ap- ences on the desert with a Mexican punk, with all the
propriate another way, the third one seems to be ap- details.
propriate still a third way. Now, which one will you H: That ties in the resistance with the sitting there.
take? E: Yes, I better tie it to that, because that's something I
H: I see. can handle.
E: You volunteer for a hypnotic trance. You are a bit re- H: I see.
luctant, and it’s your first experience, you really ought E: It’s something he can handle, and all of your resistances
to be a bit reluctant. You can use the coin technique, are really false, and they are tied to things, so why
you can use the house-tree technique, or the hand lev- not tie’em up.
itation technique. Which technique would you like me FH: What other things do you do when a patient takes
to use to put you in a trance? things back? I mean, so often you find the patient will
H: What’s so important in that is the early statement begin to move a bit and they'll take it back, or the pa-
about accepting their reluctance. tient will tend to assert himself and then have to
E: That’s right, you accept their reluctance. This reluctance apologize for it.
becomes attached to the coin technique, and the house- lv: Give me an example.
tree technique, which he rejects. (Laughter) Isn't that IT: Um trying to think of one at the moment. All I can think
right? of is extreme ones because 1 have a couple of extreme

[PAGE 045]

80 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 81


patients, but it often happens with little things with Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday,
patients. Sunday? The week can begin with any day
— and the
E: “I took care of my house, I cleaned the house, I did the most unexpected things can happen; they’ve hap-
laundry, did the dishes, cooked the meals, all week. pened to you many times in the past. You surprised
I am too incompetent to do that again. I just cant do yourself more than once in the past and the past is an
it again.” extension of a remoter past into the future.” (Laughter)
H: That’s a good example. What have I done? “Many unexpected things have
E: Is that it? happened in the past, things that you really didn’t
H: Yes. believe, couldn’t believe would happen, but they did
E: “But you have learned a lot of things, haven't you? You happen, and the future is going to become the past.
have learned that somehow or other you did it last In eight days’ time, only eight days’ time, next week
week. You didn't expect to, did you? Isn't that a sur- will be the past, and many things have happened
prise, and you really didn't expect it, did you? In fact, unexpectedly in the past.”
Monday you didn't think you would do it on Tues- H: That was an awfully good example. I had a woman sent
day. On Tuesday you really didn't expect to do it on to me who is in psychiatric treatment with someone
Wednesday. On Wednesday you really didn't expect else. She is overcome with apathy and expects to die.
to do it on Thursday. On Thursday you really, real- She called me on the phone the other day and said she
ly, really didn't expect to do it on Friday, but you did thought she'd live, and then immediately said, “Of
it. Then, on Friday you didn't know you were wearing course nothing’s changed.” This is typical of her, but
out, and you didn't expect to do it on Saturday, but actually to say she thought she’d live was a tremen-
you did. You did despite the fact that it was wearing dous statement.
you out. You didn't expect to do it on Sunday, you E: On January 1st one year I got a patient who told me
really didn’t, absolutely didn’t, expect to do it on Sun- that he was going to die that night from heart failure
day because it was wearing you out, but you did do and he'd be dead in the morning. I said, “All right, call
it on Sunday. Then, on Monday you couldn't do it, and me up tomorrow morning and tell me you are dead.”
you know that now.” I'll have gone all the way out. (Laughter) He called me up at 11 o'clock in the eveH: Yes. ning and told me he was dying. I said, “Well, you don’t
E: But let's go back. “You didn't know last Monday, you know at what time, but I want to be notified tomor-
really didn't know but you did it on Monday. You had row morning.” I got my call in the morning, “I didn’t
doubts about Tuesday, and more about Wednesday, die last night, but I'll die tonight.” Every night he
and still more and more and more—that's something called me at 11 o'clock to tell me he'd die that night.
that you had to find out that it would wear out. 1t In February he called in the morning, and I said, “Yes,
wore you out last week, but it was something that you tell me that you will die tonight. If I remember
happened last week. Seven days in a week — Sunday, correctly you told me January 1st that you would die
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, that night, but you didn't. You told me January 2nd
and Saturday. Or did that week begin with Monday, that you would die that night but you didn't. This is

[PAGE 046]

82 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 83


February 1st and you tell me you'll die tonight.” Febru- honest, he wanted to pay his bill, he couldn’t afford
ary 2nd he called me up and said, “I’m dying tonight.” to see me. Besides, all of his thinking was that obses-
I said, “Yes, you're telling me you'll die tonight. You sive-compulsive thinking. Then I took that one item
told me on January 1st that you'd die that night. You andI ran it into the ground, thoroughly. It always left
told me January 2nd you'd die that night. You told him so enraged — January 1st, January 2nd, January
me January 3rd that you’d die that night. You told 3rd, and 4th.
me January 4th that you'd die that night. But you H: Is that what you tend to do with obsessive statements?
didn't. You tell me you'll die tonight. You told me Run them into the ground?
you'd die January 1st, but you didn't. You told me E: Sometimes. But if you try to have an interview with
January 2nd, but you didn’t. You told me you'd die that man he just talks on that one item. You couldn't
January 3rd, but you didn’t. You told me you'd die budge him. As long as he insisted on that one item,
January 4th, but you didn’t. You told me on January let's have it. (Laughter) He can talk with me now and
5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th that you'd die, but you didn't.” laugh now about all the futile helpless anger he de-
(Laughter) veloped. He said, “At first I thought I was mad at
By March he said, “Goddamn it, I don’t care about you, and I was really mad at myself for saying a silly
what I said last January about dying.” I said, “I do. thing like that.” He’s finishing his college work.
I had to take those calls every night, and I didn’t IT: One thing T’d like to learn more about is this: A patient

believe a one of them.” In April he said, “I was has a symptom all the time, and he gets better and
mistaken in January, in February. I was mistaken in has it only part of the time. How do you get rid of it
March, but I am going to die tonight.” “Call me tomor- completely? You suggested arithmetical progression
row morning.” In May, “I think I’m going to die to- as one way of solving this. Do you have any other

night.” “I know, you thought that you'd die in Janu- ways?
ary, you were sure you'd die in February. You were lv: | was thinking about you this morning when I was see-

positive you’d die in March, you had some doubts ing a patient of mine. He has his mother. He also has

about it as April started going by. This is May. Call bronchial asthma. You only need to see him to recog-
me up, will you?” nize from the shape of his chest that he is asthmatic

H: This happened entirely on the phone? and that his asthma will increase and decrease accordE: It was fun. By June he called up, “I’m going to change ing to the seasons. There’s nothing you can do about
that record. I don’t think I’m going to die tonight, but it; there is nothing you can do about his mother. Now,
I don’t know about tomorrow night.” (Laughter) I I persuaded him to take a job in a bank. He’s com-

said, “Call me up next week.” He called me up next pletely, totally uninterested in banking. (Laughter)
week, “That really settled it, didn’t it?” Then I see him once a week, once in two weeks, once
H: Why did you handle him in that way instead of in some in three weeks. Every time I have seen him I have
other way? asked for some little detail in banking that he could
E: He didn’t have cardiac disease. I handled him that way answer. He got great pleasure in telling me about

because he couldn’t afford to see me regularly. He was them. Today I thought it was about time to give him

[PAGE 047]

84 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 85


a review of himself, so I let him out on banking. He kind, which is why you don’t just take one away. But
really knowsa lot about it. He was most enthusiastic. I haven't got it very clear what kind of a function or
He looks upon it as a delightful temporary job. He a purpose you look for in a symptom. Take this as a
earns money with which to go to college. When I saw hypothetical example — this is the way I tend to think
him, he was mama’s pitiful little asthmatic boy, with about it and I don’t think you do. A woman has a back
nothing except asthma. She was a very sweet mother pain with nothing organically wrong. You ask her
who would bring him a glass of water, bring him a what it keeps her from doing and she might even
sandwich, bring him a napkin. She told him when to manage to bring up that it keeps her from having sex-
go to bed and when to get up, and she sympathized ual relations. She loves to have sexual relations but
with him. Now he is an enthusiastic young man. I she can’t because of the back pain. Her husband thinks
took up this matter of time perspective with him. To it’s unfortunate because he'd love to have sexual rela-
view himself as he was a few months ago, and to see tions, but he can’t because of her back pain. This mar-
himself now. To view the attacks he has had of asthma riage may go on like this with both of them using the
in the past few months, what to expect about the at- back pain as an excuse for not facing the fact that
tacks in the future. He said, “They’re damned nui- they both have problems about sexual relations.
sances.” That’s all. And his enthusiastic view of what lv: Yes.
he’s going to do at college. IT: Now I tend to think about a symptom in terms of that
H: This was done partly by an occasional question, sort of function. When you just approach the symp-
building up cumulatively, about banking? tom directly, as you tend to do in your discussions
E: Yes. Every time he made a mistake in his work, what here, but not so much in your papers, it’s a little differ-
interested me always was the procedure by which it ent. I mean, you wouldn’t deal directly with that back
was corrected — never the details of how he made the pain; you would try to find out what was behind it.
mistake. How was it corrected, and what the attitude 1: In a woman with a low back pain you always suspect
was of so and so who helped correct the error. sexual difficulties.
H: How to emphasize the positive. IT: You don't have to inquire into this. You just tend to
E: Yes. take it for granted?
H: You really feel, then, that anything that tends to be lv: Yes.
cumulative is effective? IT: Then you treat the sexual difficulty, is that right?
E: Yes. lv: Yes.
H: That it builds on itself, so to speak. II: That's just something that I want to be sure of, because
E: It builds on itself. when I posed to you the problem of a headache or a
H: The biggest problem is to give that feeling of accom- voice difficulty, you would deal very specifically with
plishment to the patient. There’s another thing I want the headache or with the voice without getting the
to ask because I am still trying to get straight your history, trying to get the function of it. A lot of it
attitude about symptoms. Now, I know you assume then, is less inquiry on your part and more assump-
that a symptom has a function, a purpose of some Lions from previous experiences, isn’t it?

[PAGE 048]

86 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 87

E: On that particular symptom. I might approach it by 11 Yes. Lean find out some idea of what's behind a symp-
dealing with the back pain and give her a dissertation tom by asking a person what it interferes with, and
on stance, high heels, foot movements, body balance. usually that's the sort of thing they're avoiding.
I would do this so the woman would know that I con- I" Yes. But if you blanket it in safely.
sidered her back pain something that would progres- !! You don't isolate it out. You blanket it in?
sively leave, as these other matters would alter. Then " Very often I blanket it in. Constipation, urinary fre-
I could inquire about what all the backache interfered quency — what's in between? (Laughter)
with. Does it cause her to be constipated? Does it 11 OK. There is another thing I wanted to get to. I know
cause her to have diarrhea? Does it cause her to have you will behave in a certain way with a patient some-
urinary frequency? Does it interfere with sex? What Limes, and I wonder how you manage to maintain the
particular position in bed can she assume that relieves consistency of that behavior with that patient if you
her back pain and permits sex so that she can have see him over a period of time.
all the sexual pleasure that she wants? 1" Could you clarify that question?
H: Would you slip that in, or bring it in that way before 11 | think sometimes you deliberately assume a role with
she had said that it interfered with her sex relations? a patient. Perhaps a role of being angry with them,
E: Td ask these questions, and of course the constipation or arole of being very omnipotent. I wonder if, or how,
question, the urinary frequency question, permits me you manage to maintain that consistently over a
to blanket the question about sexual difficulties. It course of treatment.
implies that it could cause constipation, urinary fre- I" A role of omnipotence is a very helpful role. To main-
quency, and might even interfere with sex. tain it you had better show your weakness pretty
H: 1 see. thoroughly. You are omnipotent with the patient, and
E: Might even interfere with sex, which is the contradic- yet you let the patient deceive you on some minor lit-
tion of her attitude, and her husband’s attitude. ile point, so that they can accept your omnipotence
H: The even is? in every other regard.
E: That’s right, but it’s accepted and she has accepted the /1.'Then you use the inconsistency to maintain the con-
contradiction —then it’s much easier. What position sistency?
could she assume in bed that would permit sexual Ves,
relations so that she could have all the sexual pleasure IH One of the things that’s argued by particular schools
that she wanted? Then we'd discuss positions. is that you need to be as much yourself as possible
H: You are laying premises for what is permissible to with a patient and be consistent. Now this is a differ-
discuss? If she accepts these as you go along, she... ent sort of thing than behaving in a certain way to
E: And in discussing positions she is committing herself produce an effect with the patient.
to the idea that she wants all sexual satisfaction. She F But naturally you are inconsistent in your behavior. So
does not recognize how she is committing herself. She you get a reputation with the patient of being omnipo-
is accepting the premise without knowing it, which Lent. Under normal expectations, sooner or later you've
makes it very difficult to deny it, right? rot Lo be inconsistent. They are watching for it, wait-

[PAGE 049]

Headaches, Unconscious Conversation, Assertiveness 89
88 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


ing for your fallibility. So you satisfy their need. I can 11 One of the things that you've never commented on and
think of one patient with whom I had to take an omni- ¡hat we haven't discussed much is the problem of
potent role. She was insisting on taking up with me countertransference when you do get angry with pa-
all the details of her rows with her mother and father, Lients. Do you think much about that?
particularly her rows with her mother and the untidy had an experience of countertransference the other
night. This woman irritates the life out of me. Hor-
re ne


housekeeping. She’d sit like this (with legs apart), and
Pd say, “Is there any other topic?” “No, there isn’t.” ribly so. The previous patient had come in a bathing
(Legs pulled together) (Laughter) Pd say, “Well, are you suit and got the seat of the chair all wet. So I got a
ready to discuss that matter about your father and Lowel and draped it over the seat of the chair. Then
mother?” She started discussing that. “Are you sure (he patient that irritates me so much came in, sat
there isn't any other topic?” “No, there really isn't.” down on the towel, and irritated me very much. I sud-
(Legs pulled together again) (Laughter) All I had to denly realized, with a great deal of amusement, that
do was to watch that. Then I made another play. She after she left I had taken hold of the corner of that
discussed her mother's attitude about hanging clothes Lowel and very carefully, gingerly, picked it up and
up. I noticed that she said, well, she always threw her put it in the laundry. (Laughter) That really amused
slip, her girdle down, her stockings down, her bra ne. My own more or less phobic response to the towel
down. After a few such recitations, I noticed the ab- which took up all of my anger. I think I must have
sence of panties. She came in one day and I commented looked funny taking that towel out to the laundry.
on how windy it was outside. She said that it certain- (laughter)
ly was windy and pulled her legs together. So the next
time I asked her how long had she gone without wear-
ing panties. I had my absolute omnipotence. She came
in to the next interview very smug. I promptly con-
fessed that I didn’t know whether she had panties on
or not, and I knew darn well that she did. She was go-
ing to test me out. Yet I was so omnipotent that I
knew that she didn’t wear panties, and she had to test
me out.
FH: Do you tend, in general, if you take a particular posture
with a patient — and I don’t know really what you do
on this— but if you are consistently angry with a pa-
tient in order to have some effect, do you also give a
contrast to that?
E: Oh yes, somewhere in the situation there is laughter.
I'd be very angry, and then sometimes come up with
this ringing laughter.

[PAGE 050]

The Unconscious, Insight, and the Use of Analogies 91


r Yes. And suppose I had tried to tell that to him. He
would have wasted a lot of valuable time explaining
to me that I was not his father. I already knew that.
What he needed to do was to go down the cursed high-
CHAPTER 4 way. But think of how much delay any effort on my
part to explain that I wasn't his father would have
occasioned.
The Unconscious, I: Well, I don't know if it would have occasioned delay.
[ don’t think it would have done the same thing at all.
Insight, and That's something he has to discover for himself, that
he was treating you like his father.
the Use of Analogies I- Ile was treating me the way he wished he could treat
his father. The way he had treated his father uncon-
sciously. But he was discovering all the things that
he had done unconsciously to his father without dar1957. Present were Milton H. Erickson and Jay Haley.
ing to manifest it.


H You don’t make transference interpretations apparent- Iditor’s Note: The “Italian boy” referred to was described
hy lirickson in 1955. His conversation describing that case
ly. That is, you don’t interpret, “You must feel a cer-
1, mserted here. Present with Erickson were Jay Haley and
tain way about me.” Or do you?
John Weakland.
E: Hell's bells, no. I don't think there is any need for it.
H: You feel it's just implicit? * * *
E: It’s implicit. It serves a purpose, but why manufacture
a great big production out of it and take up valuable I" Pietro came to me as a patient. His lower lip was about
time? Sure the patients develop a tremendous trans- wo inches thick. Italian, his father trained him to be
ference, but that isn’t what’s wrong with them. That’s a flutist, and he developed this thick lip. Italian fam-
their method of getting rid of what’s wrong with them. ily, patriarchal family setup, very, very rigid. Father
I feel that it’s a bridge. You're traveling over a road, ate first, and all the choice morsels went to father.
and just because you come to a bridge is no reason Father worked hard. Each day every member of the
why you should take it apart and examine each part family, including mother, gave a report on the day’s
of it before you cross over. Speaking as an engineer, activities, for approval or disapproval. But father al-
it is nice to know howa bridge is built. ways gave a report on himself and mentioned his misFH: Well, when you had that boy, the Italian boy you men- tales too. Father dictated how many hours each day
tioned, swear at you for a period of time, and then say, Pietro should practice, and he specified what exercise,
“But you're not my father,” wasn’t your purpose to get and so on, that Pietro should do, and exactly how
him to say that? Or feel that? long.

90

[PAGE 051]

92 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
The Unconscious, Insight, and the Use of Analogies 93

So Pietro developed that thick lip and couldn’t play
cience as to the hour when he would show up next.
the flute. It had been treated for at least a couple of
But Td give him his appointment.
years, X-rays and everything, and it remained that
IT: Why did you do it that way?
way. So Pietro became my patient. Pietro was desper-
E: Any patient who has to pace the floor and shake his fist
ate for help, and usually twice a week for nine months
and explore my ancestry and describe me way back
Pietro would come in regularly for his appointments,
to the days of the Vikings, and all the looting, the
and he would tell me what a son of a bitch I was. He
raping, that my ancestors did, describe in detail the
never minced any words. He would shake his fist un-
murders they committed. All the way down the line
der my nose and threaten me. He raged up and down
thoroughly. That guy wanted me to give him every
the floor, cursing at me continuously for nine months.
opportunity, until one day he declared, “But you're not
And all that resistance. Pietro was infuriated because
my father.”
I always made little casual remarks, especially when
IT: Wait a minute. Would you say that again?
he was on the other side of the room. I would throw
17: But one day he suddenly declared that I was not his
in some casual remarks which he could not recognize.
father. Then he sat down, and three months later his
I hypnotized him the first time and told him that he
lip was in normal condition. He got a job with the
had to unburden himself and free associate. Those
Detroit symphony orchestra as first flutist, then went
casual remarks didn’t seem to make much sense, at
to New York and got a job as flutist in the New York
least Pietro told me they didn’t make any sense. At
Symphony with the privilege of private teaching.
the end of the hour he’d say, “What is my next ap-
II: Was that an answer to my question, “Why did you do
pointment?” I’d take my calendar and say, “I’m record-
it that way?”
ing the hour and day, be here on time.” (Demonstrat-
E: Yes. That is, with that patriarchal family, the father dic-
ing closing his calendar)
tating literally everything, the enforced routine. Father
He would go back to Detroit raging all the way, and
picked out the instrument, father set so many hours
he always guessed what time it was. When he arrived,
of playing the piano, so many hours of just wiggling
he would come in and go look at my desk calendar,
the fingers, and father really had a tremendous sense
and sure enough, when he walked into the office and
of music. He had Pietro pick up the flute and handle
over to my desk calendar, it said 2 o'clock Saturday,
it with the right kind of touch and go through that
6 o’clock Wednesday. Yet he knew that I had not giv-
movement without blowing it, then put it down in the
en him the appointment. He never did solve that mat-
case and take it out of the case and handle it. “The
ter. I always knew ahead; I never told him the hour
musical instrument, it is something that has feeling.
or the day. I'd switch from Wednesday to Thursday,
And you gotta learn the feel of the instrument, the
to Sunday morning, to Monday afternoon. How would
feel of the music.” He would make him practice by the
I do it? “This isn’t 2 o’clock Wednesday, it’s 20 min-
hour picking up and putting down the flute to get the
utes after 9 on Tuesday.” Or I would just say, “This
“feeluh the flute.” Yes, he was an excellent flutist. And
isn’t 2 o’clock,” and sometime later mention, “My
his father’s favorite American expression was, “Don’t
birthday occurs on Wednesday.” Sometimes he'd spend
give me any lip.”
the entire hour cursing me out because of my omnis-
W: And he was giving his father a great deal of lip.

[PAGE 052]

94 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Unconscious, Insight, and the Use of Analogies 95


E: Yes. W: You were more omniscient than father, but presumably
H: When you didn’t directly tell him the hour to come, this he did not curse father up and down at home.
made you not his father. I’: Oh no.
E: Oh, I didn’t give him the hour because father always W: There are two things going on very much at once.
knew everything. Remember the daily reports; father i’: I was even more powerful than father.
knew everything. W: And he could curse you out for nine months.
H: And you made yourself even more omniscient than that. i: And never get a batting of the eyes from me. I'd sit and
E: I made myself more omniscient than the father. I real- smoke my cigarette and just stare blankly at the floor
ly outfathered father. while his fist was under my nose being waved around.
H: Well, isn't there something else you're doing there. That really was greater than father. Because he knew
Aren't you making him come voluntarily? Or damn darn well what his father would not do to a thing like
near voluntarily? that.
E: No, I wrote down the appointment. When father said IT: Well, in the three months after he said, “You're not my
something was to be done, that's all there was to it. father,” was it just regular psychotherapy then?
No response was ever given by father. “I have spoken. I. Yes. Discussion of what he should do. “None of your lip”
I have written. It's recorded!” and its variations had become a standard of daily
FH: It’s recorded but you don't know what it is. cliché; nobody ever gave him any lip had been his
E: You've got to do it though. Because I have recorded that father’s constant boast.
you are coming in. When father left word that there I: Well, he gave you one kind of lip and he gave Pa another
must be so many hours practicing the piano to keep kind of lip.
the fingers nimble, father could phone to mother. lt: Yes. The father discussed music with him so that Pietro
Well, Pietro knew he had to do it. And things were could “learna the soula of music.” He must fall in love,
done that way. marry, and father children, so that he could “learna
F: When you say you put him in a trance the first session, the feela the sweetness to loveuh the woman, her
was he more cooperative the first session? beauty.”
E: He was very resentful about the failure of all the other W: He must do all these things that cannot be done volun-
doctors. When Dr. Wilson sent him to me, he gave me tarily.
a buildup as a good psychiatrist, and someone who I: (Reading from case notes) “He appeared exactly at the
could hypnotize him and cure his lip. time for the next appointment and launched into anH: Was the lip swollen or just thick? other diatribe, even as he closed the door behind him.
E: It was swollen. About two inches thick. The interview was terminated in the same manner. |
H: So you put him in a trance and suggested that he free merely said, ‘Your hour is up, goodbye.”
associate and get off his mind what was on it? I: This is something you mention often, this causal menE: Yes. Get every unpleasant thing out of his system. tion of “May,” and then they happen to drop in in May.
H: For any definite period of time? Does that consistently work?
E: No, I was curious to find out how he'd work it out. li: That they may drop in?

[PAGE 053]

96 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Unconscious, Insight, and the Use of Analogies 97

H: There's two “mays” in that. E: “I was born in December.”
E
E: Yes. H: Oh, you told him that. I see. Which isn't true, I suppose.
H: But you mentioned, I think it was with the urinating E: Well, it just happens that it’s handy, and let us say this
couple, you just mentioned “next month is May” in 5 is the last of November. “I was born in December.”
conversation and they came in May. So he rants and raves some more at me, and I can say,
E: Yes. Well, it was the next month. “Well, I have five fingers.” Well, now every damn fool
H: Does that consistently work? If you want somebody knows that.
to drop in the next month, do you just mention in H: So it must mean something else.
passing the month? E: That's right.
E: Yes. “Pm not going to be particularly busy next week. H: And he comes back the fifth of December. Now, is it
Probably Pll have a chance to write some papers.” possible to set this up experimentally?
What have 1 told you? The door is open. Yet at the E: Oh yes. I’ve done it.
same time it just seems that I’m offering a casual ob- H: How?
servation. E: Well, “You know, next month — I’m awful glad you gave
FH: You haven't quite closed the door by saying, “Maybe me that amazing account, and I’m awfully pleased,
Pll get a chance to do some papers,” but almost... and would you continue — I would like to continue to
E: Yes, so it doesn't look like an urgent invitation, nothing be pleased. What more could be asked?” All of the
compelling about it. So they can feel they’ve come other nice appropriate things, “and you know, next
spontaneously. “We just happened to be driving by month is May,” anda...
so we dropped in to see you.” Boy, did they go out of H: You really just slip it in that irrelevantly?
their way to happen to be driving by! le: Yes.
II: Now, if it were woven into a context which had mean-
* * *
ing in itself, it wouldn’t work?
15: No. You slip it in as a completely irrelevant, meaningEnd 1955 excerpt. 1957 conversation continues. less thing.
oe a : Then is when it works. It sticks out like a sore thumb.
H: Could you elaborate on just what you did with this lv: Yes. Now, “I was born in December.” Next month is
Italian guy to give him that next appointment? December. “I have five fingers on this hand.” It’s very
E: Yes. Here's this chap ranting and raving about me and disgusting to have somebody do that, and you wish
my neglect of him and my incompetence, and so on. you could forget that they said anything as assinine
“I was born in December.” Well, now just who is in- as that.
terested in that? Nobody at all, especially not the pa- 11: Oh, that's where it comes from. That the irrelevancies
tient, and he would rant and rave some more about you try to forget.
me. But here is my important statement — it’s impor- 15: You wish you could. Then you look at your watch and
tant because it has no meaning. It’s an unwarranted it’s 4 o'clock and you say, “Well, it isn't 1 o’clock.” On
intrusion — “December.” December 5th at I o'clock he shows up wondering,
H: You just say “December” in the middle of all this. “How come?”

[PAGE 054]

98 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Unconscious, Insight, and the Use of Analogies 99


H: Well, this is the thing that’s always puzzled me, why added to the picture, and you can recognize every in-
they wonder, “How come?” Why don’t they remember dividual part. You have now suddenly discovered the
at least the December, you know? I’m interested in alphabet. And you know all the alphabet. You see
the amnesia end of it. what I mean? You’ve often looked at a thing and
E: Because, you see, it’s so irrelevant. taken it that way and then all of a sudden you hapH: You don't have to use a trance for this? pen to get a different view of it, and why didn’t you
E: No, well, they're watching you and they’re all absorbed. know it in the first place? You're amazed.
You give them three completely irrelevant statements IT: Well, that’s a conscious discovery though.
that they wish you hadn’t made, that they wish they Ir: Can't the unconscious do exactly the same thing, be-
could forget about, but they can’t forget about be- cause it just hasn't gotten around to shifting the parts
cause there’s no meaning to them. about? In the reasoning process, the two strings. Stu-
dents would labor for hours on them. Now they know
* * * what a pendulum is. All of a sudden they put it to-
gether. Their unconscious has known what a penH: Well, this again might be related. You often speak of dulum is. They haven’t acquired any new information;
a patient discovering something when it seems to be they’ve just discovered what they have there. And it
a kind of unconscious discovery. comes as a flash of unconscious insight.
E: Yes. 1: Well, it may be an unconscious insight, but it comes
H: Your structure of the mind sometimes confuses me a as a flash of conscious insight.
bit. The conscious and the unconscious are compli- 1): Then it comes as a flash of conscious insight, but it first
cated enough, but when you have the unconscious dis- came as a flash of unconscious insight.
covering something, then it gets a little too compli- HH: In your therapy do you often leave a problem at the
cated for me. level of unconscious insight?
E: I expect you know this. What do you see there? Il": Yes. Often. “You probably won't be ready to know this
H: It’s a square. consciously for some time, so keep it out of your
E: Now this is what I mean about the unconscious discov- conscious mind. Filter it through gradually. Don’t
ering something. You know everything that’s there, blow off, with a sudden discovery that you hate your
and you look upon it as a square with diagonals, ver- mother.”
ticals and horizontals. Yet you know everything that’s IH: Do you ever use this with them in a waking state? Such
there. There’s a lot more there than what you see. a statement as, “Don’t discover this consciously”?
H: You mean more in terms of planes and things? I“; Yes. But literally I’m speaking on two levels. “Don’t disE: More in terms of what you see. Because you see this, cover this consciously,” really means, “Unconscious,
don’t you? And what is that? That’s “B.” They’re all keep it to yourself for a while.”
there. There’s an “X” there too. There’s even a cube. I: Well, that’s something relatively new —unconscious
A square cube. Now you saw every one of those parts insight —or new to me. Do you find this common in
but you didn’t identify them. There’s been nothing the literature?

[PAGE 055]

100 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Unconscious, Insight, and the Use of Analogies 101


E: But in everyday life you show unconscious insight. You E: Does it? It only knows this part.
step into a social group fully prepared to discuss some- H: And you can get the unconscious to know the full part?
thing, and all of a sudden you discover, “Well, I’m not E: So then you cover up that part and then you can see
going to discuss that. I wonder why.” And you really this part. Then you cover it all up, and you slowly
don't know why. I can think of one of the doctors who's show it that way.
Catholic, and he disagreed with me on the Catholic H: I gather you feel this can be done without his conscious
church in some matters. He presented a case before ever knowing?
the staff, and he forgot to mention his recommenda- E: Yes.
tion for sterilization. Then after the staff meeting was H: There are objections to a therapy done without insight.
over, I said, “You know, Henry, how come you didn’t For example, if a man has to pee through a ring, or
mention sterilization?” Henry said, “God, that was the a tube, and you manage it so he doesn't need one, the
entire point of this staff meeting. That’s why I pre- analytic feeling would be that he never discovered
sented the patient, to get the staff approval of sterili- why he had to do it to start with. Would you feel that
zation. That means Ill have to present it at another was irrelevant?
staff meeting.” I said, “Well, why did you forget it?” E: I feel that’s irrelevant. Is it the knowing why he used
He said, “I don’t know.” I said, “Didn’t we have visi- to do it that way, or is it the pleasure of doing it this
tors?” He said, “Yes, but what of it?” I said, “What way, forevermore, which is the vital thing?
insignia did those visitors wear?” He said he didn’t IT: I'm surprised you're not a Zen Buddhist, really.
know. I said, “You stop and think for a while.” Then E: The analyst has the feeling that you must know the
he said, “Oh yes, I just got some kind of a flash that “why.” For a knowledge of human behavior, for an aca-
they were wearing something. They were in civilian demic knowledge, the “why” is important. But for the
clothes but they had certain Catholic badges.” Visit- functioning of the individual, it’s his adjustment to
ing Catholics in a tax-supported hospital? No, you the present and the future that’s important.
don’t mention it. That’s unconscious insight. And you IH: Do you feel you have to have a pretty good idea “why”
see that all the time. before you try to change it?
H: That’s a little different though; I mean, that’s pretty E: I haven't the slightest idea, and only an academic in-
typically Freudian. But it’s a little different, uncon- terest, in “why” that couple were lifelong enuretics.*
scious insight into one of your own emotional prob- I hadn’t even bothered to speculate on “why.” Nor am
lems, which is, I thought, what you were on the edge I even interested, psychiatrically, though I am slight-
of. A guy has to touch a doorknob three times before ly academically, in how they managed to find each
he opens it. other. (Laughter) I’m much more interested in the fact
E: Yes.
H: Now can he have an unconscious where he naturally —
this problem of unconscious and conscious is tricky —
“Indirect Hypnotic Therapy of an Enuretic Couple,” in Haley, Jay, Advanced
naturally his unconscious knows why he has to touch Techniques of Hypnosis and Therapy: Selected Papers of Milton H. Erickson,
the doorknob three times. ALD). Now York: Grune & Stratton, 1967.

[PAGE 056]

102 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Unconscious, Insight, and the Use of Analogies 103


that they’re happily married, and sleeping in a dry tioned her Russian Ukranian origin, her face suddenly
bed. (Laughter) That seems to me the important thing. became hideously homely. He felt nauseated at the
The “why” of their enuresis, and the “how” of their meet- thought of being in her company. Then he heard his
ing, and the “why” of their concealment of it — well, mother's voice, literally telling him about the neigh-
that’s past history, water under the bridge. (Laughter) bors next door, and he really got a view of his mother's
Or water into the bed. (Laughter) snobbishness and how much a part of him it was. He
H: Well, if you take a symptom like that, it’s going to be was literally sick all afternoon yesterday. But he's go-
a symptom of a hell of a lot of other things in a rela- ing to have a luncheon date with her again, because
tionship. Now, solving that symptom doesn’t solve she is a bright, intelligent, competent young woman,
the other things in a relationship necessarily. and he's not going to let his mother interfere. What
E: That little hole in the dike won't flood the land, except that will do to the entire construct that his mother
that it will, because once you break through an altered forced upon him isn't... you can hardly speculate on
pattern of behavior in some way, the cracks keep it. He's really going to destroy his snobbishness in so
traveling. many, many ways now.

H: Yes. I got that feeling from most of your patients that H: You say you suggested he have a date?
if they once overcome one symptom, they'll overcome E: The date was the luncheon engagement.
the others. Do you do much in the... I don’t know H Well, the more typical analytic situation is that you give
whether you'd call it long-term therapy or a recon- no advice, no suggestions, no recommendations. You
struction of the personality? deal with what they bring you.
E: Yes. o
1
: A colleague said he had a minister come to him for
H: Now do you do that on the “why” basis? psychoanalytic therapy and the minister announced
E: Sometimes. Often you get one little “why” here, and then and discussed his plans of visiting a series of bawdy
they assume that there is a reason for it, and it's just houses. As my colleague thought it over, here's this
not nonsensical manifestations on their part. That man with his background and his current occupation.
there is a “why” for the other neurotic manifestations. If he goes to bawdy houses, accepts clandestine pros-
That they can accept those neurotic manifestations titutes, he may get venereal disease. If 1 don't run
as not purely a defect in themselves but a response counter to psychoanalytic theory and practice and ad-
in themselves. Therefore, if they can make a wrong vise the man that there's no hurry about it, no rush
response, they can learn a good response. about doing it, that he ought not to do it, and really
Something happened the other day. 1 sent one of discourage him, 1 may wreck that man's life. Right
my patients to date a certain girl. He enjoyed lunch- then and there my friend decided that he would step
eon with her. Yesterday he took her out to lunch in

again. A two-hour luncheon. During the course of it, Why should I let a girl discuss with me her inten-
the girl happened to mention that she was of Russian tion of having an affair without stopping her from it?
Ukranian origin. The previous luncheon he remarked When I see a man withdrawn from all of his social con-
about how intelligent she was, how pretty she was, tacts, even leaving his home town, coming to a strange
how very capable she was. Yesterday when she men- Lown bo live, withdrawn completely, why should I not

[PAGE 057]

104 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Unconscious, Insight, and the Use of Analogies 105


select some girl that I know is good company, and E: Without being aware of it they are suggesting it. I can
safe company, and suggest a luncheon engagement? think of a resident at the hospital being analyzed. And
Why shouldn't I suggest that he join the church choir, that voyeurism. After several weeks he just simply
instead of letting him fret around in his room wishing couldn’t avoid it; he had to go out and do some voyeur-
hopelessly? Letting the days and the months and the ism. After he got out of jail he came to me, and he
weeks and the years pass by, while I wait for him? I said, “I think the analyst is wrong. I’m quitting him.
certainly wouldn't advise a patient to do anything con- What is your advice about voyeurism?” I asked him
trary to society. I wouldn't even suggest to a man to describe what he would like to see.
who’s promiscuous that he engage in sexual activity. H. What did he describe?
I would raise the question whether or not he were real- E: He certainly described his idea of a female body. His
ly interested, and let him examine his urges, see if idea of the kind of clothes that she would wear, and
he’s genuinely interested. Phrase the question that he how she would take them off. 1 had him go through
might be more interested in good feminine companion- that a few dozen times, and then 1 said, “Where will
ship. you find this girl?” He said, “She's nonexistent. It's
H: Well, what comes to mind is your suggestion that the just my idea.” I said, “Well, do you think you'll go out
man go home and masturbate three times. Now that’s and try to find her?” “Hell no.” But he wanted to know
the most remarkable suggestion I ever heard given something about voyeurism. Well, let him find out.
by a psychiatrist. So the man wouldn't have an erec- Therefore, have him visualize it, speculate, and real-
tion when he went to bed with his wife. ly tell all the things, and then add them up. I held him
E: Yes, why shouldn't he? to the problem of describing the girl, describing the
H: True. clothes, type of lighting in the room.
E: He had a history of masturbation. There’s nothing crim- IT: Have you had many cases that analysts had given up?
inal about masturbation. 10: Tve had a considerable number of analysts as patients.
H: I just never heard it suggested before by a psychiatrist. Even training analysts. There was one well-known
Yes, excuse me I have. Wilhelm Reich comes to mind. training analyst in New York who said the 15 hours
In a paper he says it took him nine years before the spent with me had taught her more than her seven
man could masturbate with pleasure. years of analysis. Another one was my patient for a
E: What does the analyst do when he lets a man free considerable period of time, while still engaged in ac-
associate on masturbation, week after week after week, tive psychoanalysis. I’ve had a very considerable num-
but keep that topic of masturbation in front of the ber of patients who had completed their analysis and
man’s mind? So he masturbates and free associates came to me for therapy thereof. (Laughter)
and masturbates and free associates and masturbates
and free associates. Why not let him do it and get it * * *

over with?
H: OK. I gather you mean by that they often suggest it II: Sometimes a person or a couple has difficulty conced-
without meaning to suggest it, or without being aware. ing Lhere is a problem.

[PAGE 058]

106 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Unconscious, Insight, and the Use of Analogies 107


E: It’s up to you to appraise a person, and to require them wanted to wonder about the desirability of keeping
to participate. You see, I like to use analogies. her virginity, and she mentioned the age of 35 — well,
H: I know you do, and I can see how useful they can be. I drew my own conclusion. So one dayI told her, “You
E: Because they can’t reject the analogy; they can recog- know, Eisenhower, and Patton and—who was the
nize the parallel. If you just talk about the problem, other general? Suppose you tell me about the Battle
they can refuse to recognize that. The analogy they of the Bulge?” And I got the whole story about the
have to recognize; they have to recognize the paral- time she went to bed with a man and then wondered
lel. In doing so, they partially recognize the problem. and wondered and fought the man off on the battle
H: 1 see. of the bulge.
E: And they don’t know that you forced it. H: Milton, that’s a remarkable metaphor. But suppose the
H: Talking about metaphors or analogies or stories, you idea of conscious and unconscious had never been pro-
have said you reach the unconscious with them. posed. Now, how else would you explain what you did
E: Yes. o in that example? If there was no such concept as the
H: Now you chose the word “unconscious as a description unconscious.
of this process. 1 wonder if it is really essential, or if E: Are you going to get rid of the back of the mind?
you could deal with it in terms of how to get someone H: Well, how else would you explain the way you slipped
to follow a suggestion which they cannot resist beause the suggestion in? I mean, suppose we were born in
they are not aware of it. They are not aware they are 1840 and observing the same phenomenon, but prior
receiving the suggestion. An awareness difference, to the idea of the unconscious.
rather than an unconscious-conscious difference. lv: Well, now let's go back to that “Battle of the Bulge.”
E: Um trying to think of a patient. She told me about her Here is a patient who had told me in the therapeutic
horrible self-consciousness in a bathing suit because situation about her self-consciousness about her gen-
it seemed to her that whenever she wore a bathing ital area in a bathing suit. How does a woman’s geni-
suit her genitals were too prominent and everybody tal area look in a bathing suit? It has that very defin-
looked at that area of her body. She didn't like to go ite curve and a very definite bulge. I didn’t ask her
swimming for that reason. Another thing she men- to define it in that way because that would be offen-
tioned was the question that had come to her, whether sive to her. Then her question about her virginity at
or not at the age of 35 she should relinquish her vir- age 35. What pinpointed the age of 35? The calendar?
ginity. She wasn't willing to talk about that, and she No. She'd had plenty of experience with calendars, and
only talked about the temptations she had had. But calendars could pinpoint it at 34, at 33. But she tells
she was utterly, utterly indefinite, and so I steered me 35. She didn’t come to me to be educated in the
her away from the subject. I knew that she was self- matter of history, World War II history. “Eisenhower
conscious in a bathing suit, everybody looked at her and Patton, and what was that other general’s name?”
genitals, and that she had, at the age of 35, wondered Well, obviously I don’t know much about history either.
about the desirability of keeping her virginity. She Do you see that? I know Patton, I know Eisenhower,

was a decidedly attractive woman. Of course, if she but. | don’t know the other general's name. So I dem-

[PAGE 059]

108 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


onstrated my lack of knowledge of history. Well, when
you demonstrate your lack of knowledge of history,
you're pointing out very directly, by implication, that
you are not talking about history. Do you see that? CHAPTER 5
H: Now, how do you know that the patient is going to
recognize an implication unconsciously and is going
to behave in accordance with this implication? Alcoholism and
E: When the patient discovers you're not talking about
history.
H: How do you know he's going to make this discovery?
Giving Directives
E: But 1 don't know who the other general is.
H: It’s so obvious to you, Milton. (Laughter)
E: You see, I make apparent my ignorance. Why is that
patient there? For purely personal reasons. The pa- 1957. Present were Milton H. Erickson and Jay Haley.

tient then has to think, “Well, he can’t be talking about
history. And I’m here. He must be talking about me.” E: You should have been present when I made a house call
yesterday. He said to me, “You certainly put me in
amess. I think it’s unfair of you. I’ve had to sit down
all day there, and I’ve had nothing to do. I don’t think
you were fair. I don’t think you were honest. I think
it was underhanded. You're really keeping me in. I
woke up last night going to bed, and I looked around
for my bedroom slippers. I decided to sit on the patio.
My wife was sitting there. I decided that maybe I
needed a drink. I knew she'd put up a row. So I de-
cided to get dressed. I couldn’t find my clothes. I
looked in the closet. Every damn bit of clothing I had
was gone. I asked my wife where the closetful of suits
had gone. Your instructions. That’s what I call kick-
ing a man in the ass when he’s down.” He proceeded
to rub his rear.
I said, “Really, was it a kick in the ass? Was it
underhanded? Didn’t you and your wife and I stand
on my front porch while I explained to your wife
that if you had another drink, that was to constitute
your agreement that your wife should dispose of your


109

[PAGE 060]

fheDALIA
110 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Alcoholism and Giving Directives 111


clothes?” He said, “Well, I didn’t quite understand aa
said, “Pll do anything. I'll cooperate with you. Drunks
it. Yes, I did agree to it, but I really didn't believe eg can talk straight from the shoulder to one another.
you'd do it. I didn't believe you'd call up and tell her I think Norskys can, so I’m putting my faith in that.
to do it.” I said, “I didn’t call her up. We reached


E Let me show you my scrapbook.” He showed it. He
the agreement in your presence, and 1 didn't call her
=]

went through it.
E
Newspaper headlines, this aviation
up. You agreed, and you told her that was what she i record, and that one, winner of this race, and so on.
was to do, in my presence. You went and took your When he finished, he said, “Now you can start, if you
drink Thursday, you took your drin k of them
— three i think I’m worth it.”
—on Friday. Friday night, last night, she took your I said, “All right, I'll start my way. Why do you
clothes.” He said, “Now that you've explained it, it come under false pretenses? That’s not your scrap-
doesn't seem so unfair.” He immediately sat down and book. That is the scrapbook of a man who is doing
continued with the discussion. He'd been pacing the things, and you are a dirty, filthy, foul-smelling, un-
floor, holding his rear, pacing the floor. He felt kicked. if
shaven bum. You've got no right to carry that man’s
scrapbook with you. When you go home tonight, lock
* *
it up. Don't ever look at it again until you, too, are a
E: Another alcoholic came to me. He was 42. He was a na- respectable man. Now I'll tell you a few things about
tionally known man. Set up many of the early avia- yourself.” So I really delivered a diatribe for an hour
tion records. He’d been drinking since the age of 12, and a half, all derogatory. I wound up by saying,
and he was a confirmed alcoholic. He'd been locked “Now, as you mentioned before, you are on Nembutal
up, I don’t know how many times, with the d.t.'s. Hed plus the alcohol, and you always start your drunks
been in jail I don’t know how many times. In spite by ordering two schooners of beer, one in each hand.
of that he hung up some aviation records. When he You drink one, and then you drink the other, and you
walked into my apartment, he must have been sober- order a whiskey. When you leave here you go down
ing up from a drunk lying in the gutter. Dirty, filthy, Michigan Avenue to Middlefield. You'll find a beer
unshaven, and he stated, “You're a Norsky, I’m a Nor- garden there. Go in there and order your two schooners
sky, and I think I’m worth salvaging. { tried AA. I of beer and say to yourself, ‘That psychiatrist is a son
always fall of the wagon. I’m just getting over a three- of a bitch.’ Then next Saturday crawl in the doorway
month binge. Ill stay sober about a week and then and tell me how right I was.”
[ll go on another. I’ve lost literally everything, and Well, he just simply leaped down the stairs in a
that’s happened to me before. I’d sober up for a year. furious rage. He had taken my diatribe, my vituper-
Pm a good businessman. I’d always get back into ation of him, delivered calmly, dispassionately, with
good financial shape, and then I’d shoot the wad. I every nasty word I could think of. He went down
brought along my scrapbook to prove to you that Michigan Avenue, walked into that beer garden, or-
there is something good in me, though it’s pretty well dered two schooners of beer, and said, “Well, that son
washed out with alcohol. Now will you take me as a of a bitch said you would do this, the hell with him.”
patient?” (Laughter) That was September 26, 1941. A couple
I said, “Yes, if you let me handle it my way.” He months azo E got another report on him.

[PAGE 061]

112 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Alcoholism and Giving Directives 113


H: He's still off it? was that the last time you had a session except for
E: When he came back, I said, “Well, do you really want the drinking bout?
to enter therapy?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “Good, that I": No. He'd come in and report he was doing all right.
I
dressing down I gave you last time was just a mild never really did discuss his problems.
introduction. Now I’m really going to tell you what HI: He'd just drop in and talk to you for a while?
you are.” For three hours I denounced him. Sent him I: Just for a visit. A social visit. In the Pentagon, he'd call
home. It was a week after September 26th. You know, me up at night, or from his residence, and inquire all
that man hasn’t had a drink yet. That is, up to last about me. He frequently flew up to Detroit. When he
April. did he always took Betty and me out to dinner, and
H: Just two sessions did it? he ordered fancy drinks for us. He took coca cola, or
E: Oh no. orange juice, or lemon juice. Therapy? An hour and
H: He went into therapy? a half of diatribe, and that three hours of vituperation.
E: He came back the next week, a couple of weeks later. Thereafter it was social visits, except that one time
In the meantime he’d gone down to Detroit, entered with the bottle. I had to drink both drinks.
a gymnasium, and he really got himself in good phys- 11: You mean you thereupon drank the other drink, or
did
ical shape. The latter part of November he joined the he make you the offer?
Air Corps. He was given the rank of Captain, and soon I“ Ile offered it to me. “You can’t pour it back in the
bot-
Major. He called once in January and said, “I’m go- tle. It’s good liquor.” I said, “All right, as a favor to
ing haywire, I’ve got a bottle of rum on my desk.” 1 you, Tl drink it.”
said, “Bring it over. I have the glasses and the ice and I: As a favor to you. (Laughter)
the chaser.” He brought it over. I had the ice, soda I. The “why” I don't know. After the war he went into
water, glasses. I said, “Do you want a drink?” He said, civilian life, decided that he didn’t like civilian life, and
“I do.” I said, “Well, if you drink, I’ll match you drink went back into the Air Force. He’s a Colonel now.
for drink. This won't be enough for the two of us. We'll That was 13 years ago.
rest around here for awhile, and then we'll go to De-
troit. Well travel in taxicabs. You'll pay the bill. Eith- * * *

er you drink me under the table, or I drink you un-
der the table. Pour the drinks.” He poured them. 1 ls: Another alcoholic who lived here worked one mile dis-
said, “Here's how.” He looked at it, and he said, “You Lant from the beer gardens. I impressed upon him,
really mean it that you'll get drunk with me?” I said, “It's your own idea. You want to quit drinking. You
“T do.” He said, “You'll have to get drunk alone.” He can't walk down the street on the way to work because
was promoted to Lieutenant Colonel and sent to the you go into the first beer garden you come to. You
Pentagon. can’t ride the bus down the street because you always
H: Well, now when you say you asked him if he wanted get off and go get a drink. You feel so perfectly free,
therapy, and then you saw him for one more three- und so full of good intentions when you step out of
hour session, did you then take him on in therapy or your house. Allright, I know that street, and I know

[PAGE 062]

Alcoholism and Giving Directives
114 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson 115


this street, and I know this street. There are no beer because she has a woman’s name she’s a female? It
gardens. You are free, and you are full of good resolve. isn't necessarily so. You just look at the person and
It’s a distance of six miles. It’s a good, healthy walk you appraise all of those things. All you know is that
for a broken-down alcoholic who is full of good re- a human being has approached you. So you look them

solves. over and decide, on the basis of the evidence available,
H: It worked I gather? what that human being is. The general tendency is to

E: He did it. The question was, there are some beer gardens look at a skirt and say, “Well, that’s a girl.” It isn’t so.
in here. How close can you get to those? He could get A woman came into my office very beautifully

within a block of them. Then he found out that he dressed, beautiful coiffure, her makeup was excellent,
could walk on the opposite side of the street. So he and she had a very nice voice. Her introductory state-
began walking this way on the opposite side of the ment was essentially this, “I wonder if you are the

street. Cross over on the opposite side from this beer psychiatrist that I want to see?” I said, “I am the
garden, zigzagging down the street, until finally, he psychiatrist you want to see. I have looked at you.”
said, “I can walk down this street.” But why shouldn't She stalled around asking a few more questions and
he? He was a free citizen when he stepped outside the I gave her the same cryptic answer. She wanted to

house. That was many years ago. know what I meant whenI said, “I am the psychia-

H: He’s still not drinking? trist you want to see. I have looked at you.” Well, she
didn’t have any feminine, real feminine things inside
E: He’s still not drinking. Now, of course, the statement
can be made that it is just fortuitous. of her. “She” was a transvestite, had been a trans-
vestite for years.
* * * I!: How did you pick this up? I mean, could you state what
you observed that was non-feminine?
lv: Well, that total picture was non-feminine.
E: When patients come into my office, I greet them with
Hi : With this transvestite, did you do that thinking on the
a blank mind and I look them over to see who and
what and why they are without taking anything for basis of being posed that question, that you were be-
ing posed a test?
granted. For example, I look a woman patient over
: Well, I was looking at the patient as she sat down.
and I notice that she has two eyes and one of them
: Did you feel the patient was testing you and therefore
is not glass and she obviously is using both eyes. I
you had to see what you were being tested on?
also look at her hands, because, you know, I have met
: Oh, the patient was testing me.
a girl who wore gloves and she had one artificial arm.
: | mean, is that why you started looking more careful-
I look at her feet and she has two feet and rather
ly? Was it because you felt you were being tested?
broad heels. I look to see how many breasts she has,
That this was a testing question, “I wonder if you are
and I look to see what her elbow movements are, what
the psychiatrist I want to see?”
her arm movements are. Then I listen to her voice to
Ie: [had my answer then. T had already looked at her but
see what kind of intonation she has -— all to verify the
I wasn't going Lo tell her that. T was going to see what
fact that this is a female. Why should 1 assume that

[PAGE 063]

116 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Alcoholism and Giving Directives 117


she could understand —or he. Of course, I found out He went down and parked his car and looked around,
that she'd been in to see I don’t know how many other and looked around, and looked around. It's a nice
psychiatrists. And had always rejected them. mountainside, a lot of broken rock, palo verde trees,
H: They couldn’t tell. saguaro cacti. He came back and told me that he'd

E: If they couldn't tell. seen a most unusual thing. There was a saguaro cac-
tus with a stalk, a central stalk, about that high, with
* * * four mesops going up from it. Practically equal in size,
so many feet away from this palo verde tree which
1958. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Gregory Bateson, Jay Haley, was in full bloom. He said it was a most remarkably
and John Weakland. beautiful scene. A perfect picture. An unusual saguaro,
an unusual relationship to that palo verde tree in full
H: Let’s deal a bit with the question we have brought bloom. He was glad I sent him down. I didn't know
to you before: how you get patients to do what you what he would find there.
tell them to do. Now there are three ways you've dis- Huteson: You hadn't planted the cactus five years ago?

cussed. One, you've said they want to get over their (Laughter)
difficulties so they go ahead and do it. Another way I" It had been planted at least 60 years previously. But
is they want to prove you wrong, and they go ahead I knew, in that utterly impossible situation, he would
and do it to prove you're worng. A third way is it’s have to justify his trip there. I do know that if you’ve
something they're going to do anyhow, or is a char- got any intelligence, any imagination, any artistic ap-
acter trait of theirs, and therefore you just tell them preciation, that it’s impossible to go over a mountain-
to do what they would do anyhow. side without seeing something worthwhile. It’s a safe
E: Well, suppose I give an illustration of where I ask a pa- thing. Because he's got to find something to justify
tient to do an apparently ridiculous thing. It’s out of that trip.
keeping, out of character. The patient is decidedly 13 If we gave such an instruction the guy wouldn't even

seclusive, retiring, and afraid of the dark. A man. And jel in his car.
afraid of lonesomeness. I asked him, “On Sunday af- Wentland: Yes, that’s the thing.
ternoon, at about 1 o’clock, I want you to get in your 1” Yes, but you see you wouldn't say it with that absolute
car and drive down—and I named an avenue — South certainty that I had when I told him I knew he had
Nineteenth Avenue. You'll find a jog in it, but never- Lo find something. I was dead certain of it. Nobody's
theless you continue on to the end of that avenue just poing to go down there without finding a good reason
as far as you can. It’s arather lonesome place. It’s up lor being glad he went.
on the mountain side. There’s no good reason that you 11” You have sufficient emphasis on finding the reason to
have for going there. You stop the car and you get out be glad that he will get started on the trip, but then
and you walk around until you find a reason for be- you Lie it into the goal down at the end.
ing glad you went down there.” He said, “That's an 2 Lean call up that same patient anytime and tell him to
awfully silly thing.” Nevertheless he made the trip. do any other absurd thing. His attitude now toward

[PAGE 064]

118 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson 119
Alcoholism and Giving Directives


me is such that, “Well, if Erickson says so, it’s worth- that he could drive on, and he could drive on Buckeye
while.” (Laughter) He doesn’t recognize that it is he Road. He could drive out Black Canyon Highway to
who makes my suggestions worthwhile. But I tell my the city limits. That was all the driving he could do.
patients that, and I mean it. It’s the fact that I mean He said, what on earth would he ever do if East Van
it. If they don’t do it, I am genuinely disappointed, Buren ever got blockaded and he had to get back to
and they know I am. I haven't lost face; I’m just hor- Tempe? Because that was the only street he could
ribly disappointed. Then I can tell them. “Well, you drive on to get to Tempe.
missed that, and there’s nothing can be done about Now what I did with Bob was this. “What happens
that now. Because you missed it. But this time I hope
when you try to drive on the street?” He said, “I faint
you will go out, up Black Canyon Highway, and just at the wheel.” I asked him if he was sure. He said,
before you get to New River, I hope you will drive “Yes. My heart starts pounding, and I faint.” I said,
about 1500 feet down that dirt road on the righthand “low do you know?” He said, “I know. I’ve had friends
side.” Well, my disappointment about the first as- with me in the car, and I’ve tried, and I pass out at
signment —it’s too late now, they’ve missed it— but the wheel, and they’ve had to take charge.”
they’ve got another chance of a different character, So my approach to him was, “I'd like to have you
and I’m awfully glad they have got another chance. po up to Black Canyon Highway and note the tele-
But you see, I know they have another chance. Be- hone poles. Drive up to the last telephone pole that
cause if they drive down the Black Canyon Highway you dare drive up to and stop at the side of it. Then
and turn right on that New River Road, I don’t know look at the next telephone pole. Drive up there about
what in the hell they'll see, but they will see something hree in the morning. After you've looked at the next
that interests them. They’ve got to. They’ve got eyes. telephone pole, start your car up in forward gear and
How many neurotics conjure up innumerable things vet it going just fast enough so that when you reach
out of nothing. That's their pattern. Well, I’d like to he telephone pole safely, you switch off the ignition.
have them conjure up something beautiful. Some- 'Then you faint as you go past the telephone pole.
thing pleasing. Something rewarding. They’ve got the When you recover, because your car will slow up and
skill at conjuring up things. I’m perfectly willing to you're on the shoulder there,” I knew the highway,
use it. “when you recover from the faint, wonder if you can
H: Well, if a woman comes to you and says, “I’m afraid to trot to the next telephone pole. So put your car into
drive out of town,” you never tell her to drive out of first gear, start it up, release the clutch, and as soon
town. as the engine is really turning, turn off the switch, and
E: A woman who can't drive out of town? seo if you get to that third telephone pole before you
H: That's right. fnint.” You know Bob had just a lot of fun, he got
E: Well, let's not take a woman, let's take Bob. Bob could
some 20 miles.
drive on East Van Buren, and West Van Buren, he If. He pot what?
could drive on North Central, he could drive on Cy- Il" He pot some 20 miles,
prus Street. There were two or three streets in Tempe II: low many times did he faint?

[PAGE 065]

120 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Alcoholism and Giving Directives 121


E: Oh, a few dozen times, but it got so, towards the last, didn’t take much effort. He thought fainting was an
he was figuring on — can he get another half a mile be- obstacle—I thought it was a starting point.
fore he faints? I just had a letter from Bob recently: 11 'Vhis is where it gets tricky all right.
“T really enjoyed my vacation trip. I’ve traveled all | can approach that problem in another way. What was
through Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, and I’m think- her name? She lives out beyond Scottsdale, and she
ing of staying awhile in Arkansas.” He drove all the couldn’t possibly drive on Camelback, which is a few
way. But you see the willingness to faint was the es- miles north of Cypress Street. She had to go out there
sential consideration. by way of McDowell Road. She couldn't go CamelFH: The willingness to faint. back. She thought possibly she could go East Thomas.
E: He looked upon the fainting as the absolute barrier to She knew that Indian School was too close to Camel-
driving. It’s not a barrier to driving. You start your back. These roads are a mile apart. She could go Van
car to rolling, you've got the Black Canyon Highway Buren. But she couldr't possibly go Camelback, or In-
with plenty of room on that shoulder. It’s a nice wide dian School, she might possibly go Thomas. She could
highway, you can drive along there on the side of the 170 McDowell, she could go Van Buren. So, of course,
blacktop. From one telephone pole to the next. Per- | took in Baseline Road, which would be about five
fectly good. You can start your car rolling, turn off miles out of her way and was south of Van Buren. It
the ignition, and shift into neutral and proceed to would be a ridiculous way of getting to her home.
faint. Your car is going to come to a stop. ‘hen I asked her what about this matter of getting
H: You progress by fainting. absent-minded? “You know, you drive down Central,
E: That's right, and he used each faint as the starting point and you’re headed for McDowell. Why not absent-
for the next trip down the highway. You see it was mindedly turn off of Palm Lane. You can do that.
the starting point, not the stopping point. Do you see Palm Lane runs parallel with McDowell. Why not
that? And he traveled down the highway and passed cross McDowell in an absent-minded way and go out
out. vast Roosevelt, which parallels McDowell? Just do it
H: How does he get a way to do this? absent-mindedly. Just be interested in your thoughts.”
E: Three in the morning, deserted highway. He knew it was 11 Wypnosis was involved in this?
deserted. I did too. I’ Usually when I talk to people some hypnosis is involved.
H: He's willing to go out there and faint on the highway (Laughter) “Why not just absent-mindedly drive out
just because you recommended it. liast Roosevelt?” That's all I needed. “Why not plan
E: Yes. I pointed out to him, he's a nice young guy, col- ihe next time to go out East Van Buren, and absent-
lege student, unable to drive his car on certain streets mindedly go out East Roosevelt, which is north of
in Tempe, and he had to walk. No sense in owning a Van Buren? Why not plan to go out Van Buren the
car if you can’t drive it. Was it worthwhile to learn next Lime, and absent-mindedly go out McDowell in-
to drive his car at the expense of fainting? A lot of stead, which is a mile north from Van Buren? Why
people are willing to work hard to drive a car. Was he nol absent-mindedly turn left instead of right and go
willing to work hard? Was he willing to faint? Which oul. Kast Thomas?” | got her to do all those. But re-

[PAGE 066]

122 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


member, I’ve got her absent-mindedly getting further
north and further north, and Indian School is fur-
ther north. I had her go out East Roosevelt and ab-
sent-mindedly turn left, and absent-mindedly cross
McDowell. Absent-mindedly cross Thomas, and ab- CHAPTER 6
sent-mindedly turn right on Indian School Road, and
she arrived home before she noticed what she was
doing.
The Case of
Well, that settled that. When she told me about
that, I pointed out to her very, very emphatically that Inhibited Ann
she had told me that she could not go home by way
of Camelback. There was no reason why she should
go home, but she was absolutely positive that she
couldn’t go home by way of Camelback. We repeated 1,0 Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.
that and repeated that and repeated that. She couldn't
go home by Camelback. All I did was drop in one lit- !! Now that we are a little more familiar with the way you
tle suggestion; “Of course you can come in by Camel- approach patients, what we would like to do is to start
back.” (Laughter) “But you can’t go home by way of over again, and in a more systematic way deal with
Camelback.” You see, you hammer home, “You can’t ihe way you do psychotherapy, from the way you clas-
go home by way of Camelback. You can't, you can’t, sify patients to start with, to the way you terminate
you can’t, you can’t. Of course you can come in by them at the end. Now obviously you don't classify pa-
Camelback but you can't go home.” You never forget tients the way other people do. A patient comes in the
what you are aiming at. You are aiming at familiar- door, and you take a look at the patient and listen to
ity with Camelback. You emphasize all the can’ts, and ihe patient and you don’t classify him as an hysteric
you do a thoroughly competent job. Since you agree or as a compulsive...
so wholeheartedly with the patient, they are in a po- 1) Well, you might, but in your operative classification,
sition of yielding that one little inch. They can come somehow that isn’t the important point, it seems to
in by way of Camelback. That's all you want. One lit- us.

tle yielding. IH You have some way of classifying people in terms of
what they need or what you're going to do, I gather.
I’ 'Vhat is, you recognize the patient as they come in, they
may be an hysteric, or a compulsive, or a schizoid or
1 manic, something of that sort. The problem isn’t try-
ing: Lo adapt therapy to that particular classification,
but: What potentialities does the patient disclose to

[PAGE 067]

124 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Case of Inhibited Ann 125


you of their capacity to do this or to do that? You or- Ann came in because of choking spells, gasping spells,
ganize your therapy around whether they can think all-gone feelings in her chest. The fear that she could
on this one topic — and do they think better on this one not survive another half hour. When do these choking
topic by the process of avoiding thinking on another spells, gasping spells develop? She said anytime of
topic? If you discover that they can think well on the day or night. But it wasn’t long before I discovered
topic of father by avoiding any mention of mother, ¡hey tended to develop shortly before bedtime. I also
fine. So then you ask them to do their best thinking found out that they developed at noontime, luncheon
on the subject of father. Sooner or later, after they’ve time, when friends came in to visit, if risqué stories
done their best thinking on the subject of father, it were told. So 1 let my patient think that she was
becomes possible for them then to think about separating her symptomatology from the bedroom by
mother. relating it also to casual visits from neighbors, casual
In their functioning at home you discover that social groups. But I always managed to get my pa-
while they cannot function in the bedroom, they can Lient to think of some risqué story a next-door neigh-
take a tremendous pride in functioning in the den and hor told, some risqué story that was told at a social
functioning in the yard looking after the flowers and yathering. Usually I tended to object to the patient
the grass. So you've built up a tremendous pride in Lelling me the story. Let's put an inhibition on the nar-
what they can do there. The first thing they know ration of the story. The purpose would be to get the
they're working in the front yard, the side yard, the inhibitions out and working, but let's inhibit some-
back yard, and working through the front of the house hing else. Let's inhibit the story, the narration of the
to the den, and working through the back of the house story, rather than to inhibit her breathing. You see?
to the den. They start enlarging the number of par- When she chokes and when she gasps, she’s trying to
ticular things they can do in relationship to the bed- inhibit a physical function.
room. You do not ask them to function libidinally in 11 Now when she chokes and gasps, she's trying to inhibit
the bedroom, but you ask them to take a particular a physical function. You assume she needs to do this,
pride, which they can do, in something in the bed- bal, you want her to inhibit something else rather than
room. If it's no more than the painted wall, the place- that, for the moment.
ment of the furniture, and the pictures on the wall, i’ Yes, There's no sense in trying to deprive her of her pat-
the drapes, and as soon as they start taking some tern of using inhibitions. Give her lots and lots of op-
pride in some reality in the bedroom, then you've portunity to use inhibitions. So I let her inhibit herself
opened the door to bedroom functioning at the libid- from telling me the stories, but J instructed her to in-
inal level. hibit. herself. She wouldn’t have told them to me anyH: So when they come in and they describe a problem to wiıy. (Laughter) But I merely took that over. Then I
you, you're both listening for what they think is their pointed out to her that this choking, gasping, just be-
problem and also for what is potentially possible in lore she went to bed must have made preparation
what they can do. for bed difficult. Did the steam from the shower bath
E: Allright, I can give you an example. Let's call her Ann. ipyyravate her choking and her gasping? She had to

[PAGE 068]

126 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
The Case of Inhibited Ann 127


think about that. What she didn’t know was that she !! Is this a married woman?
was thinking about herself in the nude. I was enabled I" Yes. Because she would develop that maybe an hour,
by that question to get her to think about herself an hour and a half, before bedtime. Therefore it was
while in the nude, without asking her to go through the psychological anticipation of something in the
the process of undressing. So she was doing that, and bedroom. Something in the bedroom, not something
she studied that. Then I asked her if stepping from going to be in the bedroom, but something in the bed-
the shower out onto the bathmat, that sudden change room.

in temperature from the warm, moist air of the shower 11 Why do you make that distinction?
into the relatively cooler air of the bathroom, did that I" Because I don’t want her to think that maybe lovemak-
sudden change of temperature on her skin aggravate ing is involved in the situation.
her breathing in any way, or increase the choking or 11 You assume it is, but you don’t want her to think so?
the gasping? If it did, did drying herself with the 1" | assume it is by virtue of that extreme, laborious way
towel and rubbing her body improve it, lessen it, or in which she smoothes down her dress, tucks her feet
what did it do? The patient is thinking, of course, very carefully under the chair, holds herself rigidly
rather extensively about herself, in the nude out in and primly, the high-necked blouse that she is wear-
the open in the room, not behind the shower curtain, ing, the hair pulled straight back in a completely prim
and she’s discussing that openly with me. Then the fashion, the fact that I know that she’s got one child.
next thing that I did with the woman... ler entire manner is one of extreme and rigid prudish
W: So that by discussing the situation in terms of what modesty. All of her behavior suggests that; I don’t
affects her difficulty you get her to think about be- know if it’s so or not. But she’s rigidly, primly modest,
ing there in the nude. and she chokes and gasps every night. She lays that
E: Being there in the nude. She knows she’s in the nude preparation for entering the bedroom.
when she steps out of the shower; I never have to men- 11 Well, the crucial thing is: Why don’t you want her to
tion that. That is something that is understood. Too know this?
often therapists want to hammer home, “But you're 1" She wouldn't have her symptomatology if she could face
in the nude when you get out of the shower.” You the issues.
never mention unnecessary and obvious facts. If the !! Most therapy is devoted to getting her to face that
patient wants to avoid things, well certainly help them issue.
to avoid, and it’s very, very nice to avoid the obvious. 1 Oh, VIL get her to face the issues.
You've satisfied your avoidance needs, but there's If Ultimately. OK, go on.
no...
/’ But let’s get all of the issues out, and let's teach her that
W: But yet nothing is hidden. she can face this one thing already in the discussion
E: Nothing is hidden. (Laughter) The next thing I wanted Uve offered. She's faced the fact that she's nude out
to do with her was to raise the question of what in the in the middle of the room and a strange man is dis-
bedroom could possibly cause that choking, gasping, cussing: her bare skin. It’s been done so quickly and
painful feeling in her chest? so easily, but it’s a fact. It’s already been done. That's

[PAGE 069]

128 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Case of Inhibited Ann 129


going to teach her that she can face a lot of issues. fication, no further analysis, but a tremendously long
Now what are the things in the bedroom? Very, very pause, thoughtful, giving her every opportunity, at
promptly, somewhere in the interview, I have men- the conscious level as well as the unconscious level,
tioned that undoubtedly she has this symptomatol- to think of all the changes since that hope chest first
ogy when she is on vacation, when she’s visiting her became a reality in 12 years of married life. What else
mother or father, when she’s visiting friends, signi- is in that bedroom? “Of course there’s a carpet.”
fying right then and there that it isn’t necessarily . You haven't got to the bed yet.
restricted solely to her bedroom, and concealing the I" “Of course there's a carpet.” Do you recognize what that

fact that I am aware that it might possibly be related statement is? It’s a most emphatic emphasis upon the
to her husband. I’m helping her to conceal any aware- obvious. “Of course there’s a carpet.” I don’t say there
ness of the possibility of it being related to her hus- is a bed. It’s obvious that there is a carpet. It’s obvi-
band. But I am helping her to conceal it. What are the ous that there is a bed. (Laughter) But I’ve mentioned
things in the bedroom? And what are the things in that bed so emphatically, “Of course there's a carpet.”
the bedroom? Well, you know there are windows with (Laughter)
drapes. H Okay.
FH: (Laughing) All right. I So that bed is as good as named and described. That
E: There's the chairs, and there's the dresser. The question “Of course,” you see, emphasizes the obvious.
I asked her was, “Do you have your hope chest there?” 11” ‘This is like the meaning that you get across when you

A hope chest embodies, or symbolizes, all of the hesi- say, “Of course there’s a (pause) carpet.” I mean it’s
tancies and uncertainties that the nubile girl has about nol the same but it’s the same point.
marriage and about sex, and every possible uncer- ' It’s not the same. It’s the same point, yes. But it’s said
tainty, every possible inhibition. Fortunately, she did so casually, with a pause, and of course there are all
have a hope chest there. I didn’t know it, but I wanted ihe other things. Remember, I mentioned the dresser
to know for certain. and the drapes and the chairs. Now you see, in origiW: It also symbolizes the expectations too, doesn't it? nally mentioning the drapes and the dressers and the
E: The expectations too. That whole tremendous complex. chairs, my patient has an awareness of the other fur-
When she mentioned the hope chest, I inquired: Was nilure and I’ve made an incomplete mention of things.
it made out of cedar completely, or was it one of these I(’s an interrupted, incomplete task. My patient knows
lovely cedar-lined chests, or was it a combination il. My patient is not really going to be interested in
cedar-lined, cedar exterior, plywood? I’ve forgotten ihe mention of the bed. So I have met my patient’s
what it was. She told me what a lovely chest it was. need not to mention the bed. But there's still a need
Then I made the statement, “You know, all the time to mention it. That's why she's coming to me. My pa-
you've been married, about how long has it been? Lienl’s description of her choking and her gasping, and
Twelve years? There’s been a lot of changes in your I forgot to include the mention of her paling and her
hope chest, especially after your daughter was born.” Nushing and the hotness of her face, and the uncom-
A lot of changes in your hope chest. No further speci- lortable feelings throughout her body, as if she were

[PAGE 070]

130 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Case of Inhibited Ann 131


burning up. Now with that incompleted task of men- Other people like to sleep with a minimum of night
tioning the bedroom furniture — I finally achieved it clothes. Some women really like these abbreviated
by saying, “Of course there's a carpet.” That “of course” nighties, and they really do. Some women like these
means, “Well, it's a bedroom, you don't have to men- abbreviated pajamas, and some like long pajamas or
tion everything in the bedroom.” My next series of long nighties. It’s usually a function of how their skin
questions relates to this: The patient knows that ’m reacts to the temperature change.” I’ve mentioned
going to inquire into bedroom behavior. What do psy- that in the bathroom. I mentioned in the bathroom
chiatrists do? My patient was a college graduate. Sex rubbing of skin. My patient is still talking about get-
has got to come out. I’ve got to ask about what you Ling into bed in relationship to body temperature, skin
do in the bedroom. And I ask her, “You know, in hang- feelings, degree of covering.
ing up your clothes for the night, do you put them on Then I can comment to the effect, “You know, one
the back of the chair? On any particular side of the of the problems, often in a marriage, is the difference
room?” I’ve put the inflection too obvious there. Any m the reaction, physiologically, a matter of body tem-
particular side of the room (with a rising inflection). perature in sleeping. Sometimes a husband wants lots
But I ask her, does she hang her day clothes up? On of blankets and sometimes he doesn't want any. When
any particular side of the room? a husband and wife agree physiologically, it isn’t
H: Now, hold it a minute. Maybe you made it obvious, but necessary to put one blanket on one side of the bed
not to me. and two blankets on the other side.” But I’ve menE: Well, which side of the bed? Where does she undress, tioned disagreement between a husband and wife and
on the right side of the bed or the left side of the bed, difficulties in adjustment. Her statement was, “Joe
or at the foot of the bed? I don’t know. But I’m not likes to sleep in the nude.” She liked to sleep in a very,
really talking about that, I’m talking about where she very long nightie. I’ve got my information, so very,
hangs up her clothes. Which side of the room? For ex- very painlessly, by the process of cultivating every
ample, “Do you put your blouse on the back of a chair one of her inhibitions.
or the arm of a chair?” As if that were an important HH Cullivating them?
question, and it is an important question. The word Yes. Having her continue to use them. But I’ve always
“back” and the word “arm” have crept into the inquiry. directed where she used them.
Nobody has noticed it, except the unconscious be- We Have you also used them in the sense that she is so
cause of that sensitivity, because here’s a woman that inhibited that even the tangential mention of these
I suspect of having sexual conflicts or fears or anxi- ihinges is going to be quite powerful to her anyway?
eties. So we go into this question of where she drapes lis; proing to be sufficiently powerful. Now, the next step
her clothing, clothing that she has taken off. with Ann (and if I happen to slip and give her name,
Then my question relates back to the bathroom lor heaven's sake be very sure to edit that out) was
again. “I really don’t know what your metabolism is. (his: “Now we have different patterns of sleep. Some
Some people want to sleep very warmly in bed at people sleep very soundly, some very lightly, some
night; they want pajamas and they want blankets. very restíully. I don’t know what the effect of this

[PAGE 071]

132 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Case of Inhibited Ann 133


choking and gasping is upon your sleep pattern; but that the difficulties of hugging would interfere with
I would like you to think about the sleep pattern of intercourse.
your daughter, your husband, and then speculate up- lV: If T understand you rightly, what you're saying is that
on your own pattern of sleep.” even when you get more direct, you do it in an indirect
She told me how daughter could sleep and the house way.

could burn down. Daughter really slept. And I pointed I’: Yes. But it’s an awfully direct way just the same. You
out, “You know, if you had a second or third child, see, bringing it up that way, she could tell me very
you’d undoubtedly note they had different sleeping quickly and very easily, and I’ve given her a face-
patterns. Incidentally, was your daughter a planned saving explanation. I’ve told her how to defend herself
child, and is it your interest to have only one child, in explaining sexual difficulties. I much prefer my
or would you really like to have a larger family?” method of defending herself in her sexual difficulties
When I asked, “Was your daughter a planned child? than anything that she can think up. Because that
Are you interested in having an only child or do you places the situation in my hands.
really want additional children?” what am I actually 11: Well, wouldn't that be her explanation anyhow?
asking about? Did they plan sexual relations? Are I" leven so, I’ve given it to her.
they still having planned systematic sex relations? 11” You’ve also made the connection.
Yet it’s a casual inquiry that you could expect. It’s 1" I've made the connection.
asked in a properly informative fashion. 11. She might have denied it if it had come out in a differ-
Her statement was, “The child was a planned child.” ent way.
They desperately wanted more children, but it didn’t I’ IT it had come out in a different way, she might have
seem to work. It didn’t seem to work. So we got said, “There are no difficulties in intercourse.” Did you
her mention, quite directly, of sex relations. Then I ever take a person out to dinner and you know their
switched immediately to this matter of, “You said a liking for barbecued spareribs. You say, “Well, why
long nightie — do your feet get cold at night?” Now we don’t you order the barbecued spareribs?” They look
all know what “cold feet” mean. “And does anything al.you with distaste, thinking, “Why didn't he let me
in particular seem to intensify your choking and your make my own choice?” That’s right. They’re going to
gasping? For example, when your husband kisses you choose it anyway, but they still want to feel it entire-
goodnight. Does that increase your choking or your ly their own choice.
gasping?” She said, “We don't kiss goodnight because I You use that on a defense then?
he always wants to hug me when he kisses me good- Fo YVes,

night, and I can’t stand that pressure around my H ‘They want to choose their own defense.
chest.” I offered my sympathy about that, and pointed I" You, but you see, I choose it in such a way that they're
out, “Of course, that would interfere with lovemaking, awfully glad I chose it for them. (Laughter) Just as
wouldn’t it?” But you see, that’s a tangential obser- you Lake your guest out and you know that your guest
vation. What we're really talking about is kissing would like the $5.75 dinner and is going to settle for
goodnight, and I make the tangential observation Lhe $2.75. You say, “That filet mignon looks wonder-

[PAGE 072]

134 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Case of Inhibited Ann 135


ful.” Then what does your guest do? Orders the filet her behavior through 12 years of marriage? It's a
mignon. Just the same procedure entirely. beautiful summary of 12 years of sex relations. And
Then I’ve got this matter of difficulty in sexual rela- it governed her behavior. So I asked, “Is your husband
tions brought out. My statement then is essentially sympathetic to this extreme modesty of yours?” He
this, “You know, sooner or later I really ought to go wasn't. “Do you blame your husband for being impa-
into this matter of your sexual adjustments with your Lient with your extreme modesty, or do you recognize
husband. I suppose we might as well do it now. I’m (hat he is a man?”
not certain how much detail we need. I would say that ‘1 Vhat's a slippery one there.
anything that’s particularly unusual, in your mind, E" “And that he's going to think and behave like a man.”
ought to be enough to discuss. Now I don’t know See, I’ve been thinking of writing up Ann’s case, and
whether you enjoy sex, or you have difficulties in hav- | went over it this weekend.
ing orgasms. With your chest complaint, I suppose IE: Well, now you leave rather ambiguous what a man is
it interferes with satisfaction. But I wonder if there’s under those circumstances.
anything in particular that you might think that J ' That's right. My idea of a man, your idea of a man.
would consider unusual or different?” She said, “Well, They're both utterly worthless ideas. What's her idea
I suppose you will laugh at me whenI tell you I al- of a man? That's what I’ve got to deal with. And here
ways undress in the dark, and if possible in a differ- I've got a very crucial thing about her behavior, a
ent room.” woman who has to undress in the dark, preferably in
H: Well, now, you switch that from what she would con- another room, which tells me her husband would like
sider unusual to what she would think you would con- to have the light on. He would like to watch his wife
sider unusual. undress. Therefore, 1 added, “Of course, you do the
E: That's right. In other words, first I asked her to think same thing even when you're home alone, isn't that
in terms of her own thinking. Then I asked her to right?” Which is doing what? She can't really admit
think in terms of her purposes in coming to me. Ask- that she's so afraid of her husband. I don’t want the
ing her to think in terms of her own thinking, well, woman to humiliate herself by confessing that she
she's used to her own thinking. It’s utterly and com- married a man and was so unwilling to enter into the
pletely safe. So she starts thinking in those safe marriage relationship. Because she's going to condemn
terms. Then I ask her to start thinking in terms of her herself, and she is already condemning herself, fright-
purpose in coming to me. It was she who came to me, fully. So I mentioned that of course she does that even
and that was a safe thing because she decided to come when she’s home alone.
to me. So she tells me that, and then she asks me not Then, I have discovered accidentally that the drapes
to laugh at her. I asked her if she thought that any- on Lhe bedroom windows, the drapes on the bathroom
thing that governed a person's behavior over 12 years windows, or the shades there, are unbelievable drapes.
of married life is anything to laugh at? She said, No.” Now, of course, I’ve mentioned the drapes earlier, and
It isn't, you know. 1 had said the words, “Governed I know this much about her undressing behavior;
her behavior through 12 years of marriage.” What is therefore, | go back and inquire about the drapes. I

[PAGE 073]

136 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Case of Inhibited Ann 137


find that they are very, very special drapes. She has effectively. I’ve told her that she is going to do some-
window shades, and venetian blinds and drapes. All thing. Then I tell her, “Of course, you know, Joe really
on the same windows. She’s got very special water- wouldn't drop dead with heart failure if you came into
proof drapes over the bathroom window, which is the room in the nude dancing. You can think of a lot
frosted glass. Therefore, I’ve got all this material out of other things he’d be doing.” She said, “Yes.” I said,
of her, and it’s been largely voluntarily and so, safely. of course she could fantasize entering the bedroom
Then I ask her, “Speculate on the most horrible that way. “You know what you can really do? You can
thing that you can possibly do. Speculate on it. Don’t undress in the dark and get in the nude, and your hus-
tell me. Just speculate on it, because I think it’s go- band has the lights off usually, isn’t that right? In the
ing to open a whole new view of what your problem bedroom for you? Because he is a considerate man,
is. But I’m not at all sure. But don’t tell me. Because isn’t he? You can enter the bedroom dancing in the
I want you free to speculate on the most horrible thing nude and he won't even know about it.” (Laughter) Do
you could do in relationship to getting ready for bed.” you see what that’s going to do to her attitude to-
She sat there and thought, flushed and paled. While wards sex? I don’t know how much more detail you
she was flushing I said, “You really wouldn’t want to want from me.
tell me, would you?” H: What were interested in, particularly, is the various
W: When you say speculate but say, “don't tell me,” you're ways you make this shift from cooperating and en-
really saying, “Go further but still be inhibited about couraging them in behaving in some symptomatic
it.” way, and then you shift. Now you have her overly
E: Yes. And whenI tell her, “You really wouldn’t want to modest about her body, you manage to get her to
tell me, would you?” then she’s got to be sure that she think of doing the opposite, and then you shift her
really wouldn’t want to tell me, which is literally noth- back to doing the opposite but in a situation where
ing more than an instruction, “Elaborate that fantasy, she can be overly modest about her body.
whatever it is. Dress it up because you really wouldn't le: Yes.
want to tell me.” Finally she burst out laughing, and W: Well, in this case in some funny way — there are times
she said, “It’s so horribly ridiculous that I almost when you seem to make an abrupt sort of a shift from
would like to tell you.” I said, “Well, be sure that you apparently accepting what they do just 100 percent
would really like to tell me, but if it’s funny as that or maybe 200 percent, and I think there are the...
I'd like to know.” She said, “Joe would drop dead 1: Well, just stop to consider it. The patient comes to you
if I came into the bedroom in the nude, dancing.” on a very —what shall we call it —tender, intense mat-
(Laughter) I said, “We ought not to give him heart ter. They’ve got all their defenses and all of their fears
failure.” We ought not to give him heart failure. Do and all of that maladjustment behind them, and they're
you see what that does? We're going to give Joe some- desperate enough to seek help. Now suppose you take
thing, but we aren’t going to give him heart failure. somebody out hunting, and it’s their first experience
(Laughter) in hunting: and you caution them to be silent, and to
And there is my foundation laid very quickly, very be alert, and to be responsive. As you're walking along

[PAGE 074]

138 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Case of Inhibited Ann 139


briskly you suddenly turn right. You have empha- Il: Yes. You start with a situation where the husband feels
sized, “Maybe game is in sight.” You haven't said so. deprived, because she undresses in the dark, and you
You have emphasized there is a need to avoid walking arrange it so that (Laughing) she can come dancing
straight ahead. When you make a sudden shift in your into the room in the dark and deprive him.
interview with a patient, and you veer off to the right, W: While she’s moving towards him at the same time.
you have emphasized, “That particular point where (Laughter)
I veered off, that was important.” lv: But this time he won't know he's deprived. I didn’t think
W: Well, what strikes me is that with this girl, the main she should do it too soon. 1 cautioned her very, very
impression I get is that more or less consistently strongly not to do it tonight or tomorrow night, or
throughout you keep going a step further. You're al- even next week. But the week following that — I didn't
ways going ahead in a somewhat inhibited way. So know whether it was the first part or the latter part
that these two apparently contradictory things are of the week.
proceeding sort of together all the time. In contrast, II: That's your shift of “when” instead of “whether,” right?
I’m thinking of a couple that you told us about that lv: Oh yes. She did it. She wondered if she could really
came to you who were so phyloprogenitive that they engage in such a childish thing. I told her there was Ske


never enjoyed sex and you listened to them for a half one way of finding out. While her daughter was at
an hour and all of a sudden said, “Why don’t you fuck nursery school, and she was alone in the house, why
for fun?” One seems to me to be a gradual shift, and not darken the house and actually discover for herself
the other a very abrupt shift. the niceness of a sense of complete freedom. Then I
E: Yes. But, of course, with that couple I told them they went on to discuss the pleasure of swimming in the
needed shock treatment. And then I proceeded to give nude. People seldom realize what a drag a bathing suit
them the shock treatment. Now in raising this ques- is until they can feel water slipping, not over a bath-
tion of dancing in the nude into the bedroom in the ing suit, but over a nude body. Swimming is so much
dark, I was literally telling her, “You can enter the more pleasurable. If she had any doubts about it she
bedroom in the nude. You can carry out this ridiculous really ought to take a bath wearing a bathing suit.
fantasy. You can find it amusing. You can experience She'd discover what a handicap clothing was. And
a lot of feelings within yourself very, very safely.” So why not? Then I asked her what type of dancing she
I’ve got her in the process of actually dealing with her liked. She likes round dancing, she's done square dan-
own reality, her own feelings. Then, of course, the cing, she takes in the ballet. She enjoys it. Inciden-
double bind. I didn’t think she ought to do that too Lally, she does a great deal of knitting, embroidering,
soon. crocheting, dressmaking. She makes pot holders and
H: Well, then you did another little thing in there too, and she makes scarves for Christmas presents. She likes
that was to handle it in such a way that she was do- sewing. I asked her then, when I found that out: Did
ing it to defy her husband or to express some resent- she make her own nighties? I pointed out to her she
ment of her husband. ought Lo make her own nighties, at least, “run up one.”
E: To deprive her husband. I use that same phrase sometime later.

[PAGE 075]

140 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Case of Inhibited Ann 141


H: At least, “run up one”? W: What's the difference between choosing the shock treatE: Yes. That’s a dressmaker’s term, to “run up” a dress. ment in one, and this one step after another with this
“Run up” a blouse. At a later interview I spoke of let- girl?
ting her nightie run up to her neck. And still later, run E: Well, this girl was shy, timid, fearfully inhibited, and
up to the head of the bed. She did do that nude danc- reacting with these choking, gasping attacks upon her
ing. She enjoyed it. She told me about it. She said it own body. This other couple were reacting with more
was the first time in her life that she had ever really or less paranoid reactions toward each other. “Getting
enjoyed entering the bedroom. She said she went to so I hate him.” “Getting so I can’t stand her.” You see,
sleep giggling, and her husband wanted to know what it’s a different type of personality. When somebody
she was giggling about. How doesa little child feel says, in the presence of his wife, “Everytime I make
when they’ve done something they consider ludicrous love to her now I more or less hate it.” Well, there’s
and daring? They giggle to themselves. Especially a person that can take a hard blow. He's giving a hard
when it’s something ludicrous and daring that they blow. When the wife says, in her husband's presence,
can’t tell people about. They giggle, and giggle, and “We've tried so hard to get a baby, and it doesn't work,
giggle. She went to sleep giggling, and she didn’t tell when there's nothing wrong with either of us. And he's
her husband, and she didn’t go to sleep choking and just such a disappointment to me.” She's hitting hard
gasping. too. Now here are a couple of people that can hit hard,
W: I forgot that. but not with malice, with utter earnestness in depictE: Yes, you forgot it. So did she. She couldn't possibly an- ing their situation. If they can hit hard with objective
ticipate going to bed choking and gasping with that evaluations, so can you hit hard. You're just following
tremendous sense of the ludicrous. The daring, the their lead.
embarrassing thing accomplished. She had plenty of Here's a woman that tucks her skirt in unnecessar-
inhibitions about telling her husband. She had plenty ily and checks up on it repeatedly, brushes it down.
of inhibitions about showing off to her husband. She I think you ought to be wary of her sense of modesty.
had plenty of inhibitions and they were all laughable. But I think you ought to get at what’s being hidden
Then I pointed out to her, “You know, really, when behind that exaggerated modesty. Now I’ve asked her
you were full of giggles like that your husband must what was the most horrible thing that she could think
have wondered. . . it’s really unfortunate you didn't of to do. I asked her subsequently what she thought
have some lovemaking, because you were certainly in was the most utterly horrifying, amazing, ludicrous
the mood for it then with all those giggles.” You should thing she could possibly pull on her husband. What
have seen that awfully thoughtful look in her eyes. It sort of fantasy? “Don’t tell me, but just think freely
was just a casual psychiatric comment on my part. in your own mind. I don’t know whether it will em-
Then I asked her what else ought she to do? Did she barrass you or whether it will amuse you. I hope it
really enjoy that sense of physical freedom? Where will amuse you tremendously.” She thought of a lot
did she have her nightie when she danced into the of embarrassing things. She also met my hope that
room in the nude? She said, “I was using it as a scarf. iL would be an amusing thing. She did some more
Then, before I got into bed, I slipped it on.” (Laughter) laughing, and again she told me what it was.

[PAGE 076]

142 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Case of Inhibited Ann 143


She said if she ever undressed in her husband’s down to the hard, cold facts of your maladjustments.
presence with the light on, he would be sitting there Just as soon as you think you can discuss your sex-
in the bed pop-eyed. He'd be waiting for her to take ual maladjustments, let me know. Let me know direct-
her bra off, and she'd be just imagining what would ly, or let me know indirectly. I don’t care which it is,
happen to his eyes if, when she took her bra off, he and if I’m too stupid to recognize an indirect mention
saw little red ribbon bows on her nipples. (Laughter) of it, be sure you make me pay attention.”
We already see what the therapy is doing to her. In the very next interview she said, “I’d like to have
I asked her, “What size ribbons?” (Laughter) That’s you tell me all about sex relations. How a man should
right. What size ribbons? I don’t want her to present behave, and how a woman should behave.” Then she
that sort of absurd, ludicrous, ridiculous fantasy and gave me a very adequate account of her own frigidi-
then react against it. Let’s get down to matter-of-fact, ty, her own fears, her own anxieties. That choking and
common-sense considerations. “What size ribbons? that gasping, the way she gasped at the thought of
You know, there’s baby ribbon, it’s narrow, it’s bright penetration, at the thought of defloration. Her own
red. If it were too wide it wouldn’t be desirable. You choking, gasping behavior, and Joe’s own awkward-
couldn’t tie it too tight. You probably ought to put ness and clumsiness, and his own uncertainties and
it on just before you go into the bedroom, and that his own fears.
way your nipples will stay erect because of the ten- Later Ann told me about the rigid, stupid teachings
sion.” her mother had given her and her own inhibited be-
Now, of course, Ann did do that. Joe reacted very havior throughout high school and college, avoidance
nicely. He did sit up in bed. There was an awful lot of any incidental sexual learning. Never able really to
of hostility in Joe’s response. Hostility that she ac- think it through. Ann’s desire to know what an or-
cepted because his response was — “I think you're be- gasm was, and to have me describe it to her. What
ginning to get some sense.” She came and told me. “I should a woman’s orgasm feel like? My statement to
think you're beginning to get some sense.” Intercourse her was, “Every woman has her own individual or-
for them had been about once a month, under protest gasm. I can only describe to you what various women
by her, and usually very brief. Never over five min- have told me. That doesn’t mean very much. It has
utes. When Joe told her, “I think you're beginning to Lo be experienced; it has to be felt. Now what are the
get some sense,” she knew exactly what he meant, and things you want me to do to insure your sexual be-
he turned on his side and rolled over and went to sleep. havior with your husband? You've used this choking,
“Beginning to get some sense.” He also told her, “Keep this gasping, for a long time to insure against it. Sup-
right on getting sense,” and that he was willing to pose I insist that you use this choking, gasping be-
wait. Which committed her all the more. His own un- havior for something else entirely? Something differ-
conscious response. ent?”
So from then on progress continued. She said Joe How many patients resent your taking their dif-
meant a lot of things. “How do you feel about sexual liculty away from them? How many bottled up ap-
relations with him? You know we really ought to get pendixes are there in the family treasures? Have you

[PAGE 077]

144 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson The Case of Inhibited Ann 145


ever listened to someone tell you, “This is the appen- on Sunday morning, on Sunday night. Sometimes
dix the doctor took out, and do you know how many when they're alone, when daughter goes to visit a cer-
attacks I had of appendicitis?” They treasure their tain friend Sunday afternoon. Perfect freedom.
problems, but they want to treasure them safely. What She modeled some negligees, nighties, shorties, for
I was asking her was, “Let’s put your choking, gasp- her mother in her husband's presence. Mother sat
ing into a specimen bottle of some kind. And you can there in frozen horror. Ann said, “You know, I felt
have it. It’s yours.” sorry for mother because 1 knew exactly how she was
She told me what she wanted her choking, gasping feeling, and I wish she wouldn't feel that way.” Again
behavior for. She said, “There’s a couple that have Ann's reexamination of her own feelings and again her
been friends of ours for a long time. I don’t like them. rejection of those original feelings. Ann’s utilization
They always come and they always want drinks and now of her choking and gasping behavior as useful.
they always drink too much. They always find fault I think she’s such a very nice, delightful person.
unless we have the very best of whiskey for them. Joe This question of more children, another examination
likes them. I don’t like them. Joe always ignores one of herself and her husband. No apparent reason why
particular thing. He ignores the fact that the man, they shouldn’t have children. Apparently she’s a one-
whenever he gets the chance when his wife isn’t in the child woman. When she reaches the age of 35, which
room, always mentions he saw a good-looking blond is another year, she is going to abandon forever the
recently. I know that he’s stepping out on his wife. idea of becoming pregnant again. Because your hope
I want to get rid of them. I don’t want to be friends to get pregnant puts a certain amount of tension in-
with them.” Every time that couple came to call, she to things. You keep a record of your fertile periods.
had a choking, gasping episode. Now she's rid of them. During them you make love for the purpose of getH: Is it typical that in the beginning you're extraordinarily ting pregnant. In the nonfertile periods you make love
careful to avoid suggesting what the symptom seems for the sheer pleasure of making love. Ann doesn’t
to be achieving, and then later you discuss it quite want to miss the possibility of becoming pregnant;
directly? but if by the age of 35 she’s not pregnant, she better
E: Very, very often. accept that reality. That was Ann’s own reasoning.
H: And you behave as if somewhere they know what it’s I had nothing whatsoever to do about it.
achieving. Well, now, that’s the example of how you This differentiation between intercourse during the
classify someone as having a symptom related to fertile period and intercourse during the nonfertile
avoiding something about sexual relations, or that period is, again, of course, Ann’s own reasoning. But
whole problem. it does follow some of Ann’s rigid patterns. It’s inE: Now Annis very, very free in discussing sex. She goes telligently followed and intelligently utilized.
to bed in the nude. After sex relations she puts on her I cite Ann because she is such a nice, remarkably
nightie. She likes to sleep in her nightie; she likes to nice case. That horrible modesty of hers, that horri-
make love in the nude. Sex relations, three times a ble rigidity, that horrible punishment of herself, made
week, four times a week, sometimes Saturday night, her such an easy patient to manipulate in the matter

[PAGE 078]

The Case of Inhibited Ann 147
146 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

of ideas. She turned her aggressions onto herself. That sense,” in turning aside and laying down and going

left her the easy prey of others. That couple that call- to sleep. Part of an enduring type.
IT: Well, there are a couple of possible interpretations of
ed on them, of course, preyed on her too. Made her
furnish the best whiskey. She did all the shopping. that. I mean you can interpret it as passive and en-
They knew that they could make her buy the very during, and you can also interpret it as a protest to

best whiskey. In other words, she let others assault her changing.
17: You could at that time, yes, interpret it in those ways.
her. Therefore, I made use of the tendency. Why
But I think against the background of putting up
shouldn’t 1?
H: Now, would you assume that her husband would not with that sort of behavior
—I think dressing in the
dark in another room is carrying it too far. Therefore,
necessarily welcome her becoming less modest? That
this would also be an arrangement that would be he must be pretty passive and enduring.
W: Milton’s got a positive view of the spouse, as well as
satisfying his needs?
a positive, utilizing sort of view of the behavior of the
E: From everything about Ann’s statements to me, I felt
patient.
that her husband was one of these people who tend
lv: You see, if he were going to be negative and hostile
to hope for the better. Of course, in his reaction to Bill
and Stella, letting Bill and Stella demand that he fur- about it, he’d make her undress in the dark in the
nish them with the best whiskey. One wonders what bedroom.
II: In the dark in the bedroom?
would have happened to Ann had she had a for-
lv: You see, that would be a negative, hostile attitude on
thright, aggressive husband. Their sexual pattern
his part. That would be putting his wife in the nude
after treatment was at least three times a week;
in his presence, but also helping her to be complete-
previously once a month. That’s a horrible contrast.
Again it suggests a certain passive character on the ly unavailable. I would probably have varied my ap-
proach very greatly if Joe had arbitrarily insisted that
part of the husband.
H: We find that very typically if a wife or a husband has she undress in the dark in the bedroom. That's a dif-
ferent sort of a picture.
some difficulty such as that, and one of them changes,
II: You mean if he's capable of insisting that she undress
the other gets disturbed or changes or flips in some
in the bedroom and also insists that she undress in
way. This idea that the husband would like the wife
to be more receptive sexually, and then when she is the dark in the bedroom, then something of him is

this is fine, doesn’t necessarily hold up in a lot of cases. being...
lv: Something’s wrong then. It would be hostile. It would
When she gets more receptive sexually, he can get
be a negative thing, it would bea self-defeating thing
more upset.
on his part. When Joe let her go into another room
W: I think what you were saying, if I understood you, is
that in this case the idea was that he was a passive, to undress in the dark when the bedroom was dark,
and then to come into the bedroom in the dark in her
enduring guy, that he would endure this until he got
nightie, he was just enduring it. Keeping away from
used to the fact that things could be different and bet-
her and out of it, having no share in it.
ter. Is that right?
IT: Now I gather that one thing that might be said is that
E: Yes. As he illustrated in, “You're beginning Lo get some

[PAGE 079]

The Case of Inhibited Ann 149
148 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


when you see a new patient and you observe them and E: Oh yes. But just the same, people can react unfavorably
listen to what they say, that you classify them in to adults and themselves and treat the objective
terms of some function in the present of their symp- world with the greatest of care. The farmer may be
tom or difficulty. You don’t classify them in terms of very harsh toward his family, and he may punish
psychodynamics in the past; it’s something in the himself with a tremendous amount of work; but his
present.
horses are well curried and fed and brushed down, and
E: Something in the present. so are his cattle. His stock are prizewinners in every
H: Now suppose someone comes in and his problem is that regard. But so far as people are concerned, he quar-
he fails. Well, I have one. He’s a photographer and he rels with his neighbors, he quarrels with his family,
keeps making stupid mistakes. He leaves the camera and he beats himself over the back all the time.
open, or he doesn’t push a switch. Now when you see H: You don’t feel that the good care of his livestock is

that, what do you assume about this sort of a symp- related to being a good farmer, which is related to
tom? Do you assume that he’s failing in relation to what would his father or mother think of him if he
somebody else? Or do you assume that he’s failing in wasn't a good farmer?
relation to himself? E: It’s the same sort of thing that allows a child to take
E: There are three possibilities. He’s failing in relationship a toy apart and put it together with extreme care so
to himself, he’s failing in relationship to other persons, that he knows and understands and enjoys the toy all
or he’s failing in relationship to the objective world. the more.
H: What’s the objective world?
E: The destructiveness toward the objective world. Fail-
ing in relationship to it.
H: I don't conceive of the objective world except as other
people. What do you mean by the objective world?
E: You take the child who is very well adjusted, very hap-
py, gets along with himself, gets along with his
parents, and you bring him a new toy. What does he
do with that toy? He takes it apart with the greatest
of care and he puts it together again. That has nothing
to do with his father and mother. They can’t unders-
tand it. But here is the objective world with which you
can behave. You can do things with this objective
world. You do it so nicely, with utter disregard of how
the parents feel about you taking a toy all apart.
H: It’s a little easier to see it with a child than it is with
an adult. The objective world has got tied up with an
awful lot of people by the time you're an adult.

[PAGE 080]

Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 151


for it. After she gets acquainted with you, then she'll
be able to start concealing more adequately.
The patient 1 saw twice, on Friday and Saturday,
CHAPTER 7 came in and said, “I've come a long way to see you.
Pve come 1800 miles. 1 drove halfway, and then my
car broke down. Then I took a plane, even though I’m
Classifying People afraid of planes. I’ve got to go back by train. Here I
am, out here in the middle of nowhere, 1800 miles
away from home. I want to go home. I want to go
and home.” That's the answer right then and there.
I saw his wife later in the hour. I pointed out to her,
Starting Difficult Cases “Your husband isn't going to cooperate with treat-
ment. He's already thought through how he's going
Lo get back to Oklahoma City. He said, ‘I want to go
home.’ He said it childishly. He said it the way a child
who is spoiled says, ‘I want to go home.’ And he's go1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.
ing to go home.” She pointed out how her husband
was a very successful businessman. Very, very compeH: Well, now, getting back to how you classify people, I
tent. He had invested a tremendous amount of money
think it’s somehow different from the way other peo- and time in the trip out here, given up a job to come
ple classify. But it’s hard to get at just how you do out here, and that really he wasn't going to go home.
it. Now a woman comes in and tells you that she is Wouldn't 1 please have faith and confidence? She fought
always gagging, having difficulty breathing, and she all night long with him Friday night, and he loaded
acts overly modest, in the way she arranges her skirt. up on highballs to have enough strength to come and
Now you also begin to look for something positive Lell me, “I will not submit to treatment. I wanna go,
that you can use. | wanna go.” That's that. There wasn't anything I
E: Well, you see she's come in, and she doesn't know how could do.
to act in that strange and new situation. Therefore, i! So you feel that it’s partly that it’s a new situation they
she is going to strive desperately, because there is no don't know how to handle that they reveal some of the
formulated plan by which she can present herself. things that they wouldn't ordinarily reveal?
Since there is no formulated plan, she's going to be
" You. What does the good administrator do when he calls
at a loss about how to conceal her problem the way in someone he wants to reprimand or rebuke? They
she's been concealing it from herself for a long time. are very used to being rebuked, and a good adminis-
Since she has got no patterns of concealment when trator, what does he do? Everybody called to the
she comes into the office, she is going to betray a good
boss's office for a bawling out puts his chips on his
deal of her problem right then and there if you look shoulder and puts on his hangdog air and marches to

150

[PAGE 081]

152 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson 153
Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases

the boss’s office. Then he has his part, and the boss 11: What do you look for? I mean, setting that aside for
has his part. Except the good administrator steps out a moment, what do you look for in his relationship to
of the office and says, “I’m sorry, I’ll be busy; here is you? In how he responds to you?
a magazine you can read while you're waiting.” I’: Well, I’m curious about that in this way. Should he defy
A poor helpless employee comes in for the admin- me, should he cooperate with me, or should he treat
istrator's reprimand. He doesn't want that magazine. me as an intelligent empathizer with no personal im-
“What should 1 do? Should 1 read it?” He's got to plications? What sort of a role should I have in his
spend some time. How's he going to spend the time? existence? I dislike that patterned, rigid attitude. I
Should he throw the magazine down on the floor? can think of one psychoanalyst. He sits at his desk
Well, there it lies. Maybe he ought to put it up on the and the analysand enters. He turns, he stands, he
end table. No, hell leave it lying there. It’s a new, walks over and he shakes hands. He's silent. The anal-
strange, alien situation. He just doesn't know what ysand lies down on the couch over here, and the ana-
to do to handle it. And he's still struggling with it. lyst turns this way, which is slightly back of the head
When the administrator walks in, all of the employee's of the couch. Now, when the hour's over, the analyst
defenses are stripped because he's been trying to deal stands, silently shakes hands. Then the analysand
with that magazine. It's a horrible situation. walks out that door. It doesn't make a bit of difference
If you want an employee to quit, what do you do? who the analysand is. There's no deviation in that pat-
You can’t fire him; the union will jump on you. You tern. Three months, six months, a year, three years,
can't ask him to resign; he'll defy you knowing the five years. I think Alex has gone through that routine
union will support him. So you hand him a ball of yarn with his analyst now for 12 long years. One of De-
and say, “While you're waiting, do you mind, as a fa- troit's leading analysts. Male, female, old, young, mid-
vor to me, unwinding that in part and making two dle-aged, grade school, high school, college professor —
balls equal size?” It’s an impossible situation. Yes, he it doesn't make a bit of difference. That same rigid
can do it; how do you rebel against anything as idiotic routine day after day.
as that? So you wait the 15 or 20 minutes, and then 11. Well, let me put it this way: What do you base your
your secretary, when you buzz her, comes in and says prognosis on? I mean, if you do make some sort of a
so-and-so left his resignation. You know that he's go- prognosis by the end of an hour with a new patient —
ing to resign. He isn’t going to tolerate that sort of both some estimate of how long it will be, and whether
thing. you can do anything for him?
FH: Well, when a patient offers you this sort of behavior I". Ws a matter of their general behavior. What do they
when he first comes in, and you're looking for some- «how you that they can actually do.
thing positive you can use, what sort of things do you
look for? * * *
E: Anything that the patient actually can do. Anything
that he can do. Preferably something that he can do " Well, Lake the selectee for the draft who could only pee
in relationship to his problem. through a wooden tube or a metal tube.

[PAGE 082]

154 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 155


H We've often wondered where you get these people.
he fainted. He had tried to enter drugstores by sheer
E: He isn't the first I’ve encountered.
physical force and fainted. He was sick and tired of
H: He isn't?
that.
E: Oh no. But you need a willingness to inquire into their I didn’t use hypnosis on the matter of entering
behavior. They hold it out. But what did 1 do? I made buildings, because I thought I could handle that and
it a constant use of a tube, didn't 1? Except since he win his absolute confidence in me by correcting that
had the inconstancy of a metal or a wooden tube, I first. Then I could employ hypnosis. So I made an ap-
used that and made the tube neither metal nor wood. pointment for him. He was afraid of girls, and I asked
I made it bamboo. The metal tubes and wooden tubes him how he would feel about going to the Golden
he used were of an inconstant length. Therefore, I Drumstick. He said he'd faint at the thought. “How
made the bamboo tube of an inconstant length. Then, would you feel about going there in company?” He'd
of course, I transformed it into the tube of his hand faint even worse. Now here are various types of women:
and then the realization he had a tube—his penis — the young, naive woman, the divorcée, the widow, the
and he constantly urinated through that tube. experienced lady. They can be attractive or unattracFT: When this first came up we were discussing the instruc- tive. Which was the most frightening of those four?
tions you give at various times about the conscious There was no question about it —an attractive divorcée.
mind and the unconscious mind. The unconscious mind I told him that he was taking Mrs. Erickson and
will know this now, but will keep it secret from the me out to dinner at the Golden Drumstick and that.
conscious mind. One of the questions that comes to there would be someone coming along. It might be a
my mind is this: If they know it in their unconscious young man, a divorced man, a widowed man, or an old
mind, didn’t they know it in their conscious mind be- man, a young girl, a divorcée, a widow, or an old lady.
fore? What happens when you say, “Now you will He should arrive at 7 o'clock on Tuesday. 1 would
know it in your unconscious mind but not in your con- drive because I didn’t care to be in his car when he
scious mind”? was likely to faint. He arrived at 7. I had arranged,
E: All right, take Bill. Bill had difficulty in his work, he of course, with an extremely attractive divorcée Lo ar-
had to drive down North Central to Van Buren, he rive at 7:20. I let the poor devil sit and sweat and pace
worked in a car lot there. Coming down North Cen- the floor and sit down and jump up.
tral he had to go past the Golden Drumstick restau- Finally the divorcée, one of these utterly charming,
rant. He was afraid to enter the bank building or any casily met people, walked in. I said to him, “Introduce
tall building, afraid to ride in an elevator, afraid to yourself,” just to make it hard. So he introduced him-
enter a drugstore, afraid to enter certain restaurants self. Then 1 told the divorcée his plans, “Bill has de-
because they were too well-lighted. And he was afraid cided to take the three of us to dinner at the Golden
to cross Van Buren on foot; he just couldn’t. He could Drumstick.” So we went out and got in my car und
really work up a sweat trying to cross it. If he stepped | drove there and parked the car and we got oul. |
out of the lot onto the pavement, the probability was said, “You know, this is a nice graveled parking lot;
that someone would have to pick up that man because that’s a nice level spot there where you can fall down

[PAGE 083]

Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 157
156 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

have to drive down North Central by driving two
and faint. You want that one, or is there a better one blocks away from the Golden Drumstick and passing
that you can find?” He said, “I’m afraid it will happen it and then getting back to Central.
when I get to the door.” So we walked over to the door But when it came to crossing Van Buren he couldn't
and I said, “Nice-looking sidewalk, probably bang you do it. So in a trance state he could. “Really I can’t, I
head hard if you crash.” He said, “Can we get a table just know that it’s possible, but I also know I can't.”
inside just next to the door?” I said, “We'll take the
So I told him that there was one thing else that his
table that I pick out.” So we went across — they have unconscious knew, and that was that he could cross
an elevated section —clear across to the elevated sec-
Van Buren without knowing that he was crossing it.
tion in the far corner. The divorcée sat beside me. And that he would not know when he crossed it. You
While we were waiting, the divorcée and Mrs. Erick-
see the setup there? Not even his unconscious would
son and I talked way above his head. We told the
know it. It only knew that it was possible. I told him,
most abstruse jokes we knew and laughed heartily
“Now work it out.”
at them. That reminds me, one of them was, “What
He always parked his car on a certain side street.
is the difference between a duck?” “One leg is both the
He arrived late one morning, his parking space was
same.” We told mythological riddles. “Who wrote the taken. So he drove around the corner onto Van Buren
song ‘How dry I am”” “Tantalus.” The three of us had and parked on the opposite side. He crossed Van Buren
a good time and he was out of the swim and feeling and went to work. At the close of the day he went
increasingly miserable. This divorcée had a Master’s
to his usual parking place, and the car wasn’t there.
degree. “That’s right, I had to find another parking place.” He
Then, when the waitress came over, I picked a fight
went over and got in his car. As he started up, he took
with her. It was a rather disagreeable, noisy fight. I a look, “Wait a minute, I’m on the opposite side of Van
demanded the manager and picked a fight with him. Buren. How did I get here? And my car is here. I must
Poor Bill was ready to die. Finally, in my fight with have walked across Van Buren. I left my car and
the manager I demanded to see the kitchen. We got crossed Van Buren, and I’m back here; therefore, I
out there and I let him and the waitress in on the se- crossed Van Buren twice. But I don’t remember it.”
cret that I was ribbing my friend. So they fell in line Im the next trance state he told me all about it. I saw
with it. Boy, did she slam the food on the table. Bill Lo il that he got there too late for his parking space.
ate his dinner. But I kept urging him to clean up his “And I was busy cussing for oversleeping and I cussed
plate, as did the divorcée. “That fat’s good for you.” mentally all the time while he was finding a parking
He lived through it, and he came home with us. “pace somewhere.”
I had tipped off the divorcée. She said, “You know IE Wail a minute, who was cussing?
I feel in the mood to go dancing tonight.” He had / ‘Fhe unconscious. “I was cussing all the time he was find-
learned to dance in high school a little bit. She took imp a parking place.”
him dancing. The next night he picked up a friend of i? Ile really split it into “I” and “he.”
his. “Let’s go out to dinner.” They went to the Golden 1? Of course, Bill was cussing too.
Drumstick. Tried out a drugstore, and so on. Ile didn’t

[PAGE 084]

158 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 159


FH: (Laughing) How did he get in here? breast is caught in his ear and he is saying something
E: “But I was cussing, and Bill was cussing.” like, “Help, I’m stuck.”) They know you listen to the
H: He developed the cussing end of it himself? That wasn’t heart with a stethoscope and that you listen to the
suggested to him? heart with the ear, and here the nipple gets caught in
E: No, I didn’t suggest it. the ear, and he can’t get it out. (Laughter) Then I ask
H: Before we get away from this restaurant deal, it’s like
them, “I wonder what he did do.”
so many of your papers — we wonder why you assumed 11: What do they say?
that if you took him to dinner with a divorcée and I“: Well, I wait a few seconds, a long enough pause, and
made it an unpleasant dinner he would then be able I say, “Of course, that’s just a cartoon.” (He turns and
to go in there himself.
puts it away.) “Now, what about your sexual inhibiE: Listen, could anything worse ever happen in a restau- tions? Can you tell me about them?” A patient I had
rant than what I pulled on him? The worst possible last week said, “You know, I should talk to you about
thing had happened; everything else that happened my sexual inhibitions, but please don't ask me. I can't.
would be a welcomed relief. And if you try to discuss it, I can't control myself, I'll
H: Why didn't he faint going in? have to walk out of the office. And I don’t want to.
E: How could he? His fainting was done because of his I'll never be happy, and my husband will never be
neuroticism, wasn’t it? And I picked his spots. And happy, unless I do talk about that. But, please Doctor,
those weren't the spots that belonged to his uncon- don’t.” I said. “Well, let’s introduce a note of levity,”
scious choices. What could he do? and I handed her the cartoon. “Of course, it’s only a
H: He couldn’t pick another spot?
cartoon. What about your sexual relations?” “Why am
E: I kept him too busy. | so tired every night when we go to bed that I can't
W: You were always a step ahead of him. have intercourse?”
E: I was just a step ahead. I picked out the spots.
HH: Ilow did you pick that particular cartoon? What's in
H Did you pick a spot you thought he would pick, or did
il that you thought would open them up?
you just pick at random? 1: | don't know. The patent absurdity of it. The fact that
E: Oh I just kept him busy reacting and rejecting my
a man does like to put his cheek on a pretty breast.
spots.
"l'he fact that there is an oriface there, and a phallic
W: He has to fall down in his way for his purpose.
structure does enter an oriface. And it is a man, and
il is a woman.
* * *
1: An awful lot of “is and isn'ts” tied in there, all framed
by the fact that it’s just a cartoon.
E: I’ve got a little cartoon here that I like to use with
IH: It’s only a cartoon, only fiction.
women who are tremendously inhibited sexually. To Hl give you another example. I tried to write this up
open them wide open. (He shows a cartoon of a young
for publication, but ’'m rather dubious about publish-
doctor with a stethoscope around his neck who is
ing it. Grace was 35 years old and a little bit more
pressing his ear to a lady’s breast. The nipple of the
than pleasingly plump. She had a plain face but de-

[PAGE 085]

160 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 161


cidedly attractive face. She really had a pleasing per- one else from whom she was willing to seek therapy.
sonality. A friend saw her and said, “Good God, Milt, As for consulting a stranger, she knew she couldn't
why doesn’t she wash her face and her neck and comb force herself to seek therapy from someone unknown
her hair and put on a dress instead of a gunny sack.”
to her. Since the writer knew her well professionally,
I had known Grace for some time. She came to me he was personally aware of her personal rigidities. Her
hesitantly, saying, “Dr. Erickson, I want psycho- statement that drastic therapeutic procedures would
therapy. I’m 35 years old. All my life I’ve wanted to be necessary in a short time was readily accepted. She
get married and have a husband and children. The
was told to think the matter over for three days. Dur-
nearest I got to it is to be a psychiatrist in a children’s ing this time she was to decide whether or not she
clinic. I can’t get a date. I know that I’ve got an at- wished therapy and to decide if she wanted therapy
tractive personality. I know that I’m slightly over-
sufficiently drastic to benefit her. Also, she was as-
weight, but not too overweight because men do like
sured that she could be benefited greatly, but that
plump girls who are slightly overweight. There is no
it would require a tremendous amount of personal
reason. I’m intelligent, I’m cultured, I’m interesting,
strength to withstand the therapeutic assault that
and I want psychotherapy. I want it fast because I
would be necessary under the conditions she proposed.
am getting desperate. I’m 35 years old.”
She returned in three days stating that nothing short
So I told her, “You want psychotherapy, you want of murder could deter her. Also, she felt rather hopeful
it fast, you're getting desperate. Do you want me to
because she believed that only shock could ever change
give it to you in my way? Do you think you can take her behavior.”
it? Because I can give it to you rapidly, thoroughly, IV: May I inquire if “assault” was your actual word?
effectively, but it'll be a rather shocking experience.” I: That's right.
Instead of quoting from memory perhaps I can find IV: | assumed it was; I just wanted to be sure.
that paper I had begun. (Reading) “She sought psy- I: (Reading) “Concientious employee, cold, impersonal, her
chotherapy and explained in a prim, rigid, impersonal behavior seclusive, withdrawn in her habits, had only
fashion that she was horribly wretched and frustrated. two friends — a professor and his wife. With them she
She explained further that therapy would have to be was a charming conversationalist, a very intelligent per-
rather rapid since she had accepted a position in a dis-
son with a wide range of interests. Except for monthly
tant city where she was determined that she would
visits with them she limited herself to her apartment.
either be different or give up. She wanted hypnosis l ler employer kept her only because of the excellence
employed; however, she expressed with utter finality of her work. She wore steel-rimmed glasses and no
the idea that she could not be hypnotized. Therefore, makeup, wore clothes that never fit and were of clash-
it would be the writer’s obligation to employ some ing colors. Her color vision was normal. Her personal
drastic and rapid procedure that would break down
habits were untidy despite the orderliness and effi-
her resistances completely and thus force her to ac- ciency of her work. Her hair was never well combed,
cept therapy without delay or procrastination. Fur- her cars were always dirty and so was her neck. Fre-
thermore, her funds were limited and she knew of no
quently her fingernails were similarly dirty. Many ef-

[PAGE 086]

162 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 163

forts had been made to mention these items to her, Her neck and ears were dirty, her teeth were in need
but she could freeze anybody that looked at her finger- of brushing, her hair sloppily combed, her steel-
nails. She would be utterly cold and impersonal. rimmed glasses, her lack of makeup. All these things
“She was assured that therapy would be sufficient- were discussed as things she could correct without
ly drastic to shock her into changing and she was told any help from the therapist, for which she herself was
that before therapy could begin she would have to totally at fault, and which were expressive of willful
promise absolutely not to discontinue it, and to exe- self-neglect. ‘I don’t care what you want to say about
cute fully every task assigned to her, no matter what my psychotherapeutic techniques; it’s the results. But
it was. However, before being asked for the promise, I said an assault, didn’t 1?
she was told she should think over all possible implica- “Thereupon she was handed a washcloth and in-
tions, especially unpleasant ones, of what had been structed to wash one side of her neck and then to view
said to her. the contrast between the washed and the unwashed
“Three days later she returned, declaring that her sides. The interview was concluded with the state-
established mode of living was intolerable and that ment that she was a sorry looking mess, but that she
any change would be for the better. Therefore she was to make no purchases until she was so instructed.
promised to absolutely meet all the demands placed She was merely to continue working, but to think over
upon her. A prolonged session was held with her, and the truth of everything that had been said to her.
it was initiated by a direct inquiry, “How much money Also, her next appointment would be in two days and
have you got?” She stated that since her mother’s it would be equally long and quite possibly even more
death she had saved $1,000. and was prepared to pay devastating.
that amount over at once. She was instructed to place “She appeared promptly, embarrassed and hesi-
$700 in a checking account with a full expectation of tant, without makeup but otherwise remarkably well
spending all of that amount on herself in an unexpect- groomed except for the poor fit of her dress and the
ed fashion. loud colors of the cloth. Systematically, the previous
“She was then presented with a mirror, a tape meas- interview was reviewed and the changes she had suc-
ure, a scale, and weight chart. For about three hours ceeded in making were discussed for her, still in a cold,
a comprehensive, completely straightforward critique impersonal manner. She was then told to perpare her-
was offered of her weight and appearance, with all self for a new, highly important, but hitherto neglected,
possible proof. Certainly I examined each fingernail unrealized and disregarded matter of the greatest im-
and described the amount of dirt; her fingernails were portance to her, as a living, sentient creature. This
in mourning, this one, this one, and this, and this. matter was no longer something she could neglect or
Holding a mirror I had her describe the dirt, the lines disregard, nor could she ever again repress awareness
of perspiration. A couple of mirrors were used to get of that something which was apparent and recognized
her dirty ears, her uncombed hair, her misfitting hy everyone with whom she came in contact. Once she
dress, clashing colors between her blouse and her was stripped of her repressions —‘Once you are stripped
skirt. Just as you would do a physical examination. of your repressions, your own awareness of what had

[PAGE 087]

164 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 165


been so horribly repressed would be continuously are to go to a dance studio and learn well and rapid-
present in your consciousness and would compel you ly to dance. Also, have the beauty counselor select the
to behave normally and rightfully with a pleasing and material for a formal dress to wear at that dance. You
satisfying self-awareness.’ What this was would be will take the material selected to Mrs. W, who is a
disclosed as she took her departure. seamstress, Explain that you wish to engage her serv-
“She was given an appointment for three days later. ices merely to supervise you in making the dress. She
As she left the office, she was told, as she left the door, is to help you in cutting out the pattern, putting it
‘Now go home, undress completely””—oh, this is a together and fitting it. The sewing, whether by ma-
falsification of it because I was thinking of putting chine or by hand, will be done entirely by you. You
it in print — what I actually said was, “Grace, this is know what you have to do. Go do it. Your next ap-
the kind of thing you’ve got to be aware of. You have pointment will be when you are on your way to the
a very, very pretty patch of fur between your legs, dance’.
»»


now go home and think it over. Undress, get in the She walked in, and she was really dressed. Embar-
nude, stand in front of a mirror, and you will see the rassed, blushing, flushing, I’ll bet her belly muscles
three beautiful badges of womanhood. They are with were doing a dance. Beautifully, tastefully gowned.
you always and wherever you go you cannot forget And it was almost completely handmade. She’d lost
them, ever again.” “Grace, you have a pretty patch of excess weight; animated, vivacious, and charmingly
fur between your legs.” self-conscious.
“She appeared for her next appointment promptly, Three months later, after assuming her duties in
exceedingly embarrassed in manner. Without any her new position, she became acquainted with a col-
preliminaries she was told, ‘You have $700. set aside lege professor. A year later they were married. Grace
for some special purpose. You have an additional has four kids — happily married. She'd worked her way
$300.; you have a paycheck coming in. Go to the XYZ through college and supported her invalid mother the
department store—they have a beauty counselor — whole time. And she —I presume~had a pretty patch
go to her as you were when you came to see me. In of fur between her legs.
a straightforward fashion tell her that you are a sorry W: Well, I assume that if you said so your assumption was
mess, that you know nothing about self-grooming, sufficiently real so that it was certain.
and that you want to hire her to teach you all you need E: Yes. It was all the raping that was necessary.
to know, that you have $700. and more if absolutely W: That plus the amount that was going on in her mind.
necessary. Have her outfit you completely. You'll find Il: It was interesting to me the way you made her next ap-
her a charming, warm-hearted, sympathetic, under- pointment with you contingent upon her going to the
standing woman. You will enjoy knowing her, and she dance.
will find it thrilling to teach you what you need to E
= : Well, certainly.
know. Additionally, there is to be a dance in a few II : She couldn't back out at all if she was going to see
you
weeks for all your fellow employees, and you will be again.
routinely invited. You are to go. In preparation, you I: She'd given me an absolute promise. She had to go to
pa

[PAGE 088]

166 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 167


the dance. She had to do everything that I said. She her buy different sets of falsies and think about which
could engage a seamstress to supervise. To use your one she should wear when she came to see you, and
word, I really had her in a bind. And she could never what might you be thinking about her as she sat
forget that pretty patch of fur. And she never could. there.
Stand in front of the mirror and see the three beauti- E: Mrs. Erickson was recently in Detroit and went up to
ful badges of womanhood. Womanhood! Grace is still see the girl’s father. And the girl is a very, very hap-
my friend. She wanted drastic psychotherapy; she py girl. I really rate in that family.
wanted it rapidly. H: One of the questions that bothers me in so many of your
H: She sure got it. cases is: How did you know that this woman would
E: Now how many binds would it take to analyze all those react to this kind of a treatment and not get panick-
things that were touched upon. ed and run away, or something another rigid woman
W: It would take a whale of a lot. I feel like what she got might do? Was it her motivation when she came and
was both more than she asked for and less somehow, her own statements about wanting drastic treatment?
and that’s what was going on. lv: As for consulting a stranger, she knew she could not
E: Grace later told me that she had come to me with the force herself to seek therapy from someone unknown
realization in her mind that if I thought it necessary to her. She knew that husband and wife, and she knew
to seduce her she would have yielded. me, and in that rigid, impersonal way she just knew
W: Yes, at one level you did that and more, if it can be her work. There was nobody else in the world.
stated that way. W: Do you somehow just know, do you think it out, or does
E: And to see the three badges of womanhood — and she -it just come to you? I think of this sort of thing over
was a virgin. Of womanhood, after I told her she had and over again when we read your work.
a pretty patch of fur between her legs. See the badges Il: We read your papers, and you do something, and after
of womanhood — I had raped her, hadn’t I? you have done it and it has worked, it seems an obW: In that sense, you had raped her. vious thing to do, and we wonder how you ever thought
E: Because she couldn't look at the badges of possible of it.
womanhood; they were already the badges of woman- IV: Obvious is not quite the right word —it seems very ap-
hood. propriate. Very appropriate but not at all obvious is
H: Well, she got what she came for. the way I feel about it.
W: A little differently. 11: "he couple you had kneel and urinate on the bed.
H: Well, her appearance changed to that of a woman who 11: Our place was in an uproar for a week after that paper
had been successfully seduced, which was really what arrived.*
you were after, wasn't it? i; | was listing my papers, my secretary was making the
E: That's right. And it had been really a verbal rape — patch list, and she made a mistake, a typographical error —
of fur. Imagine that prim and rigid girl standing there
and hearing that.
*CL “Indirect, Hypnotherapy of an Enuretic Couple,” in Jay Haley (Ed.) AdW: The association it brings to mind is your case where vanced Techniques of Hypnosis and Therapy, Selected Papers of Milton H.
the girl wanted her breasts developed, and you had Erechzon, New York, Grane & Stratton, 1967.

[PAGE 089]

168 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 169


the “ruination” paper. I had really ruined that urina- E: This 26-year-old girl, weight 254 lbs., came in. Her state-
tion, hadn’t I? ment was essentially this, “I’m too fat. You can see
W: Well, it did seem like a perfectly appropriate thing to that. I always react to stress by eating. I’ve got two
do. sisters and I’ve got one brother who's living. I’m the
E: But there it is set up as a situation for me. They were youngest by 13 years. I live with my mother; my rea-
so sincere, and so simple and straightforward, and so sons are inadequate. I seldom date. I go out with
honest. Good heavens, when you get a person like friends. Married friends. I’m interested in politics.
that, run them out on that limb. That is, my mother and I are interested in politics.
W: Yes, this is somehow hoist by his own petard. But my mother can’t understand me because I dig
E: This girl, she knew only one person. Well, she’s stuck rock-and-roll and Bach. I’ve got my prejudices; I’m ab-
with him. solutely tolerant of religion and race. What does that
W: If you wouldn’t do it, who would? mean? I’m militant. I idolize my carousing father.”
E: That’s right. Now every one of those statements is made to me
W: So you said, “All right, I will make an assault on you.” in an absolutely challenging fashion. Two years of colE: Then that physical assault, examining each fingernail, lege, excellent vocabulary. With all of that challenge,
and every one of them was in mourning. That was a all of that emphasis, all of that absolute assertion on
pretty painful physical assault, wasn’t it? her part. Erratic criticism. Absolutely tolerant of reH: There must have been an anticipation in her about how ligion and race. Militant. And very harsh condemna-
much more was going to be examined, all the time. tion.
E: That’s right. And looking at her neck in the mirror and I asked her immediately, “Why are you so defen-
then washing one side of it, viewing the contrast. Of sive? Why?” She immediately picked up the “why” and
course, she had to go home and take a bath thorough- never disputed the defensiveness. She said she didn’t
ly, and she had to show up the next time well groomed know why, unless it was because she was so lonesome
— because I approved of the washed side of her neck; in the family. She let her mother dominate her because
therefore I approved of her bathed body. she was the baby of the family. And she didn’t want
H: But somehow, one of the things you do is very sharply to hurt anybody. This time it was a much softer state-
focus upon some kind of a bind problem, or ambiva- ment, not a challenge of me. Then, all of a sudden, she
lent problem, so that it is dealt with very directly. You said, “You know, I started getting fat when I was on
set up a conflict, or a situation, between you and the the farm. I worked hard. I ate excessively. Mother al-
person, and you use that right to the hilt for a spe- ways cultivates everybody, and I’m awfully lonesome
cific purpose. at home. I think that I need help.”
E: You use it as a wedge. Well, when she said, “I think that I need help,” I
H: Yes. spent the rest of the time literally wasting the rest
E: And effect a terrific cleavage. of the hour. (Laughter) It was casual, social; I picked
up an awful lot of information which I forgot about.
* * *
Whereabouts she lived. Every inconsequential, mean-

[PAGE 090]

inal




170 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 171


AE


ingless thing that I could think of. I didn’t inquire here, and I debated and debated and debated whether
about any of her life, or anything of that sort. Pure I would come and see you this morning. Of course, I
a


casual wastefulness. ig
knew I would or I wouldn't have gotten up and driven
Here is a 254 lb. girl who comes into the office chal- wpe
those 20 miles to be here at eight o’clock in the morn-
lenging, literally threatening, demonstrating that she ae
ing. I hate to get up in the morning. Well, I sat there
can give all the answers. ThenI hit her hard with that, parked in the car, and debated— because I got here
“Why are you so defensive?” All of the emphasis on
e


plenty early — whether or not I would come and see
the word why, so that she will pick that up and not you. Because I spent plenty of time hating you. In
dispute that word “defensive.” She gives some more Pc

fact, I suffered from insomnia all week. Lying in bed
information, ends up with that pitiful, “I think I need hating you.”
some help.” Now here’s 254 pounds of militant, author- I said, “What else did you accomplish?” She said,
itative, dictatorial, dominating patient, laying every- “Well, I don’t know if it’s an accomplishment or not;
thing out to me—reduced to a pleading creature, “I it's only a week—no, it’s two weeks. I’ve lost 15 pounds.
think I need some help.” This dress that I haven’t worn for a year, that I like
What do I do? If I offer help right then and there, so much, I’m wearing it today.” I said, “All right,
I’m catching her at a very, very weak moment and let- now you hated me and you hated me plenty. You
ting her know that I recognize her as a very, very stayed awake, you missed your sleep just to hate me.
weak person. Therefore, I immediately start wasting And how much do you hate your mother?” She said,
time so that she can recover her sense of poise, her “I hate to admit it, but I hate her plenty.”
sense of self-confidence. Now, why did I feel so comfortable about that girl
Just before she left, I said, “Before I see you again,” that I would prognostically assign that very, very
and I gave her an appointment, “there are a number drastic task?
of difficult things I would like to have you do, but I'll II: | don't know why. What told you?
only assign one. I think itll trouble you a lot. You're I’: There's a girl that showed me her strength right away,
not going to believe it when I assign it to you. Pd like and then showed me her weakness right away. Then
to have you tell me when you come in next time: Why when I was sufficiently courteous, when I didn’t take
do you hate your mother?” She said, “I don't.” I said, advantage of the weakness and just proceeded to waste
“No, of course you don't know that,” transforming her the rest of the hour, she didn't do anything at all about
statement, “I don't,” into, “Of course you don't know it. She didn’t run out, and she didn’t emphasize her
that.” “But that’s the problem you're going to work weakness. She started gathering her forces and put-
on between now and your next appointment.” ting herself together. A good prognostic outlook right
She came in at the next appointment and she burst there. She wasn’t broken down by her sudden unex-
into laughter as she sat here in the chair. She said, “Do pected display of weakness. She wasn't overwhelmed
you know how much I've hated you for the past week?” by it; and then I hit her with that question, the as-
I said, “I hope plenty.” She said, “Do you know that sigsnment to speculate on her mother hatred. Her ready
I arrived early. I parked my car in a street away from necepbance of my misuse of her utterance, “Why do

[PAGE 091]

172 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 173

you hate your mother?” “I don't.” “Of course you don't
came back the second time? She got up early to in-
know.” No effort on her part to dispute that — she’s an
dulge herself (Laughs) in a make-believe, little girl
intelligent girl. All of the interview gave that. Her
fashion, to park the car and debate whether or not she
statement that she weighed 250 lbs., and she started
was going to come in and see me. Of course she knew
eating excessively. At least I could have talked about
she was. That's the kind of indulgence 1 would like to
that; but I didn’t, you know. You see, that was obvi-
have a patient have. They're indulging all their fan-
ous. (Laughter) Extremely obvious. Why discuss it?
tasies and still measuring up. You recognize that,
H: Well, then, one of the ways you judge prognosis is how
don't you? Not the least bit ashamed of telling me,
willing they are to show you their strength and their
“Tve been a bad little girl, but here I am to measure
weakness.
up.” And to tell me that she hated me. Then I told her
E: To show their strength. To show their weaknesses. Now
I hoped she'd done a good job, and what else had she
the man I described to you, he promptly started em-
accomplished? I’ve forgotten the other things she had
phasizing his weaknesses. What a great big daring
accomplished. Of course, she lost the 15 pounds of
thing he did. To come 1800 miles. “I want to go home.”
weight, the 14 pounds of weight. One of the other
W: Now he was only emphasizing one side?
things she mentioned was that she had not worked
E: Only one side, because to a man who had been in the
or looked for a job for a year and a half. Well, she’s
armed services as he had, you don't brag about com-
got a job.
ing 1800 miles. You don't brag about driving your car
IE: You use the initial interview, then, as a kind of a testing
all the way to Oklahoma City from Indianapolis, tak-
situation.
ing a plane from Oklahoma City to Phoenix. You start
I oe As a testing, as a diagnostic situation, and as a prog-
bragging about that when you are—what is it, 36
nostic situation.
years old, and you've been in the serivce? You haven't
I: Do you tend to use any particular behavior on your part
got very much to brag about. You're displaying a
to put stress on the patient?
horrible weakness and nothing but weakness.
Ir: “Why are you so defensive?” That’s my behavior. But
W: Now looking at this fat girl in a little different way.
it’s a reaction to hers; it’s an appraisal of hers.
What did you accept?
I: ‘That was your first statement to her? After listening
E: She was so emphatic and so authoritative. She laid out
to her?
her problems so emphatically. The interview began
be: I’d been listening to her. She had been in charge of the
on that sort of a strident, authoritative note. How did
interview. The only real questions I asked her were
it end? “Of course you don't know how much you hate
her name, her age, her address, her telephone number,
your mother. 1 want you to work on that problem.
her educational background, her religious background,
There are a lot of unpleasant tasks I want to give you,
and whether or not she was married. Then, “What do
but Ill give you only one.”
you want to say to me?” Sometimes I do that immeW: (Laughing) You say, if she can come in and be authori-
diately when U'm not certain about what the patient
tative, you can be even more authoritative.
is like. Sometimes I take that information at the midE: And so much more gently so. What did she do when she
dle of the hour, and sometimes at the end of the hour.

[PAGE 092]

174 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 175


On rare occasions I take it at the next interview, goodness by telling me that she debated coming in to
wherein I put an appointment in my book with an X see me. Then she’s tested my goodness by telling me
mark. (Laughter) that she hated me, and I told her I hope she did a good
H: You don’t even ask their name? job.
E: That's right. H: You made it that there were a large number of unpleasW: In what sort of a situation would you do that? I’m sure ant tasks to make it easier for her to do just this one
you'd have some particular reason with a patient. of them?
E: It’s always some highly individualistic reaction that the E: That’s right.
patient shows. W: So you were being hard on her and good to her at the
H: Someone who was terribly proud of his name and his same time.
address would really be put down by that, wouldn't E: Hard and good at the same time. I told her that I hoped
they? (Laughs) she did a good job of hating me. That’s right. How
E: The girl likes her job. She's been off to two political vulnerable am I as a therapeutic figure in her eyes?
meetings. She's got a job with the State Department. H: She was exploring you all right.
She's the only girl in that office of 14 girls who doesn't E: She explored me, thoroughly, competently, and in the
smoke. What was the purpose of that communica- way that little children do —how do little children have
tion? such remarkable insight? But they do explore you so
H: I don’t know. thoroughly, and she used that little child’s attitude
E: She’s a pretty extra special girl, isn’t she? of threatening.
H: Militantly extra special. II: So, you not only classify them by their strength and
E: She's the girl who is telling me, and drawing my atten- weakness but by how willing they are to reveal their
tion to the fact, that of all the 14 girls she is outstand- strength and weaknesses to you, and then what reac-
ing. Then I realized that at the previous interviews tion they have after they have revealed their strength
she looked very, very carefully at the ashtray, and and weakness to you.
then repeatedly searched my desk. You know, neither lv: Yes.
of us smoke. Now she’s identified with me, and I’m It. Well, when you look for something they can do, what
identified with her, and she’s done it so sweetly. Then do you settle for? I mean, how do you know what’s
consider that other communication; she likes this dress going to be useful? Obviously they can do something
very much, she hasn’t worn it for over a year. She likes ~ they can talk, they can sit in a chair, and so on. But
it very much. This dress she likes very much she’s what do you prefer that they can do?
wearing today in the office with me. I: Well, for that girl, anybody who wraps herself up in that


H: You had quite an effect on her all right. quantity of blubber and who expresses some ambivaE: Yes. And those two literally simple utterances: “Why lent feelings toward her mother — what does she need
are you so defensive?” “I’m going to assign a number Lo do? A girl who lays out her problem so thorough-
of unpleasant tasks, only one to work on before the ly -what does she need to do in a reality situation?
next appointment.” Have I intimidated her? No. I Something in relationship to her problem.
made her want to please me, and she’s tested my I: Well, what. did you see that she could do?

[PAGE 093]

176 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 177


E: Consider this matter of her hatred of her mother. In him to pace on instruction. Whereas at other times
other words, “If you can come into this office and out- you don’t pay any particular attention to the imme-
line your problem to me, you've come to me as a psy- diate behavior but you hit a more general level of func-
chiatrist for help. I, as a psychiatrist, ought to speci- tioning and accept and begin to direct that.
fy some area in which you need help. What are your
E: Now take that man who paced back and forth here. This
mother hatreds? Examine them.”
is a very small office, yet he paced back and forth. All
W: She's a positive outliner; therefore, you send her home
of that tension, all of that anxiety, a tremendous ten-
and outline this area positively.
sion. How could I focus any attention on any deep,
E: Well, certainly.
underlying thing? Perhaps if this office had been larW: So, it is like the case of Ann where you picked up on ger, less cramped, and he could have had more room
the inhibition and utilized it. Here you pick up on the
in which to pace, I might have directed attention to
aggressive outlining of things, attacking things.
something lying underneath. But I doubt it, because
E: The aggressive, intelligent outline. She stayed awake he had so much tension. I think he’d show the same
nights hating me because of the thinking I made her
degree of tension in an auditorium or an office.
do about her mother, which was a beautiful way of W: Then this was a case where this was so immediate that
telling me that she'd done a lot of thinking about her there wasn't really any other place to start, practically.
mother hatred. That she was doing something about
E: Yes, and that was what he was making the office inter-
the hatred of mother by transferring the hatred to me,
view. A pacing. He’d been kicked out of other offices
and I’m not very vulnerable. At least she's finding
because he wouldn’t cooperate. He told me this inter-
that out at the very beginning of the interview. Then view is going to be a pacing interview. (Laughter)
I can ask her what else has she accomplished? What W: Who told who?
else? A weight loss. The wearing of a dress she hasn't 17: Well, he'd been kicked out of other offices. Would I kick
been able to wear. A pretty dress, a dress she likes him out? Thereby, he told me, “This is going to be a
very much. In other words, a beautiful statement to pacing interview. Are you going to kick me out?”
me, “I like therapy.” Therefore, it was up to me to take charge, literally,
W: Just before we came down, 1 was reading your recent of that implied question by having him pace.
paper on utilization techniques in hypnotic work, and /1: This you would consider formally similar to preventing
this was about accepting things in a similar sort of the inhibited woman from telling you the risqué stories
way.* One of the things that struck me there was that that bother her. Setting up an inhibited situation that
sometimes it seems that what you focus on accepting she is inhibited.
is the most immediate level of behavior. Like the man lv: Yes.
who paces up and down in your office, and you get I: Well, there's something about this that strikes me as
terribly obvious when I try to write something about
your work, and that is that you treat psychiatric cases
in the same sort of way as you treat resistant hyp-
*“Further Techniques of Hypnosis-Utilization Techniques,” in Haley, Jay
(Ed.) Advanced Techniques of Hypnosis and Therapy, Selected Papers of Milton notic subjects, that the same sort of pattern is inIL Erickson, M.D., New York, Grune & Stratton, 1967. volved.

[PAGE 094]

178 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 179


E: You see, the patient comes in to you— whether he's a E: In spite of my accepting behavior.
hypnotic patient or psychiatric patient on whom youre FH: Because of it, let's put it that way.
not going to use hypnosis—he comes to you to the E: Yes. And pleased that she had met a match.
best of his understanding because he cannot get along W: You're also offering her something for the future all the
in his immediate reality situation. He doesn’t come time, aren’t you? I seem to recall various references
to you to have you explain a childhood situation. He to something about what was going to happen in her
just wants to live today, happily today. He'd like to office at some time.
be free of today’s tension. In fact, he’d like to be free E: Yes. Now at my last seminar another woman physician
of this moment’s tension. He’s urgently asking that. volunteered as my resistant subject. Afterwards, sev-
Therefore, I meet him at that level. Yes, we can cor- eral of the seminarians with good insight said, “How
rect this immediate moment of reality, which then did you measure letting her top you each time by such
makes it possible for him to accept the reality of five a narrow margin?” (Laughter) They said, “You let her

minutes from now, the reality of five days from now, top you every time. Each time you made it more and

the reality of five years from now. more difficult for her to top you, but each time she

H: That’s a big extension of this moment. succeeded by the narrowest of margins.”
E: I know. II: Of course, you set that up so nicely to begin with when
H: Well, we'll get to extending that moment a bit later, but you ask them to demonstrate resistance for the au-
what I wonder is if you see any difference— suppose dience.
you're going to hypnotise somebody in a stage dem- lv: Except this woman came to me the first morning and

onstration. You're not going to therapute him, and said, “You list on the program the handling of resis-
this is a resistant person. Do you see any formal dif- tant patients. This is my first seminar. 1 would like
ference to the ways the person resists you and tries to be your ‘resistant patient.” (Laughter)
to control the situation? II. Y volunteer to resist you.
lv: Yes. Therefore, what did I do? I wondered, and as soon
E: Well, let’s go back to that San Francisco demonstration.
You were there, weren’t you? With that woman psy- as I got her on the platform I knew I would let her

chiatrist? No matter what she said, how did you feel top me. I had to let her top me every time. I also had

about it? to let the audience see, but not let her see, that I was

H: What do you mean, no matter what she said? measuring things very carefully and always deliber-
ately. Letting her top me by just so much. One of
E: What I did with her.
H: I thought you were accepting whatever she said. those who came up and discussed it with me said, “I’ve
E: Yes. How did she feel about it? always tried to put patients in their place, and I didn’t

H: I think she had very mixed feelings about it. know you could put them in their place by letting

E: Very mixed, yes. them put you in your place.”
IT. It's the controlling the control all right.
H: Both more desperate and pleased at the same time.
I; Yes. And of course she had her handkerchief. (Laughter)
E: More desperate and more pleased. Why more desperate?
H: Because she couldn’t handle you. She wiped the perspiration from her brow each time,

[PAGE 095]

180 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 181


but she had such a triumphant smile. Everybody could terview, withhold all the material you are disinclined
see it so beautifully. to tell me. In other words, this is a free and easy situaH: Well, do you see any formal difference between resisting tion with no pressure, no compulsion. At long last
you when you're hypnotizing someone and the way a you've found an easy, free situation, so take advan-
person tries to deal with you when you're trying to tage of it. I've had more than one say at the end of
remove their symptoms? the hour, “I came here anticipating tremendous diffiE: It’s essentially the same sort of thing. Frequently, the culty in talking to you. I was very, very certain that it
patient has a more centralized goal. would take me weeks and weeks before I’d ever dare
H: In what sense centralized? to tell you these things. And here I’ve already told
E: When you can resist me, it would be between you and you, and I’m glad.” My answer under those circum-
me. But if you were the patient, you would have in stances is unexpected, “Well, you know, so am I; but
your arms some treasure, a little object here that I'd like to have you bear in mind that you undoubted-
you'll be turning yourself this way to protect while ly have a lot of unhappy repressed memories that
you resist me. Do you see? You feel yourself as your- didn’t come to mind, and those will have to come out
self and your problem as a burden, or another entity later.” So I told them they have withheld, and they
of some kind, that you have to shield from me. can’t be disappointed by being too informative in the
H: Well, isn't the burden used to shield the person from first interview. They’re comforted by the fact that
you though? they have withheld.
E: Well, it might be. While with a resistant subject, that's W: Those will have to come out later.
between man and man. II. "There's another thing going on here too. When a patient
H: Well, do you think that implies, or applies to, the fact comes to you, he's at a disadvantage because he needs
that when you're dealing with a patient the symptom help. But he has one advantage and that is that you
is not only involved with you at the moment but also need information, and he can withhold it from you.
used outside of here? Now, when you instruct him to talk and also to withE: Yes. It's another entity. You see, that's one reason why hold, you’ve got him going in both directions. But if
with a patient, as soon as I’ve got name and address at the end of the hour, after you’ve told him to with-
and all that statistical data, I sometimes ask the pa- hold, he says, “I didn’t withhold.”
tient, “Now what can 1 do for you?” If 1 choose that 1”: }e’s disobeyed me.
opening, the patient says, “I have a problem.” I watch II Then you've got to go around again and say you have
the way in which they say, “I have a problem.” 1 tell withheld. (Laughter) It’s this sort of a struggle going
them, “Well in order to handle your problem Tll have on here.
to know all about you, but in giving me an account — Il: Well, why do you call it a struggle?
this is only the first interview, you know — I would like IV’ Hs just sort of cooperation going on.
you to be extremely careful to withhold from me every- IT. A working out, let's say, of a relationship.
thing you feel disinclined to tell me.” What have I 1? And a defining of the relationship, always accurately
said? This is only the first interview. In this first in- though.

[PAGE 096]

182 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 183


W: Accurately but with a positive emphasis. haven't got any time. He's got everything defined.
E: Yes. He’s closed his mind. Then, instead of dealing with
W: How did you ever develop the ability to get such a view it, he said, “I want to go home.” What little boy is
of the positive side of a whole lot of things that every- speaking? He tells me his plans in a man’s tone of
body else would probably be considering difficult as voice; “I want to go home” in a little boy's voice. If
hell? I want to discuss it, I have to discuss it while he talks
E: Well, it’s this way. Somebody wants to learn psychiatry, to me in a man’s voice. Periodically he will interrupt
so they start reading Freud, and they’re absolutely in a little boy’s voice. He came to see me on Friday.
fascinated by Freud. He is so instructive and so in- The second visit was on Saturday. The next possible
formative. But they never looked at the rest of the appointment is going to be on Monday. He's got all
books on the shelves. They actually absorbed them- day Sunday in which to execute his plans for going
selves in Freud as if that was the only book that was home-— period. I’d better recognize that reality. He's
ever written. You read Freud, and you read Freud going home by train. There’s no possibility of diffi-
with the utmost of interest and pleasure and satisfac- culty in getting a train seat. He came by plane. He's
tion. You also ought to wonder what Jung and Adler in a hurry to get home; he tells me he’s going to travel
say about it, and what would Westermark say about by train. He's an ex-GI who's been overseas. He knows
it? all about traveling. He wants to go home with childish
H: How is this relevant to the positive attitude? eagerness. He takes that slow train. Sunday is comE: Then when a patient comes into your office and presents ing up. A plane you might have to wait for a seat.
you an awfully negative thing, you're always looking I}: Suppose you would have, on the first day, put him in
at this side of it, and that side, above it and below it, a trance and sent him home?
beyond it and in front of it. Because there’s always 1". 1800 miles?
obverse and reverse to a coin. 11” Well, that's not so far for you.
W: You might also say that we can rely on the patient to I" Oh yes, Td like to add the other additional information.
give us the negative side. They arrived, and he insisted on spending the first
E: Almost always you can rely on them (Laughter) to give night — I’ve forgotten what motel — and then checked
the negative side. out so they could find another, which, of course, was
H: Well, we have one example of what you feel can’t be ac- vital information.
cepted. This man who came to you and wanted to go 11. Ilow was that vital?
home. You thought there was no way to accept this I" "he patient comes to see me from out of town and
and utilize it. checks into a motel. He was planning to see me. His
E: There’s no way of utilizing it that I can see. He had doctor recommended three weeks. So before he comes
already defined the distance, his wants, the fact that for the first appointment, he checks out of his motel.
he was going to go home by train. I can’t see him all He's got no place to return to in Phoenix, which, of
day long. I’ve got him for an hour. He’s done all of that course, | just automatically added into the picture he
thinking before he comes for the first interview. I just puve,

[PAGE 097]

184 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 185


W: The picture then is one in which he’s cutting himself car and I sold it for a small sum of money instead of
loose all the time before he even really gets here. what it was worth. Then I drank up the money. I went
E: He's cutting himself loose before he came to see me. home and I laughed at my mother. I’m depressed. I
H: Well, what other things do you face that you feel can- hate myself. There isn’t a solitary thing. Here I am
not be accepted and utilized?
50 years old.”
E: Suppose 1 get my schedule. (After looking at his sched- That was my initial meeting with her. I said, “Well,
ule) Fifty years old, a high school business education. do you feel happy or depressed?” She said, “Natural-
“T'm an alcoholic; even Alcoholics Anonymous failed ly, Im depressed; can't you see it?” I said, “Yes, I can
me. Besides, I’m mean to my mother. WhenI fall in see that you’re depressed, but what else?” She said,
love, it's always with some no-good married man. Every “Do you want all of the rest of the sordid details?” I
time I do something I do something to hurt myself, said, “No. I’m not interested in sordid details.” “You're
even if it’s no more than having a temper tantrum. I a psychiatrist, aren’t you?” I said, “Yes.” “Why aren’t
hate living on the ranch. I live with mother and my you interested in sordid details? For example, my sex-
brother. My brother is an alcoholic, and he hates my ual life? I’ve lived with this man, that man. Especially
mother too. I hate him and I hate my mother. You married men. They’re all no good. Never seen a mar-
ought to see the way she wastes her time making ried man, no matter what walk of life, that was any
stinking little plants grow in the yard. I live a pure- good. They’re all stinkers. Now, what one of my af-
ly parasitic life. I take a joy in aggravating my mother. fairs do you want me to tell you about?”
I’m a completely worthless person. Why are you wast- I said, “Well, I’m not interested.” “Well, what are
ing your time? Don’t you think it’s rather stupid of you interested in?” “I just want you to tell me one lit-
you to waste your time on a worthless creature like tle thing. You are 50 years old. Mr. X is a very, very
me? Here I am 50 years old in a psychiatrist’s office. wealthy cattle owner, a very, very wealthy rancher.
I went to Dr. B. I told him what I’m telling you, and He married into a family —that would be your sister.
he kicked me out of the office. I went to Dr. D., and [t’s a rather talented family. You're 50 years old. The
I told him the same thing I’m telling you. He wouldn't little thing that I want to know is, before you reached
have anything to do with me. They’re pretty smart your present state, age of 50, and your present state
men. They know I’ve got a wealthy brother-in-law. of being my patient, what was just one of your accom-
They know that my sister will pay any fees. You know plishments? She said, “Good or bad?” I said, “I’m not
how they like money. You know it. You know what interested in the sordid.” She said, “I built up a ceram-
their reputation is in Phoenix. They kicked me out of ics business.” Just one little detail.
the office, and they like money. Don't you think you're Let’s see, when did she come to me? That was Oc-
stupid to deal with me? Let me tell you, 1 did have Lober. She didn’t come back until May. She saw me
a car. My brother-in-law bought it for me. So I got off and on, not very frequently. (Reading schedule)
drunk and speeded and then 1 beat up on the cop. 1 Let's see, May 25th, May 29th, June Ist, June 4th,
got thrown in jail. I lost my driver's license. I lost my June 8th, June 12th, June 15th, June 25th, June 30th,
car. When I lost my driver's license, I just took that July 7th, July 10th, July 13th. On June 30th, I mark,

[PAGE 098]

186 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 187


“Very slow improvement.” July 7th, “Much self-pity.” Il: Now wait a minute, you're getting shifty here. What
July 10th, “Improved.” July 18th, “Much self-pity.” does your being unable to recall or spell the name of
She canceled out after July 13th. She said that things this stuff have to do with what?
were absolutely hopeless and that there was no sense I: What does it have to do with it? There's nothing too
in coming to me further. I said, “Of course things are large or too small for her to find fault with. All of her
absolutely hopeless. That's why you've got to change.” relationships with mother, all of her relationships with
(Laughter) her brother, her relationships with her sister, her
She was in to see me in September. Do you ever brother-in-law, with all the psychiatrists, with me,
want to meet a high pressure, successful business- with everything. That’s the sort of thing. She told me
woman? Allan went to the fair, and he was asked what all about the ranch her mother owned. All the work
impressed him most about the fair. He said, “I learned her brother did.
something. There was a woman there that had a booth IH: Allright, but how does your behaving inadequately in
selling a self-relaxing machine. I think she’s also sel- some way get into this?
ling real estate. I don’t know what all. But the way 17. Allright, when she wants to find fault with her mother
that woman handled everybody at that fair —she had putting in a new lawn, dichondra, then in spite of the
her booth surrounded by people.” A patient of mine fact that she gives me the name, I mispronounce it,
went to the fair. I said, “What was interesting at the and I get it confused with some other grass, then I
fair?” “The woman selling a reducing machine. She’s can't even spell it. What have I done? I’ve given her
got a lot of other interests too. I wish I could be like some more things to find fault with.
that woman.” A third person told me the same thing. I: You mean, if you can get her to find fault on your
She was absolutely hopeless. Much self-pity, of terms...
course. There wasn’t anything too big or too small. I“: On my terms, and over and over again. “But what's
The petunias, the St. Augustine grass, the lipsia. No, wrong with you, why are you so stupid? I told you last
that isn’t the correct name for it; I can’t think of the time my brother’s drunk when he’s cultivating the cot-
correct name. But I’m doing the same thing I did with ton. Where did you get the idea it was corn?” I’m
her. She told me about the stupid thing her mother stupid.
was doing, that stupid thing of planting those stupid HH: If you can arrange for her to call you stupid, it’s good
little pieces of grass that grow only so high and make for her?
a permanent lawn. Yet I stumbled all over the name. I Yos, it’s very good for her.
I couldn’t pronounce it. I couldn’t spell it. I still can’t 11: Particularly if she would be doing it anyhow.
think of it. Oh, she was going to do it anyhow.

HR: It’s dichondra. IH. Well, that’s another example of how you can accept
E: Allright. I brought in that special grass they’re using anything. You can even accept that. It raises another
in Pennsylvania for eroded areas. She was discussing question. When you accept something of that sort,
it for me. I mispronounced it, and I tried to spell it. you behave inadequately so they'll behave like you’re
She told me I was stupid. But all that self-pity meant inadequate, how do you keep them coming to you?
that she was really running out. E Tn the first place, they wouldn't come to me if they

[PAGE 099]

Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 189
188 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

became dependent upon me to show her things to
thought I was inadequate. They wouldn't come to me
name — then she was my patient. As soon as this pa-
if they thought I was stupid. But if they want me to
tient became dependent upon me to name the things
be useful to them, I’d better be useful in a way that
that she should criticize...
meets their immediate needs. Now she needed to call
H: Oh, I see.
me stupid.
E: Well, of course, you realize, do you not, that the planH: So, that would keep her coming to you because you were
tain has a much shorter root than the mullein? And
meeting her needs?
the mullein is going to take the water that soaks in
E: That’s right.
deeply. The plantain is going to absorb the water near
W: She needed to be critical.
the surface. I think you ought to chop down the mulE: She needed to be critical from the very beginning. She
lein weeds first. (Laughs)
showed how she needed to be critical with large things
H: Now, were you working out some oedipal drama on
and small things. So she was critical about the dichon-
this? I mean, with married men, and the cow that
dra. Then I pointed out to her that she didn’t even
doesn't get to take the food, doesn't give the milk, and
know the different kinds of weeds that grow in the
so on?
pasture where the cows were, the weeds that were us-
: Was I working on an oedipal drama? No, I don't know
ing up the irrigation water. That’s really hunting for
what I was working on.
something to find fault with. The water that’s used
: I just wondered if it was deliberate in some way.
up by the weeds growing in the pasture where the
: No. Now she's going to come back to see me once a
cows feed. Why didn’t she take a hoe and go and chop
month. I think from now on. Her statement is, “Any
down those weeds? She's calling me stupid. She's chop-
woman my age, with my ability, made a lot of busi-
ping down a married man. “All married men are ab-
ness successes in the past. Of course 1 always break
solutely worthless.” Why doesn't she chop down worth-
them up. I think that I’m old enough now to know
less weeds; they're stealing the water away from the
that 1 need some good advice. Now and then. Once
grass that should feed cows to produce milk.
a month I think will swing it for me, so I'll get back
W: Now this is beginning to get toward the thing that was
to see you once a month. Of course, Tl probably sell
puzzling me. I can see the aspect of accepting her
you a little real estate, and a few things like that.” But
criticalness. What 1 haven't seen in this one yet is how
you see, that's only a sop to her vanity.
the transformation takes place.
One of the things that is intriguing her is this quesE: You finally run out of things to criticize when you're try-
tion, “Dr. Erickson, would you please tell me: How did
ing to criticize things to somebody who keeps direct-
you see anything worthwhile to salvage in me? I’ve
ing the way in which you criticize. It’s the same thing
inquired, you never asked a question of my brother-
as that obsessive-compulsive woman who said, “Oh
in-law. You never asked a question of my sister. You
yes, that's a staple.” Remember in my “Utilization
never asked a question of my mother. How did you
Techniques” how I kept passing out things until I
see anything worthwhile to salvage in me?” I said,
would delay her in naming it as a pencil, pencil holder,
“Well, you know, you're underweight, you look your
pencil. You see, as soon as that particular woman

[PAGE 100]

190 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 191


age, you've got a history of affairs. You gave me a
fenders marred at the very least. Or you get a terrific
history of promiscuity; certainly I didn’t see sexual
tongue-lashing. Anyway, it's a most unpleasant thing,
appeal. You’ve seen my wife. I didn’t see sex appeal
because you don't know what —they may run along-
in you, at least not for me. I must have seen some-
side of you for a few blocks and try and run you into
thing in the way of brains and personality and abil-
the curb, mash your fenders, get behind you and jolt
ity.” (Laughs) I must have seen something in the way
you. You'd better accept their challenge.
of brains and personality and ability. She asked me
A couple of hot-rodders pulled up alongside of Allan
again, what did I see? I said, “Oh well, let’s call it per-
at a red light and gave him a preemptory challenge.
sonality.” She asked me again. “Oh, let's call it brains.”
Allan looked at them (acting strange and laughing);
The next day, “Well, let's call it ability.” I’m never go-
they looked at him in absolute horror. That braying
ing to answer that question. See, it's wrong to answer
laugh of a teenager, that completely asinine — you have
that question.
to have heard —that braying laugh of a stupid teenW: If you answer anything specific, she will go out and
ager. They just drove on so glad to be free of that
disprove it, won't she?
idiot. You've accepted it; you've placed a reinterpreE: That's right.
tation on it in a completely acceptable way. It's disH: Well, why did you eliminate sex appeal?
pleasing to the other person; they have to accept it.
E: Well, I’m a married man.
Those hot-rodders (laughing), “Let's get out of here.”
H: Oh, I see.
Instead of trying to make Allan run, they wanted to
W: So this would fall right into the old history if she's been
run. You see? With your psychiatric patients you bear
getting involved with married men all the time and
that in mind. 1 don't care who calls me stupid. He
thinking that she and they are no good.
wouldn't be here if he didn't have a need to do it.
E: Tm not going to have her waste her time with me. Why
11: Well now, the crucial thing that we keep trying to un-
should she waste her time with me? She's already told
derstand is what about after you have accepted what,
me all married men are no good. Now, let's close that
the patient offers. Merely accepting isn’t enough. If
question. Let's close it rudely, emphatically, painful-
you just go on accepting what they’re doing, maybe
ly, but let's close it. “At least not for me.”
it is enough; I don’t know. What about a situation
H: Well, that's another example of what you're accepting;
where a patient tries to handle you by being inhibited?
do you have another example of what you cannot ac-
And you accept their being inhibited, and are a little
cept? And utilize?
inhibited yourself? Now, at some point there has to
E: Let me give you an example of what Allan did in high
be a change, or a shift, on your part.
school. Allan was driving along in the Nash one night.
lv: Yes, but when you are absolutely positive that the other
I’ve had the same experience happen to me. My secre-
person is as inhibited as you are, and won't go any fur-
tary has had it. It’s a common thing in Phoenix. At
ther than you'll go, it’s awfully easy to go along. Be-
night some hot-rodder breezes up alongside of you and
cause you start relying on his strength to aid you in
challenges you to a drag race. Or are you chicken? If
inhibiting. You know what he has told you, “Now you
you don't measure up to the situation, you get your
can think Chese things; but you withhold everything:

[PAGE 101]

192 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 193

that you don’t want to tell me, and be sure to with-
H: Now, that’s a case where you don't shift inhibiting them,
hold them.” Now and then patients start some things,
you shift the content in some way.
and one word possesses a double meaning, but you
E: Let me give you an example. “Dr. Erickson, you
know it’s going to be an innocent comment. You say,
remember me. I was your patient a long time ago.
“Just amoment, think over what you started to say.”
There’s a new situation, and I’m very glad that I’ve
Then you repeat, and they become aware of that other
got you to come to. I’m absolutely horrified by my
meaning. They know they can trust you, that you're
behavior. I’m also somewhat amused, in fact quite
not going to take advantage of their unwariness. Ac-
amused. I don’t know whether or not to tell it to you.
tually, of course, they came here to tell you.
I don’t know how much to tell you. I would like to
H: Yes, that’s the point.
have you help me tell you the right amount.” That was
E: That's the point. And you're inhibiting them to their dis-
a patient on which I used inhibition technique, oh,
advantage, and they want their advantage.
back in the '50s, the early ’50s. “I’m certainly horriH: Well, then at some point you have to shift, don’t you?
fied, amused, somewhat amused, quite amused, horE: But you see, when they become aware of the fact that
ribly distressed, horrified.”
you are inhibiting them to meet their wishes to be in-
My statement was, “All right, so you're horrified
hibited, but it’s to their disadvantage, they better do
by your behavior; and you're amused by it. I wonder
something about it. So then they decide to tell you
how well you understand the behavior if you've got
this. And they find out that you survive. Then they
those contradictory attitudes toward it? I don’t know
tell you a bit more. And you're still living.
which you want to tell me, the horrifying aspect or
H: Well, you have to stop inhibiting them at the point
the amusing aspect? Or a little of both?” In spite of
where they begin to decide to tell you this then?
her experience, she didn’t know what I was saying.
E: When they start releasing, I always review the inhibi-
“A little of both” implied withholding a large part.
tion on some unimportant item. If the girl is disclos-
She said, “I think Tl tell you a little. I went to col-
ing a traumatic affair, and she starts to tell me what
lege last year. I enjoyed my course immensely. The
the street address is at which it occurred, well, na-
teacher was very, very helpful. I was most en-
turally, I don’t want to know the street. You see?
thusiastic. I suppose I formed a student’s crush on
H: (Laughing) You mean you continue to inhibit, but you
the professor. I enrolled this year in a different course,
shift from inhibiting the major things to minor things?
different professor.” Long pause. I said, “Are you enE: To the minor, the unimportant things. The patient
joying this course as much?” She said, “Oh yes, it’s
wants inhibition; but the patient wants freedom too,
a different course.” I’m trying to pause to duplicate.
you know.
“Well, let's see, what you're trying to tell me is
H: Well, typically the patient also wants to inhibit the ma-
something about last year's professor.” She said, Yes.
jor things and not the minor things.
his year’s professor, in this other course, doesn't
E: But the patient is coming to you to get rid of those ma-
discuss things as well as last year’s professor. I was
jor things; therefore, you let them keep the inhibition,
wishing that I could get last year’s professor to dis-
and you let them get rid of the major things that are
cuss it. As I came out of the classroom I saw him,
troubling them.
went over; I told him how much IT enjoyed being in

[PAGE 102]

194 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 195


his class last year. How much I had gotten out of it, E: But you see, I told her to tell me a little. She was a pa-
how much I wished I were in his class this year. That tient I had treated before. An inhibited patient who
I was having difficulty comprehending this year’s had learned that she could tell me a little. But that’s
course adequately, and I wondered if he would discuss howa little builds up. The situation is amusing, but
it with me? He said, ‘Why don’t you come to my of- she’s horrified. How could she go back to see him?
fice? I’ve got a little time now.’ I said, ‘Well, Pve got That was her question. And what should I answer?
to go up to speak to someone, but Tl be up shortly.’ IT: Well, did it stop with a kiss?
I didn’t really have anybody to speak to. But he went 15: She's an inhibited person. She doesn’t know how she
up to his office, and I went to the woman’s room and managed.
I thought things over. I had the feeling as if I were II: She manageda little.
going there for a rendezvous. It took an awful lot of lv: Yes. Shall she go back to see him?
courage. I went up and I apologized to him for tak- II: Well, what did you advise?
ing his time. He told me he was glad to give me time. lv: I said, “You're thinking the whole situation over, aren't
He took the textbook, and he inquired about the chap- you?” She said, “Yes.” I said, “You know, it seems to
ter, and he gave me a very, very nice discussion. He me if you can think the whole thing over, the professor
talked about the various things associated with it. He can too. I don’t even know who he is. He might have
was so nice. All the time I kept thinking, this is real- some questions too. 1 can't answer his question. Your
ly a rendezvous. I kept telling him, ‘I mustn’t take question is only half of the situation.” Because I’m not
your time.’ He began looking at me in a rather queer going to be hung for my answer to her question. If
fashion. I felt I ought to change my seat, and some- I give the wrong answer, she can use me as a scape-
how or another I put my chair around alongside of goat, isn't that right? If I say, “Yes,” she can blame
him, I told him I mustn’t — take his time. (Laughter) me if she does go back. If I say, “Yes,” and she doesn’t
Finally it finished. He said, ‘Really now, what is on go back, then I’ve disclosed the fact that my advice
your mind?’ I said, ‘I’ve lost my head.’ I said, ‘I like is faulty. If I say, “No,” and she goes back, I’ve dis-
you an awful lot. I'm awfully grateful to you, and I closed the fact that my advice is faulty and I’m wrong.
shouldn't talk this way to you because I’m a married If I say, “No,” and she doesn’t go back, it’s J who
woman.’ He said it was a very painful situation for barred her. I stand to lose on any answer I give.
him, and then he said, You know, I’m glad you came fl: That's not atypical of the situation you get into with
up, because I’m tremendously attracted to you. If you advice.
don’t mind, I would like to kiss you.’ I put my arms H: That's right. Therefore, I point out that I can only
around him andI said, ‘But I’m a married woman, and answer a part of it, and it’s not the correct answer or
I can't let you kiss me on the mouth.’ I don't know how Lhe full answer, the adequate answer. But look, when
I did it, I had a low-necked dress on and I had him I do that, she has to consider the professor. Now she's
kiss me here.” (Laughter) I had told her to tell me “a grot. to consider the professor, and she is a married
little.” woman. At the purely personal level, knowing what
H: That was a little? I know about her husband, why shouldn’t she go back

[PAGE 103]

196 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Classifying People and Starting Difficult Cases 197


and have an affair with the professor? That husband a part of the whole. And then what type of thinking

has never hesitated to take every cruel and selfish ad- did she think he was doing, and how did that reflect

vantage of his wife imaginable. Everything they have her type of thinking, and what did she really feel? And

is something that he wants, nothing that she wanted. what was her attitude toward her husband? What's

He has a spinster sister who is rigid and reared in her home situation? Can she think freely about her

Europe in one of these matriarchal-patriarchal types own emotional desires, and how does she think her

of families where the eldest sister who isn’t married emotional desires fit with her personality structure?

takes mother’s place and dictates to all the other Before the hour was over, she said, “You know, ac-
members of the family. The husband is bringing that tually, emotionally I would like to go to bed with him.

sister into his home. The girl knows what’s in store Pd like to make love with him. I’m pretty certain he'd

for her. Her husband really worked for a year bring- like to do that with me. But when I consider my child-
hood, my lifelong experiences, my religious attitudes
ing that situation about.
I don't think my personality could take the actual
H: Well, now this started on the question of whether you
have to make a shift or not, as I recall. physical experience. What I’m really going to think
about ~ I’m not going to hesitate about recognizing
E: Yes.
H: Now, in your utilization technique, you accept what to the fullest degree exactly what my emotional atti-

they do and encourage what they do to the point —I tudes are.” I said, “What do you mean, to the fullest

mean, one way you make the shift is you encourage
degree— your emotional attitudes?” She said, “You

what they do until they begin to wait for you to direct know what I mean, because with emotional attitudes

them. Then you direct them in a different direction. you get physiological responses too. I’m going to rec-

Now in this inhibition you continue to accept the in- ognize those.” Yes.

hibition, but displace it from something major to mi- She means she’s going to think about the professor.
She’s going to notice certain erotic responses in the
nor. Are there others?
E: She was going to tell me a little, and what did I shift erogenous zones, and she’s not going to be ashamed

from? From wondering whether the amusing, or the of them or hesitant. But she’s not going to put any

horror, is what she wanted to tell me. It was con- of her thinking into action until she is convinced

tradictory. I shifted from helping her to inhibit to a whether or not she, as a personality, can tolerate it.

receptive attitude, isn’t that right?
She isn’t going to feel that she ruled out action be-
cause of fear; if she rules out action, she'll have the
H: Yes.
W: You mean, when you made the reference to contradic- feeling she ruled it out because of willingness to con-

tory, that was inhibitory, and then you changed to say sider it fully and freely. In getting patients to resolve

really any aspect of it, or some of both, would be ac- problems by examining all of their thinking, and sepa-
rating it from action, and then in accordance with
ceptable?
E: Yes. So then I shifted from an inhibitory to a receptive their understandings, whether positive or negative

force. She started pouring it all out. Then she asked feelings, determining their actions. |
me the question, and 1 avoided that by defining it as

[PAGE 104]

Failure, and What is Essential for Change 199


beautifully qualified in endowments. That horribly de-
structive attitude toward his mother. His mother’s
horribly destructive attitude toward him. He's cer-
tainly getting even. His mother and father were hap-
CHAPTER 8
pily married. They had a very, very nice home. He
adored his father, and he adored his mother. Then his
Failure, father died; I think it was from cancer. After about
a year's period of grief, a friend of his father started
comforting the mother. They have never bothered to
and What is
get married. The boy wanted the man to marry his
mother. He’s wanted his mother married all through
Essential for Change high school. Today he’s 28 and he still wants it. Bul
they won't do it. Mother and her lover both want him
to graduate with honors.
H: They want him to be legitimate even if they don’t want.
1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland. to be. I wasn’t thinking of examples of you failing, |
was thinking again of this shift...
H: When you get someone who's failing or defeating him- W: Though we had that on the list as another topic.
self in some way, and you accept this, how do you H: We do have on the list what failures you've had and
make a switch on that? I mean, are there other ways what you've thought about them.
besides delaying until he’s waiting for you? E: You see, with that failure, I’ve got to go along with him.
E: Now, here are a couple of patients I’m failing on miser- H: That's a pretty mild failure, a B.A. instead of a Ph.!).,
ably. I’m settling in the one case for a less destruc- isn’t it?
tive goal. That’s all that I can see that I can accom- E: Yes, but he isn’t going to use any of his actual abilities.
plish with him. Let’s see, for eight years he has been He'll get a clerical job; he'll sell real estate. Any high
going to college. Really capable. He hopes to complete school kid could do that. He'll function at that level.
his junior year in June after eight years. His goal was
to become a Ph.D. in psychology. Well, if it takes you * * *

eight years to complete the junior year, and you’ve
got chiefly D’s and C's and repeats with C's, you're 17: T had a patient who said, “What will you say if I tell you
never going to qualify for a Ph.D. degree. Isn't that I’m going to commit suicide right here in your office?”
right? So he’s going to graduate with a B.A., and then I said, “Well, I ought to call the police before you do
possibly —he isn't going to take a Ph.D., that’s set- it. Honestly, I really ought to.” She said, “A psychial-
tled — possibly become an accountant, possibly go on ric interview is confidential.” I said, “Suicide never ts
to become a real estate salesman. I’m settling for that confidential.” Y did call the police. It took the sergeant
lesser goal instead of trying to make him a Ph.D. He's und two patrolmen about two hours to talk the girl

198

[PAGE 105]

200 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Failure, and What is Essential for Change 201


into going home. The girl came to me for one definite H: What do you mean “give up”?
reason, “Either you do an abortion, or you refer me E: When the patient says, “You know, I’ve been very grate-
to an abortionist, or Tl commit suicide right here.” ful to you. I’ve been off of liquor for over two years.
That’s what took the sergeant and the two patrolmen I’ve got no desire for it, no hunger for it. Um getting
so long, that fixed, rigid demand. along all right with my job. I’m well adjusted with my
H: You had them haul her out of here and take her home? wife. I’ve been thinking about it for some time, and
E: Oh, 1 turned the office over to them and let them talk what the hell is the meaning of it all? I thought Td
to her. Fortunately, she was my last patient in the af- better drop in and say goodbye to you. I’ve said good-
ternoon. She'd come in as an emergency. She said there bye to my wife. I’m going downtown and get plas-
was an emergency situation —could she come right in tered.” It’s a very distressing thing to have happen
and see me? Then she told me the psychiatric inter- to you. Because what does it mean? Well, you know
view was confidential; suicides aren't. where they’re headed then. Skid row. There’s been
H: How come you didn’t try and manipulate her out of it some sort of slow, insidious cessation from that nor-
in that situation instead of bringing in the police? mal happiness, good adjustment. “I want none of it.”
E: Because she was a university student over at Tempe, And I’ve had patients come in and resign from the
and her roommate knew that she had called me. If process of happy living. I had a patient come in and
that gal committed suicide or went to an abortionist, say, “You know, since my wife and I saw you we've
where would my professional standing be? The only been living happily, getting along. The kids are hap-
thing to do is protect myself. Get the police in. The py; but I met a prostitute the other night, and I’m go-
sergeant was smooth in handling the girl. He said it ing to move off with her.” You see that in everyday
was one of the toughest cases he ever had to handle, life all the time. The careful automobile driver one
and he was literally sweating. She wanted an abortion, day, for no reason at all, opens it up to see if it will
or the name of an abortionist. The police told her the go 130 over the wrong kind of a road. You'll see the
same thing I did; under no circumstances could they drug addict, who's been off drugs for five years, say-
give her the name of an abortionist, even if they knew ing, “This is silly, this is ridiculous; but I want to have
a thousand. some horse tonight.” He knows exactly where he’s goW: What became of her? ing to wind up.
E: I don’t know. A patient, a new one I got recently, said, “All
W: Didn’t see her any more? through World War II I was an overt homosexual. I
E: I know the police were trying to persuade her to marry reenlisted for two years over in Italy so that I could
her boyfriend, who was on his way from San Franisco, remain in Italy where the kids were so numerous and
wanting to marry her. I know the police got in touch would do anything for you.” He said, “My last homo-
with the girl’s mother. sexual experience with a kid was two years ago. I
H: Well, when was the last time a patient managed to dis- haven't been tempted. I have often gone hunting with
turb you? a 16-year-old. I’m a welcome visitor to his home. But
E: When I knowa patient is going to go and deliberately the other day I thought to myself, what the hell, so
give up. I went down on him, got him to go down on me. Then

[PAGE 106]

202 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Failure, and What is Essential for Change 203


I went down to South Phoenix; I picked up some Whenever you work with a patient, if you’re deal-
more, knowing all the time that I wouldn’t go back ing with an oedipal situation, you want that patient
to my wife, my mother, my brother, or anybody. I’m to do something about the father, whether it’s to write
going down to skid row.” That’s what he’s doing. “How him a letter or not to write him a letter. You want the
can I go down to skid row,” was the question he put patient to write the word “father” on a piece of paper.
to me, “more safely?” What does he mean by that? So You want him to draw a picture and label it “father.”
that he can get a long sentence on a relatively minor You want him to crumple the paper up and put it in
crime. the wastebakset. It isn’t sufficient to have the patient
I think that if you make a searching enough inquiry just simply say, “My father did this, my father did
in a lot of patients, you'll find a long period of adjust- that,” and free associate endlessly. A patient who has
ment, and then some nut comes loose. Some screw free associated on father extensively, and informative-
comes loose. They go haywire. You see these people ly, and with insight —it is still an incomplete process
who are perfectly wonderful people, and friends; and until the patient has actually done something.
they hit the age of 25, and they cease to be nice, lik- In therapy, the first thing I want to do with a pa-
able, friendly people that you want to associate with. tient is to get that patient to do something. When in-
Each half decade wipes out some people; even though ducing the hypnotic trance, one of the first things I
their bodies remain alive, their personalities have died. want the patient to do is to participate in some way.
I ask them to take a comfortable seat, and they are
* * * sitting comfortably. Then I point out that they haven't
shifted and I want them to. Do they mind moving the
H: Well, granted that you accept the patients’ behavior and right foot one-fourth of an inch to the right, to the left?
that you direct them differently and such, what do I want them to do something. If they still refuse, then
you think is crucial for producing a therapeutic change? I want to know if it’s all right if I move their hand
I mean, some people have the idea that a patient has slightly. They’re still not doing anything, but I’m very
to have some insight, some people have the idea he likely to move the hand so that it rests in such a way
has to ventilate his feeling, and so on. But you obvi- that the weight of it causes the hand to tip slightly
ously have a different idea. What is it you’re after that over. (Laughter)
you think is essential to produce a change? IT: So they’ve got to do something?
E: I think it’s the same as in the matter of teaching a child ls: They’ve got to do something. The patient I had for the
in school. It isn’t enough to explain to the children two first time this morning was going to be quite passive
plus two equals four. You can explain that and argue about it. She was not going to let her eyes close. I
it, and deduce it, and everything else that you want. asked her a couple of times. So then I told her, “Now
But you do need to have the child start doing some- hold your eyes open after I say, ‘close them,’ for a
thing. He does need to put down one, and another one, while.” You see, she had to hold her eyes open, but she
and draw a line, and put a plus sign, and he learns one was doing something. She had to close her eyes also,
plus one equals two. It is his sense of doing some- and that way, when she resisted, I got her to do two
thing. things: Lhe one she was going to do anyway, and the

[PAGE 107]

dott


{sai


204 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Failure, and What is Essential for Change 205


other she had to do to stop doing the thing I asked
about?” She tightened up her mouth and shook her
her to do. (Laughter)
head. I asked her if she could talk. She shook her head.
FH: When you say you want them to do something, what
Complete blocking, verbal blocking. I asked her if she
you seem to mean is that you want them to do some-
could write for me. She shook her head. I told her I
thing under your direction.
was sorry that she couldn’t talk, I was sorry that she
E: Yes. To do something under my direction. Just as the
couldn’t write. But I was glad she could shake her
teacher says, “Now take your pencil and your paper
head. And I was very glad she could hold a pencil, and
out of your desk and get ready to do your lesson.” So
I handed her one. I asked her to hold it in her left
under the teacher's direction they initiate, and they
hand. She looked at me with some question and held
do their lesson. So 1 want my patient to do something
it in her left hand. I said, “Of course, you are right-
as a measure of initiating his performance of the things
handed; but after you’ve held it in your left hand, I
that he himself needs to do.
want you to hold it in your writing hand. You really
FH: It just isn’t enough that he do something under your
can’t write yet, can you? Not until you get home. I
direction; he has to do something which you mutually
wonder how you feel about not being able to write here
define as “voluntary” on his part?
now in the office? Do you think you'll be glad to be
E: As voluntary on his part, and as relating to his problem.
able to write at home for me?” And she started in
Now sometimes it isn't necessarily a tangible act. I
talking.
want you to think over your thoughts on this matter.
H: Can you explain that?
That is doing something too. It’s an assignment of a
E: Yes. She shook her head. I was glad she could shake her
task, but it’s merely initiating the task that he him-
head. She’s here in the office, you know. She shook her
self must do. Because J want you to think over your
head. She was a school teacher; shaking her head was
thoughts on your problems. While I’m telling him what
a communication. I asked her to hold a pencil. I asked
to do, yet all the thinking he has to do is his action.
her to do more than communicate. I asked her to do
And it's in relationship to his problem. So it's an in-
the wrong thing in relationship to a pencil. She was
tangible act, but nevertheless it’s a participation.
right-handed. It’s wrong to hold a writing pencil in the
H: You would define doing something as some overt piece
left hand. Do you see that?
of behavior, or thinking something, or feeling some-
IT: I see that, but I don’t see the significance of that.
thing?
E: I was asking her to do something wrong in relationship
E: Yes. In addition, over and above, what are the ordinary
to communication. Do you see that?
events of the therapeutic hour? The patient comes to
IT: You mean you were asking her to do what she was do-
tell you about his problem. He expects you to talk
ing anyhow?
about his problem. He expects you to give him some
E: Oh, yes, the wrong thing in relationship to communica-
advice. He expects to receive some advice. But you
tion. (Laughter) Then I shifted the pencil to the writ-
put in another task. This patient I saw Saturday who
ing hand and asked her how she felt about it.
said, “I can’t talk. Can I write it out the next time I
IT: That was telling her to do the right thing in communi-
come here?” I told her, “Yes, but could you tell me
cation?
some of the things by name that you might write
I Vo do the writing. The “right” thing really, because |

[PAGE 108]

206 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Failure, and What is Essential for Change 207


called it “the writing hand,” not the “right” hand —“the teacher. She’ll want to correct that. She recognizes a
writing hand.” I asked her how she thought about it. pencil in the hand is a means of communication. She's
Whereupon she started verbalizing. She was doing the blocked and she can’t talk. She's blocked and she can't
right thing about communicating. Just by getting the write. She wants to correct it. I speak about the right
patient to do those things, we had quite an extensive hand as the writing hand, but I only ask her how she
talk. Did I think she was schizophrenic? Did I think feels about that.
her prognosis was bad? Did I think she hated her hus- W: Then her questions. Really, the things that she wants
band? Did I think that she wanted a divorce? Was she to talk to you about are related in a way, in that they're
afraid to face her own thinking? The amount of ma- all so much, “Is there something terribly wrong with
terial that came out was very, very extensive. But it me?”
would have been so very, very easy for her to sit here E: That's right.
with her mouth all tightened up, pursed up, and shak- W: You've taken her shaking of her head and said even this
ing her head violently. But here's an intelligent woman, is good.
a school teacher. E: 1 said that is good. She felt distressed because she shook
H: Well, why didn’t you want to accept her saying she'd
her head, “No,” in a situation where that was wrong.
write it the next time? But I was glad she could shake her head, and so I got
E: She came into the office fully prepared to talk to me, participation. It’s so vitally important to get her to
and then she blocked so completely. If I allowed her do something. But it’s getting the patient to do some-
to go home after an hour's silence, or allowed her to thing that fits into the situation. Now suppose I'd had
go home right away, that would have taught her it her on the psychoanalytic couch, and I could have
is useless to be in the office. I’d better teach her that comforted myself for an entire hour by thinking what
a tremendous amount can be accomplished in the of-
beautiful resistance. I could have explained to the pa-
fice. By getting her to participate in that little way, tient that it was resistance. I don’t think it was re-
approving her shaking her head. Well, I’m glad she
sistance. I think it was much more terror, fear, uncer-
can shake her head. I’m glad that she can communi-
tainty, and I wouldn’t really call it resistance at all.
cate, even if it is negatively. Then the pencil in the II: There's something awfully slippery in that. It may not
hand. For a school teacher, it’s of tremendous signif-
be resistance in the sense of resisting her own ideas.
icance. But putting it in the wrong hand is a very safe
It can be seen as a way of handling you.
thing. lv: Y know, but why call it resistance? Because here's a paW: It’s safe but yet it’s something that she will want to tient horribly afraid of the self, the ideas.
correct. Il: Yes, and of you.
E: That she will want to correct; she’s a school teacher. E: Why of me? Not necessarily. I don't think I’m the least
FH: (Laughing) Well, that's a nice example of something
— bit important in her life. I think this horrible idea,
I’m not altogether sure what. “Am I psychotic?” is tremendously important. “Am
W: Of several things. I schizophrenic? Do I hate my husband?”
E: But you see, it’s simply a recognition
— she is a school H: She doesn’t stop someone on the street and ask him

[PAGE 109]

208 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Failure, and What is Essential for Change 209


that. She asks an authority that. You're important ders if it is as bad as that. (Laughter) When you ex-
enough to be an authority to her. plain to her about uterine contractions, “You know,
E: Yes. the uterus is a muscle, and you know what muscle
H: And she comes to an authority and is unable to speak contractions are,” so you demonstrate with your bi-
to him. ceps. The patient begins to think about the uterus as
E: Why? Because that authority may confirm her sus- a muscle, and it contracts.
picions — not the person. She isn't afraid of me. She's H: Well, you have a way of getting the patient to do some-
afraid that maybe her ideas are right. That’s what thing. Then is it necessary to make a shift so that the
she’s afraid of. Not of the therapist. Maybe her ideas idea gets across that they're doing something on their
are right, and she's afraid of discovering that her ideas own volition?
are right. So it isn’t really resistance to me as ther- E: Suppose I take the example of this morning. This woman
apist. came in this morning, and she said, “I’ve got a very
H: There must be some of that involved, or after the she- bad sinus. I know that’s correct. My face is aching,
nanigans with the pencil she wouldn’t start talking and my face is hot. I’ve got a horrible headache. And
to you. You didn’t relieve her fear about whether her I don’t think I’ve been behaving very well. My sexual
ideas were right by this business with the pencil. behavior has been pretty bad. I don’t think I am imE: No, all I taught her was that she could do something. proving at all. I think I’m slipping. I think I’m going
I taught her that she could do something in relation- backwards.” I don’t know what it was in her tone of
ship to what she, as a school teacher, understood as voice, but this frank, and open, and ready negative
communication. Everything that I did there was cen- attitude; I said, “Well, what do you really think?” She
tered around the fact that she was a school teacher. said, “I wonder if I’m in pretty serious shape?” I said,
I could have handed her chalk; I could have handed “You're wondering if you're in pretty serious shape.
her an eraser, a pencil, a pen. I wouldn’t have handed Do you want to repeat that question again but change
her a box of paints and a paintbrush. She’s not an it slightly?” She said, “Pm wondering if Um going
artist. crazy?”
H: You put a great emphasis on vocation as a part of I said, “That's not your question at all, and you
character. know it, and I know it. I think it’s about time that you
E: 1 put a great deal of emphasis on speaking English to stopped all of that pretense. I’ve been trying for a long
the English-speaking patient too. I would prefer to time to get you to face the facts. You've been afraid.
speak Spanish to the patient who speaks only Spanish. You wouldn't do it. You've gone in every direction.
You try to speak to the patient in terms that are famil- And you know your headaches have been increasing.
iar to them in a matter-of-fact, everyday language. Be- Your body pains have been increasing. Everything.
cause in presenting things in matter-of-fact, everyday Now go ahead and ask that question.” She said, “All
language they tend to accept it casually. How do you right, is my husband an alcoholic?” I said, “Would you
explain about childbirth to a first-time mother? As ask me that question if he weren’t?” She said, “No.”
surely as you explain in medical terminology, she won- “So what are you going to do about it?”

[PAGE 110]

210 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Failure, and What is Essential for Change 211


Then, when it came to leaving the office, I said, a trance. You don’t know what you want to do. You've
“What about your headaches, what about your body got to do something, and I don’t like the idea of you
aches? You haven't got arthritis, you haven't got a having physical complaints. You resent your husband
backache, you haven't got migraines, you haven't real- making love to you drunk. You are a very reserved and
ly got headaches. You really haven't got an ulcer of shy person. Now I’m going to bully you. You're sitting
the stomach. You haven't got any of these complaints. there, and I want you to sit quietly. And I can reach
There's nothing wrong with your heart, nothing wrong over and pat you on the knee, and that’s something
with your blood pressure. But for a long time you you don't like. You couldn't possibly like it. You have
have been refusing to recognize your husband. What rather rigid ideas about ethical conduct.”
did you do yesterday?” After she went into the trance, I apologized for bul-
She said, “I did some sewing.” I said, “Yes, you did lying her. 1 had stated that I was going to bully her,
some sewing. What did you do yesterday?” She said, and I pointed out that she could think through regret-
“I counted his drinks for one hour and a half. Seven fully, without headaches or physical aches, but with
double shots of gin in one-and-a-half hours. I didn’t emotional heartache, the problem of what she was go-
pay any attention to the drinks before that, and I ing to do with an alcoholically sick husband. She's a
didn’t pay any attention to the drinks after that; but nurse. And she left free of those physical complaints.
I knew that last Sunday, and the Sunday before that, She won't have any. Why did 1 use that word “bully-
and the Sunday before that, and the month before ing”? How did she sit and sew and watch her husband
that. I know I can’t stand to have him make love to for an hour and a half while she counted, and then that
me. I don’t want a drunk to make love to me.” resentful statement — she didn’t know how many drinks
So before she left the office, a woman with that long before and how many drinks afterward. But seven
record —even before she came to me—of arthritis, back- double shots of gin in an hour and a half. How much
aches, bellyaches, headaches, neck aches, arm aches. of a bully is her husband?
Now, suddenly faced with that particular problem of II: Well, what's she going to do about his drinking?

full recognition that her husband is an alcoholic. What 17: She isn’t going to be able to do anything about her bully-
is she going to do? In the past I couldn't get her to face ing husband. She’s simply confronted with that malig-
his alcoholism, even in a trance state. I was afraid to. nancy in the family relationship. Her husband isn’t
She was an excellent hypnotic subject. She wanted to going to come in for any therapy. Her husband is a
leave the office with the statement, “I suppose I'll have dentist. I had to put her in a trance once so that she
to go home and face my headache.” “My heartache” was could go to the office and have her husband do some
really what she meant by “headache,” but she was say- simple work on her teeth. There was no way for her
ing “headache.” to get to the office; she couldn’t bring herself. She said
I told her, “Sit in the chair and cross your legs, re- she was so phobic regarding dentistry.
lax.” She looked at me and said, “Are you sure you can Today I asked her, “Remember that occasion on
hypnotize me? Because I don’t think I want to go in- which T had to put you in a trance to send you to the
to a trance.” I told her, “No, you don’t want to go into office, and that tremendous phobia you had for den-

[PAGE 111]

i
, co

212 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Failure, and What is Essential for Change 213


tistry?” She said, “Yes.” I was very respectful of her E: There was that desperate note in her voice when she
statements about having a phobia, not telling me the spoke about her face aches and her sinus. Haven't you
truth; she was awfully surprised with her answer. She ever heard somebody speak irritably, and you know
said, “I wasn’t a phobic. My appointment was for this is it, they've had all the aggravation that they can
Saturday afternoon at 1 o’clock. That’s the time when take? How do you recognize that?
all the office help leaves. I didn’t want him working W: They’ve had all they can take; they'll get down to cases.
on my teeth after having taken a drink. I’m afraid to E: Yes.
know if he drinks while at work.” When I put her in H. Well, on getting them to do something: If a patient
the trance, I told her, “For some reason or other, in- comes in and starts by doing something voluntarily,
stead of getting there at 1 o'clock, I want you there he does it on his terms, which are not the best terms
at least one-half hour early, even though your hus- in the world. So you get him to do something on your
band has told you to come after the girls leave.” Her terms, but then there's a shift to where he thinks he's
husband won't take a drink at the office while the girls _ doing something on his terms.
are there. I don’t think I could have gotten her to go E: You know the biblical phrase is, “As a man thinketh,
to the office. I could not have corrected her “phobia,” so he is.” What am I having this patient do? She's go-
if I had told her to arrive there at 1:15 or 1:30. I don't ing to, I hope, open a special savings account, and
think I could possibly have gotten her there. Where she's going to abstract a dollar bill here, and a five
did I get onto this question of her husband’s alcohol- dollar bill there, and she's going to start a special sav-
ism? Her tremendous fright reaction about the neigh- ings account. Economically it's a good thing. Emo-
bor next door. He was an alcoholic. tionally it's tremendously important. Her resentment
W: You mean the next-door neighbor was also? about her husband making his deposits with the barE: Was an alcoholic. tender. She's making her cash deposits with a savings
W: And she brings this up somehow? account. So often these patients decide, “Well, my husE: She brings it into the therapeutic hour. I learned quite band is an alcoholic, I might as well pour it in too,”
a bit about a number of alcoholics that she had met. and many a nice person goes downhill that way. I’m
About her husband not going into the same office going to let this woman join her husband in an out-
with another dentist because that other dentist drank lay of cash in relationship to alcohol. For every ten
at work. Really an irrelevent bit of information so far dollars he deposits with the bartender, ...
as those father relationships, mother relationships,
and those intensely bitter brother relationships to * * *
which she was trying to attach her headaches and her
backaches, leg aches, and joint aches. “> A woman wrote me a letter saying it would take her
W: How did you tell that this particular day was the time some months to get up enough courage to see me, but
for this move? You apparently had been seeing her she would. She finally did. 1 pushed her into a corner
over a period of time, and this particular day you say pretty thoroughly. She gave me the impression that
to her, “Now tell me this differently.” I could do that. And she said she had very little self-

[PAGE 112]

214 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Failure, and What is Essential for Change 215


control. And that her mother had always found it ob- of bowel movement? On a hot day in summer on the
jectionable to take care of her because of the odor. Her desert, and you run out of water, a bowel movement
emphasis on the word “odor” told me that it was pass- ought to be rather hard and firm due to dehydration.
ing flatus. Now she couldn't really talk about that, so Now a bowel movement after a cathartic ought to be
as the therapeutic approach I launched into athletic rather watery, because the intestine knows what it is
contests. “You know, to be able to hit a golf ball three doing. The stomach looks at the food it receives and
hundred yards, now that’s something, isn’t it. To hit selects that which it can digest, which is taken from
a home run over the fence, that’s really something. To what the stomach digests, and so on throughout the
swim a long distance, that’s really something. A weight intestines. The bowels should look at the cathartic and
lifter who can pick up 200 pounds and (grunting with recognize, this needs fluid and removal.”
the effort) lift it up, that’s something.” (Laughs) Then she went into the question, “But gas, what is
You see where that girl was right then and there? that?” I gave her a dissertation on the intestinal floor
That grunting. And then I told her the body’s muscles and how it’s a symbiotic thing, that the bacteria in
had the privilege of feeling that they had contracted the intestinal tract aid in disgestion, and they aid in
hard and forcibly and effectively. That the muscles digestion by virtue of their own digestion, and there
of the forearm, the muscles of the upper arm. That has to be some putrefaction, and therefore there must
there really was a satisfaction in biting down on hard be the release of gaseous substances. And of course,
candy. That every child has learned in some way the using technical words and stopping to explain them
absolute delight of swallowing a whole cherry and feel- really put it on a high scientific level. “The rectum
ing it go down. She could recognize all those, and she should take pleasure in a large firm bowel movement,
thought it was a very charming dissertation I was giv- a large soft one, a long liquid one, or a gaseous one.
ing her. And she thought that every child should have And one should recognize that there’s a time and place
the experience of swallowing a cherry. She mentioned for various things. You may eat at the table, but
some of the things that she swallowed with particular somehow or other — not because it's against the law —
delight. you don’t brush your teeth at the table. You leave the
Then I spoke about respecting one’s feet by wear- table. You can wash the dishes at the table, and in a
ing proper shoes. She agreed that one should respect country kitchen where there is no sink, you do wash
the feet and the eyes and ears and the teeth. Then I the dishes at the table by putting the dishpan at the
said, “Of course, you know that tremendous satisfac- table. Perfectly all right. But when there's an oppor-
tion that you have after a good meal when you really tunity to wash them in the sink, wash them in the
feel well stuffed.” She was rather plump; she did like sink. When there’s an opportunity to brush your teeth
food— one look tells you that. The stomach deserves in the bathroom, brush them there. Time and place,
to be pleased, and didn’t she think it would be fair and and a good time and good place, for the good function
honest of her to recognize that her rectum could really of the bowels. But it must be recognized that the bow-
be pleased by having a good bowel movement? All the els’ needs supersede those of the person. You may be
foregoing discussion had been accepted; it was just driving a car and need to go someplace, and it is ur-
the foundation. “And what should be the consistency rent Ghat you as a person get there, and you get some

[PAGE 113]

216 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Failure, and What is Essential for Change 217


sand in your eyes, You'd better park the car and tend
E: The girl I just interviewed is very much depressed. She's
to the needs of your eyes. Never mind yourself as a
one of these quiet girls, thoughtful girls, rather in-
person, attend to the needs of your eyes. And one at-
tense girls, who feels her emotions very strongly but.
tends to the needs of the various parts of the body,
does not express them too much. She took a certain
and repeats those attentions until one gains the
position in the chair. She’s been married several years,
amount of control necessary.”
seven years, and has a six-year-old child. She took a
She elaborated on that herself. She went home and
certain position in the chair which made it imperative
cooked herself a big meal of beans. She said, “You
for me to ask her about her premarital affairs. Some
know, it was fun. 1 spent the entire day making little
day I’m going to run across a woman who takes that.
ones, making big ones, loud ones, soft ones.” Her sex-
particular position without having had premarital af-
ual relations with her husband had been very difficult.
fairs, or who has not been stepping out on her hus-
He insisted on sex relations; she abhorred them be-
band.
cause she might pass flatus. Now she has a baby.
H: Well, what's the position?
W: I’m very struck by the beginning buildup of control,
E: (Demonstrates) A little bit more than that, but the
more and more control. Reminds me of the paper in
knees are differently placed. There's a certain position
which a man had some sort of a tic, and you showed
of the hands, of the shoulders, a certain position ol
him it could be increased, and if it could be increased
the head. Of course, the girl was amazed so Lremen
it could be decreased.
dously because I wanted to know about the preman
E: Yes. She really had a good time. She enrolled in college.
tal affairs. I think too she stepped out on her husband,
W: But first the acceptance.
but there was something very special about the pre
E: Now, this batting a home run, this hitting a golf ball,
marital affairs — something very special about. then.
so far removed that foundation of sports, and then the
She looked at me rather amazed and said there was,
weight lifting (he grunts). I was talking about sports,
that the one premarital affair entered into her pres
wasn’t 1? Or was I?
ent depression. She didn't know that. I made use of
W: The answer is yes.
the trance state off and on. I asked her a question and
E: But whether she understands, in that sense, the nuance
told her to let her unconscious answer it. I worded il.
was there. Not any direct attack upon her bowels, and
for a “yes” or “no” answer. She is very much . . well,
yet there was that nuance of meaning, the weight
she was not in full recollection of all of her answers,
lifting.
and she has a tremendous conscious feeling that her
W: She gives you the nuance cue in that little reference to
unconscious is giving every correct answer. It. amazed
odor. her because she didn’t know some of the answers.
E: Yes.
II: What you've done then is noticed this position before
W: You build up from nuance.
and then found out there were affairs, so now you asE: 'm going to go out and see her baby.
sume it’s correlated with the affairs?
12: Um looking for the time when T see that sort of thinyr
* * *
in all the body position, and there's been no affairs.

[PAGE 114]



218 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Failure, and What is Essential for Change 219


With this girl today, I was tremendously hesitant, E: Some day I’m going to see a woman who takes that
seemingly uncertain, tremendously gentle, over and posture and who hasn’t had an affair, and then I’ve
over again changing a word in a sentence. Now the got to figure out why that posture.
rapport that I established with that girl—she just
didn’t want to walk out of the house. Just didn’t want (Interruption for a surprise visit from an ex-
to walk, and she told me how for three months near- patient)
ly every day she sat down at the phone and sat there
with a hand on the receiver looking at my name and E: Periodically I have private patients, some as long ago
phone number in the phone book. Should she call me as 25 years, come back and check up on me like this.
or shouldn’t she? For three months. Every day. And That grandmother in Boston. It was a marvelous ex-
she almost didn’t get here. And the rapport with her perience. I was lecturing and she came in to greet me.
was tremendous. I was so utterly taken by that girl Still a good hypnotic subject. It wouldn’t take long
as a hypnotic subject. I told the girl, “I asked you to put her back into a trance.
about your premarital affairs, and I asked as if I knew H: What was this girl’s (the visitor’s) problem in the hos-
all about them, and that rather startled you.” She was pital?
sitting something like this, and I said, “I asked that E: Oh, that was some peculiar type of stuporous with-
because your unconscious mind had done something drawal.
that told me you'd had premarital affairs, and she H: It wasn't schizophrenia?
said, “Why, I thought it was just a question.” (Dem- E: No, it was a psychotic reaction, as I recall it. At first
onstrating changing her position) (Laughs) sight she looked like a catatonic schizophrenic, and
H: She shifted her position? as you got acquainted with her you wondered what
E: And put her feet right back, and changed her body posi- the diagnosis was. It wasn’t manic. It wasn’t a depres-
tion and her head position. (Laughs) “Well, I thought sion. But it was a tremendous psychotic reaction with
it was just a question you asked me.” I said, “No, it’s much fear and uncertainty. I don’t remember enough
the acuity and the capacity of your unconscious mind about it. Oh, incidentally, what do you think I wrote
to understand and to answer.” You should have seen on that picture of me? (He had given the visiting pa-
that beautiful smile on her face, and that glazing of tient a picture of himself.)
the eyes as she went into a trance to accept that thank IT: I don't know. I wondered.
you. Now, therapy with her is going to be done where W: I think I got a look at it. From what I gather you
even I won't know what part of the time she's in a thanked her for coming to see you.
trance and what part of the time she’s out of a trance. Is: That's right. You saw the tremendous emotional reac-
But I do know that I have all the rapport in the world tion. For me to give her my best regards would have
that I could ever ask for. And you always look at pa- been a horrible thing to do, isn’t that right? But I
tients when they come in to see you, what sort of posi- thanked her. Where does that put her values in her
tional evidence they give you. own eyes?
H: It’s one thing to see it, and it’s another to be able to in- W: This makes her very important.
terpret it. lv: Yes. IL hasn't. detracted from me one particle, but it’s

[PAGE 115]

220 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Failure, and What is Essential for Change 221


increased her importance in her own eyes, increased severe psychotic state with a profound withdrawal.
her own respect. It elevates me at the same time it She had been committed to Arizona State Hospital.
elevates her. She's got a tremendous motivation, and Her normal weight was about 110 pounds. They had
I have given her my best regards. She’s paid off. Should put a stomach tube in to feed her, to build her up, so
I write it across the face of the picture, or across the that they could eventually operate on her esophagus
back of it? And when will she find that out? and build a new esophagus. She'd been there about
H: When will she find what out? six months getting 4000 calories a day. Profoundly
E: Find out that I wrote it across the back of it rather than depressed, passive, schizoid, apparently hallucinating.
the face of it. Taking 4000 calories a day, and her weight was slightW: She knows it, but she doesn’t realize it. ly over 80 pounds.
E: Yes. She is Spanish, isn’t she? So when I joined the staff at Arizona State HospiW: Yes. tal, I ran across her in the hospital. I didn’t like that
E: What is she going to do with that picture? She's going history, so I took over the feeding of Ann. The tube
to frame it. The picture is for all to see, but the mes- feeding. I reduced the intake of food to 2500 calories;
sage... that’s enough for her to gain. It’s just a waste of time
W: The message is for her. to ask her body to try and digest 4000 calories; 2500
E: It’s for her. That's when she finds that out. (Laughter) is enough, she weighs 80 pounds. Let’s see, I think one
Because I hesitated, I thought about it. of the first things I did was get some nice fresh horseW: Not a public message, it’s a personal message. radish. I explained to Mary that before I fed her I was
E: Yes. I thought it over, hesitated, and then I put it on going to put some horseradish in her mouth
— you see,
the back. Of course, she can get these frames where she couldn’t swallow at all—and to chew it.
you slide out the back. W: But she could smell and taste and chew?
W: She can get another look at it. E: That's right. At every tube feeding, chewing gum, catE: That's right. But it’s her personal message. And she's sup, tabasco sauce, cinnamon bark, cloves.
going to find it out just as soon as she gets it framed. W: Something to stimulate.
E: Something that ordinarily initiates the process of diges-
* * *
tion. Mary built up to 110 pounds very rapidly. Then
she was discharged, sent to a general hospital for an
Is: This reminds me of another patient who came in. Her esophageal repair. By the time she got out of the gen-
name was, let’s say, Mary. I didn’t recognize Mary. eral hospital, I had left the Arizona State Hospital
Mary had gotten up in the middle of the night, and and gone into private practice here. About three years
she didn’t want to awaken the children, so she had later Mary said that she just couldn’t stand it any
taken a healthy swig of cough syrup from a bottle in longer. She had to look up that doctor. We discussed
which she had carelessly placed some lye. her social adjustments, her marital adjustments, her
She reacted to her hospitalization, and her terror, family adjustments, and her adjustments to the op-
and all the damage she had done, by developing a very eration. Then we took up the question of food, and all

[PAGE 116]

222 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


the talks Pd given her while handing her gum or cin-
namon bark. She had really gone into cooking with
her kids to teach them to enjoy food.
But you see the simplicity of handling her? Calories
wasn't the answer. Getting the patient to chew gum, CHAPTER 9
that smarting horseradish, the biting, burning horse-
radish. Here’s a very, very passive patient, months of
experience being passive. Therefore, I started the pro- Some Psychotic Problems
cedure with something I was dead certain she would
spit out. But she would taste it. I made certain I’d get
my patient to do something. I wanted her to use her
mouth in relationship to her tube feeding. You are go- 1961. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.

ing to use your mouth when you get a mouthful of
nice, fresh, strong horseradish. (Laughter) And you're H: John’s got a problem that we might bring up. He's got
being tube fed at the time. Instead of that passive role a mute schizophrenic boy that he’s been struggling
of letting it be poured in, she was being very active with.
with her mouth, which is connected with her stomach. W: Pm struggling with the whole family, and the boy is
Then, of course, after that I could give her anything essentially mute. I’ve heard him say a few words, and
else, and if she showed any tendency to be passive he is reported to talk a little bit to his mother or to
about it, I always had something that would bring ac- his father separately. Never when two people are there
tion. The nurses, of course, thought I was foolish un- in hearing range together. My feeling is that the par-
til they saw the patient beginning to gain weight. But ents have been making some visible changes in how
you see that manner of participation—doing some- they deal with each other, but the boy is still just as
thing. mute as ever. He looks a little more with it, but that’s
about all I can say.
IT: He’s 16?
W: He's 17. And he's a long-standing case. He's been in bad
shape since he was a little kid.
15: And he's catatonic then?
W: Yes. Im told there is a question about getting him to
be more expressive, complicated by the fact one of the
main themes of the parents has been to get him to talk
by any means. This also has the implication — get him
to talk and leave us out of the picture.
lv: George had been in the hospital about six years. He was
in his twenties. He had never been known to utter

[PAGE 117]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 225


anything except neologisms. Usually a neologism or H: Are you suggesting that with a mute boy you should
a meaningless phrase. “How old are you today?” “Two sit there and be mute with him?
and bear.” “What day is it today?” “Up one and down E: No. I was thinking what I’ve done with the mute ones.
brown.” Then sometimes just noises. Looked them over and said, “Let’s see, your name is
So I sat down with George, and I very carefully Raymond. No, that’s not right, it isn’t Raymond; it’s,
asked him dozens of questions and wrote down his oh yes, I wonder why you wear brown shoes? Your
replies. There was no pattern to them at all. So I got name, of course, is Harold; but that isn’t a red shirt,
a great variety of possible replies. Then I started du- that’s a blue shirt. Oh no, that’s right, your name isn’t
plicating them, paraphrasing them, until I had a thou- Harold.”
sand or more. Then one morning at 8 o'clock I sat down Have you any idea how absolutely irritating that
beside George, and I said, “Good morning, George.” sort of thing is to one of those mute patients? Sooner
He gave me an idiotic reply, so I replied in kind. So or later he’s going to say, “My name is John, and this
he replied in kind. So we had a steady conversation. is a red shirt, and those are black shoes.” But you're
Up until about 11 o’clock—complete nonsense. softspoken, almost apologetic at times, because you
And finally George said, “I’m getting tired of this.” correct your error. “Of course, it’s rather early in the
I said, “So am I, but I don't mind.” He said, “What morning to be talking to you, but wait a minute, is
do you want to know?” I said, “I'd like to take a his- this early in the morning, or is it early yesterday, or
tory of you?” “Square holes and barefoot.” So I replied is it late next week?” You really don’t know. They try
in kind. A few minutes later he said, “Why do you to shift their attention away from you. But you know
want to take a history of me?” I said, “Because I'd like there's something awfully morbid about a normal perto get all the information 1 can from you.” He said, son, the doctor on the ward, sitting down and pulling:
“Why are you talking this nonsense to me?” “Because that stuff, and their attention gets dragged back again
it seems to be the sort of stuff that you enjoy talk- and again.
ing.” (Laughter) He said, “Well, if 1 give you my his- Phillip had been in the hospital ten years and had
tory, will you leave me alone?” 1 said, “Certainly, un- not spoken a single word. He stared straight ahead.
til I want the mental examination. I don’t know when So I sat down beside him with a great big pad of
TU take that.” So George said, “All right, after lunch paper, and my statement was, “I want to take your
TU give you the history.” history. I want to find out a lot of things about you.
He interrupted his history several times with non- I’ve got plenty of time to do it. So P'm going to ask
sense, so I joined in. But I got the history. A few days you questions, I’m going to write them down. Then
later 1 told George 1 was going to do a mental ex- I’m going to write down any answers even if | have
amination shortly. I got the nonsense replies, to which to give the answers myself. Now your name is Phillip
I replied. George and I became very close friends. He Jones. Let's see, Phillip is spelled “Y-t-u-w-x-z. Now
cut out his nonsense talking. I was able to send him let's see, Jones, that’s a hard name to spell, 'I got. a
home. I was able to have him get a job. But you sit look from you.’ Your age? Let’s see, | know you're oldthere and talk that idiocy. er Lhan my baby boy. You're not as old as my father,

[PAGE 118]

226 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 227


so you must be 103.” I wrote it down. And he finally you ever seen these stage magicians? Dr. Hause is
grabbed the notebook from me and the pencil and said, just pulling a magic stunt on me. He pretends to tube
“Don't write any more nonsense.” It’s a very painful feed me.” I said, “Well, Dr. Hause is discontinuing you
thing. Phillip and I later became very close friends. and he’s turning it over to me. I’m going to tube feed
I could walk in, sit down and chat with him, and dis- you.” He said, “Oh yes, you'll tube feed me the way
cuss a lot of things. Phillip’s explanation was, “There's they all do. I haven’t got any stomach, no guts. You
nobody around here worthwhile talking to except go through the motions of tube feeding me, but you
won't tube feed me.” I promised him that I would tube

W: What you do, then, is take their refusal to give you in-
ou.”
feed him next week, and he himself would offer me the

formation as a license to be wrong. I mean, they’re proof. The proof that he had been tube fed. Each day

keeping you from being informed ... that week, every time I saw Herbert, I reminded him
E: Yes, and therefore I have informed them of the fact about next week. The next week, of course, I tube fed
that I’m completely uninformed. I am completely un- him. How would you tube feed him?
informed when you try to spell Phillip with a “y” and W: I think I’ve got this one. You're giving him an emetic?
a “z” and a “w.” But you're recognizing that they aren't E: Oh no.

going to give you any information. You recognize that W: No? Wouldn't this do it then?

you've got to make a record. You'd better make that E: No. I fixed up a tube feeding of raw cod-liver oil, vinegar,

record because that's your obligation. But you make baking soda, and milk, eggnog. When he started belch-
the record without information because they didn't ing raw fish, rotten fish, there was the inner proof. I

give you any information. And “W-x-y-z-1-k” doesnt got him with rotten fish. The emetic he could take as
spell “Phillip,” so there's no information about his an assault. I told him, “Now I think that belching of

name there. But you're frustrating the patient's own yours is proof that I fed you. Of course, you don’t have
symptom. to be satisfied with it, but I'll see to it you belch every
IT: A mute patient has so much power. time I tube feed you.” He finally said, “Don’t tube feed
i: But he doesn't. me anymore with that rotten fish.” Then he ponted
IT: IE you see him with the family he does. out that tube feeding wouldn’t do him any good beI’: Within the family, yes. cause he had no colon.
IT: With anyone else who tries to get him to talk he im- W: He was really asking for it.

mediately has the advantage. E: 1 told him I thought he had a colon. I was positive, but

E: You see, whenever you violate, effectively, a patient's I'd let him get the proof all by himself. All by himself.
system of symptomatology— Herbert stood in a cor- So I slipped a cathartic in his tube feeding one night,
ner in his nightshirt. Had been standing there six locked him up in his room and put him in restraint in
months, night and day. He had to be tube fed. I asked the bed. The cathartic was scheduled to work about

Herbert why he had to be tube fed. He said he had 6 a.m. He was restrained in bed. He didn’t mind that —

no stomach, he had no bowels, no throat. I asked him until 6 a.m. the next morning. I was down there, and

what happened to the tube feeding. He said, “Haven't when he yelled to be taken to the bathroom, I pointed

[PAGE 119]

228 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 229


out, “But you've got no colon.” I fed back statements wasn't a punishment corner. As long as a man can't
until he finally crudely told me what was going to hap- eat, the least you can do for him is give him some nice
pen if I didn’t believe he had a colon. All the way to odors.
the bathroom I kept asking was he sure. W: That’s real benevolence.
Then he said he could be tube fed and he could H: Yes, that is.
move his bowels, but he couldn’t eat solid food and E: Herbert had one other thing. Herbert had a lifetime
he could not put a glass of anything up to his mouth history of gambling, and he was an expert at cards.
or feed himself. I told him that I was willing to bet To get him to participate in ward recreation was lit-
that next week, on Monday morning, he would be erally impossible. There were four badly deteriorated
pounding on the dining room door asking to be al- patients who played cards all day long. One played
lowed to go into the dining room. That there would bridge, one played poker. It was primarily a matter
be a glass of milk on the table awaiting him when he of picking cards up and dealing them out, and toss-
finally got in there, and that he would drink it. Well, ing the cards in and saying, “I win the pot, that’s my
he just jeered at me. But the next morning at 6 a.m. hand.” Whoever spoke first got it. They each kept
he was really pounding on the dining room door. When their own scores, all day long. So I stood Herbert be-
it was opened there was a glass of milk there. He went hind one of them so he watched the game. I told him
in and drank it. In tube feeding him the night before I thought it was interesting. Herbert said, “That's tor-
I put plenty of salt in him to dehydrate him in a most ture watching those men do things like that with
gosh awful fashion. He was literally dehydrated. He cards.” I said, “There is only one way out of it. Teach
was dying of thirst. I had all the bathroom doors so-and-so how to play a game.” So Herbert taught an-
locked, so the only source of water flowed through the other patient a new game of cards. But that was hor-
dining room. rible, to stand there all day Sunday watching that
Herbert came out of it. He was discharged from the card game.
hospital and hired by the hospital. Years later he was * * *
still working in the kitchen. To teach Herbert to eat
food, I sent him out on the hospital farm in mid-winter E: I put John and Alfredo on the same bench. John knew
to get cold. Then I brought him in and stood him in he was Jesus Christ, and Alfredo knew he was Jesus
the kitchen right where he could smell all the nicest Christ. (Laughter) John would say, “Listen to that,
kind of food. Then I had the cook, who really liked to crazy guy; he says he's Jesus Christ, and I am. You
eat, sit down beside him and feed her face. Without know it and I know it.” Pd step over to Alfredo, and
inviting him. Until finally he demanded to be invited Alfredo would say, “He says he’s Jesus Christ; that
to have something to eat. man’s crazy. I’m Jesus Christ.” We'd talk, and, “Yes,
That’s manipulating, maneuvering. That’s taking that man’s crazy; he claims to be Jesus Christ.” I'd
the patient’s own symptom and handling it. He called step back to John, “Alfredo there claims he's Jesus

that place in the kitchen his punishment corner. Smell- Christ and you know damn well he’s crazy, and Al-

ing all that nice food that he couldn't eat. I argued it fredo knows damn well that you're crazy, because you

[PAGE 120]

230 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 231


claim to be Jesus Christ.” (Laughter) That went on I'm not crazy,” and then I would ask him if the other
day after day, with me wondering, “Now John, you patients were crazy if they were locked up, and who
say that you're not crazy, and I hear you saying ex- should be locked up. “Crazy people.” “Are you locked
actly the same crazy things that Alfredo says.” up?” “Yes. But wrongly so.” “If you were crazy, would
Finally, one day John said, “You know, I’ve been you know it? “No.” “And you don't know that you're
thinking it over. He claims to be Jesus Christ, and I crazy, do you?” Yet I was accused many times of be-
know he’s crazy, and you know he’s crazy. Only he ing harsh and unsympathetic. Always avoid the issue:
doesn’t know he’s crazy; that’s why he keeps on say- “The Institute of Euphemisms,” The Hartford Retreat.
ing he’s Jesus Christ. I’m saying that, and he thinks Now and then a patient goes there and just blows his
the same way about me that I think about him. It top, “I am a patient, I’m not a guest, and that is a
looks to me as if we're both crazy.” I said to him, nurse, not a psychiatric aide, and this is a hospital
“That’s the way I feel about it; that’s the way every grounds, not a campus.” Yet the staff there very care-
nurse in the ward feels about it. You know, Jesus fully tried to educate the patients in euphemistic liv-
Christ wouldn’t have to claim to be Jesus Christ. But ing.

John, you have yelled it and screamed it and shouted H: It’s a very insidious kind of thing.
it. I don’t think that’s very Christ-like. I think that’s E: It’s damned profitable. (Laughter)
just plain crazy behavior.” W: It’s profitable in other fields too.
So John said, “Well, there's one test I'd like to make. E: I got horribly condemned the other day — I think I men-
Will you take me to the library? And we'll pick out tioned telling a woman to get out of town with her
a book.” He looked through it, and he said, “Let’s see kids.
now, there's a capital T and an h, there's an o, and H: No, I don’t think you mentioned it.
there's an r, and there's an n— T-h-o-r-n — and there's E: I was royally condemned because I told a doctor's wife,
at, and an o, and there's an n. That's my name, Thorn- “From what I know of your husband, and I know a
ton. And there's my name on that page, too. So this lot, you came here because you're worried about him.
book is written about me.” I said, “Well, let's see. I think you've got reason for it. I think you ought nol.
There's a capital E, there's an r, there's an i, yes, ac, waste any time. You've got your car, you've got the
and k, and s-o-n. E-r-i-c-k-s-o-n. 1 think, John, the kids. Get the hell out of town. Get out of the state.”
book's written about me.” “Somebody’s crazy. It isn't She took my word for it, and she just beat it. Later
you. Let me think it over awhile.” her husband came in, after getting sympathy from
So John discarded all of his delusions. He became some others, and he complained about my sending his
the hospital librarian, and then he went out and got wife out of town. He came in and cussed me out. The
a job. Four years later he was still gainfully employed, next day he showed up and said, “What shall I do with
no delusions. Now and then he'd visit the hospital to that revolver? I loaded it. I was going to kill her, and
see how Alfredo got along. the kids, and myself. I think I’ve come to my senses.”
Yet doctors would criticize me horribly when a pa- 11: Whew!

tient would tell me, “I’m framed, I don’t belong here, lv: Now he's not going to go around and tell people he eriti-

[PAGE 121]

232 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 233


cized me too. I could have sent her home and kept my dancing girls. (Laughter) She objected rather strenu-
mouth shut when the corpses were found. ously. But I told her if she could have young men, I
could have dancing girls. What did that do?
* * * H: I don't have any idea.
E: My rights are to be respected; her rights are to be
H: We would like to know how you treat the ambulatory respected. It validated her hallucinations; then she
schizophrenic. For example, how do you handle the could view her hallucinations in the same way I could
schizophrenic who is hallucinating and has delusions. view mine. (Pause) Isn't that right? And if I could take
Or, for example, the patient who comes in and says, a good view of my hallucinations, then she could take
“The neighbors are shouting at me, and everybody a good view of her hallucinations. She could take the
says the neighbors aren't shouting at me, but I know same view of her hallucinations that I could take of
they are.” mine, but she didn’t recognize where that would lead.
E: I had a patient come in who was plagued and pleased, Because my view of the dancing girls was quite dif-
annoyed and delighted, about those nude young men ferent from her view of her dancing boys. But I had
who floated about ceiling height above her as she it established right there. I promised her that my
walked down the street. dancing girls would be faithful to me, that they would
H: (Laughter) Til be damned. not become involved with her young men. I had to tell
E: Half a dozen of them. They talked to her, sometimes her why — because they belonged to me, they were
discussing art, literature, music. Sometimes they talked mine. Besides, the young men were only interested in
crudely on the subject of sex, sometimes even horri- her; they had no eyes for my dancing girls.
fying the patient on the subject of sex. They were H: You began to treat this like a trance hallucination to
nude. Sometimes they had erections, and sometimes take it over?
they didn’t. She came in here. How would a prospec- E: Yes. And let her have her wishes. She didn’t want to
tive employer feel about those? What are the neigh- share those young men with any other dame or dames;
bors going to think? What did I think? She walked they belonged to her. And I established her right. I
in here, she circled around, and with great difficulty established my right to the dancing girls.
she sat down on that chair. She wanted me to define H: I gather you wouldn't interpret the bear trap in any way
the situation. Why did I keep a bear trap there that to her, such as she was a little worried about what you
was set? She described it to me. A great bear trap set were doing in the office.
ready to spring. I told her that it was a rather in- le: No. When the telephone rang, I stupidly, thoughtless-
volved matter that couldn’t be explained in just one ly, started walking into that bear trap. She leaped to
session. She kept looking over in that alcove there, her feet, put out her hand and pressed me back. There-
and she asked me if I didn’t feel it was rather un- after I walked in and out of the office, when she was
professional to keep half a dozen nude dancing girls there, around the bear trap. I didn’t explain to her for
in my office when I was interviewing patients. She many interviews that bear trap. I told her eventually
didn’t like the way her young men were looking at my I'd remove it. But my purposes were mine, and I didn't

[PAGE 122]

234 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 235


feel accountable to her how I ran my psychiatrist be. Periodically she'll write me a letter, wrap up a lot
office. Again defining me as a psychiatrist. I slowly of catatonic symptoms in it, and send it to me to put
raised with her the question of when she would want in the closet along with the young men. They are there
those young men floating along over her. All the time? and she can come back here any time she wants to,
At least I didn’t think they ought to go into the bath- and the young men can come out of the closet. She’s
room. a chronic catatonic.
H: You treated that like you would any of the symptoms? H: With her you just try to make that as easy as possible
Like a neurotic symptom? on her?
E: Yes. Then, I didn’t allow my dancing girls to go out in E: She writes me her letters and she wraps up her symp-
the living room. No reason why they should trouble toms. When she first became my patient she was
Mrs. Erickson. Those were my private dancing girls. some $3,000., some $4,000., in debt. She paid that off,
“What do you do with them when you have other pa- paid me off; she has accumulated savings. 1 don't
tients?” “Patients who won't appreciate them? I have know what the eventual future is going to be. 1 think
them out of sight.” For the patients who won't ap- that by the time she reaches 40 or 45, she'll break com-
preciate them, the dancing girls were out of sight. And pletely. But I think she will have had a reasonably
she felt that was a good idea. Many people are so un- productive life from 27 to that age.
appreciative of things. Why try to force them to ap- H: One time when I was here there was a blond girl who
preciate that which they cannot? Which then gave had just gotten married and you said she was an acute
me the opportunity of wondering if she wanted those schizophrenic the year before.
young men to go into the offices with her where she E: Yes.
wanted to apply for work. I kept the dancing girls out H: 1 gather she had a better result?
of sight for people who wouldn't appreciate them. It E: Oh yes.
wasn't long before she thought it would be a good idea H: How did you treat her?
to leave them here. She applied and got ajob, but she E: From earliest infancy her mother had hated her. Her
was at liberty to come here every day if she wanted mother used to take advantage of her father’s absence
to and enjoy her young men. They didn't mind stay- to spank her as an infant. She got punished all along
ing here, and she discovered that the dancing girls had the way. She told her that she was hideous and home-
no eyes for her young men. That they really liked only ly, that she had no future, that her father was no good,
me. And sometimes I'd banish the dancing girls, so that he was selfish. Her mother kept insisting that
that just she, the young men, and I were in the room. she, the mother, was once a beautiful girl but that this
Then sometimes I’d banish the young men too. They miserable child had ruined her looks for her. My prob-
are still in that closet you know. (Laughter) lem was to teach her to recognize the fact that she was
She taught school for four years, a high school a pretty girl. And that she did not have to overeat.
counselor. Now and then she came in to check on her That layer of fat — I was so curious about the beautiful
young men. She is out of the state now, holding a good thighs inside that wrapping of blubber. And that's
secretarial position. She is catatonic schiz, always will what | called it. Her thighs were horribly fat, her hips

[PAGE 123]

236 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotie Problems 237


were horribly fat. She was definitely overweight. I nine months after marriage. A student — he began ne-
was curious about those pretty thighs, those pretty glecting her sexually —too tired. So I had a long in-
hips, and that pretty belly, with all that wrapping of terview with her—what to do with her husband. A
blubber. brief one with him. The girl proceeded to recognize
H: What kind of symptoms did she have? that she had sexual rights, and she was going to exE: Withdrawal, with that vague sort of fantasy formation, ecute them, and that she was going to get every sex-
apart from this world, never fully described, wherein ual pleasure that she wanted, and as much as she
she lost her sense of reality. Trying to find out where wanted, that she enjoyed it so much that he would
the arm of the chair is, feeling it, and looking every- find it impossible not to enjoy it. And she seduced him
where to see the arm of the chair. But no coordina- into very adequate sexual behavior.
tion of the tactile sensations with the visual. Where H: When you dealt with her, did you discuss her parents
is the arm of the chair? She can feel it, but she can’t with her, and their behavior with her?
find it visually. That sort of defect. And I was so in- E: Oh yes, what I insisted on when discussing her mother
terested in finding out what that pretty girl was un- —I called her a flat slob —I asked her why in hell her
derneath that wrapping of blubber. father shouldn't go screwing around, with a flat slob
She’s married, happily so. She’s going to have her of a wife like that, who yelled and screeched and beat
baby this summer. She married a very nice young up the product of what should have been a very happy
man of whom I approved. Her wedding? The mother sexual relationship.
and father separated. The girl asked me, “Should 1 in- H: How did the girl react when you criticized her mother?
vite my mother to the wedding?” I said, “Your mother E: 1 tensed her up; then, of course, I would distract her,
will come to the wedding. She'll throw a very weepy and ask her, “Is your elbow comfortable on the arm
scene; then she'll throw an hysterical scene. Then she's of that chair?” Then tell her, “Yes, you can’t really find
going to denounce you, your bridegroom, and the the arm of the chair, except with your elbow, and since
groom’s parents, and your father. Yet you feel you you can find it with the elbow, you can really enjoy
ought to invite your mother.” You see, her mother had it.” So less and less of that visual searching. Then |
been over to see me and I knew what she was. “You're started in, “You can't find the arm of the chair; it’s just.
going to tell your mother and lay it on the line for her. your arm, but your arm can find the arm of the chair
Tell her to sit down, to shut her trap, and to listen to and you can find your arm.”
you. Then, with absolute intensity, you explain to H: Why did you distract her at the moment she tensed up,
your mother that she is welcome to come to the wed- when you criticized her mother, rather than let her
ding, and to be your definition of a good mother — well tense up?
behaved, well poised, and courteous.” The girl really Ii: Merely to mobilize her emotions. I didn’t want her to
did lay it on the line to her mother. And the mother get her emotions roused up and then try to dissipate
was terrified, and did behave, and she acquitted her- them in her own way. I could mobilize them, distract.
self in magnificent fashion. her, and her emotions were right where I wanted them.
The girl had one difficulty with her husband about Then | could offer another criticism of her mother, in-

[PAGE 124]

EN)


238 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 239


tensify her emotions, distract her again, and then The mother soon learned to use me as some sort of
come out with the idea that if her father wanted a a father figure that would talk harshly but imper-
mistress, when his wife denied him sex, I didn’t see sonally to her, so when she'd do something wrong
why it wasn’t all right. I had her emotions and her she'd call and tell me about it, and 1 would whip her
father’s rights. After that I told the father to sepa- over the phone.
rate from his wife, and live in a different place. H: Why did you want the daughter to get concerned about
H: You did tell him that? the father’s rights?
E: Oh, he would now and then, because his wife would get E: With whom did the daughter identify? Pretty difficult
agreeable, go home and have sexual relations with her. to identify with her mother except in fatness, in all
It didn’t take the daughter long to find out about that. the wrong things. But her father was a good man, and
So I told the daughter it’s all right for her father to when she started defending his rights, she started to
eames


go outside the house and find a piece of tail, and if he identify with all the good things about him. You start
happened to walk in the direction of XYZ street, that defending my rights and what happens? You become
was all right too. And if he wanted to walk in L and
ae


my ally. You become part of me.
M street, that was all right too. And all her emotional H: Did the mother make any attempts to take her daugh-
intensity went into the right of her father to have in- ter out of therapy?
tercourse, with any woman he chose, including her E: Oh yes.
mother. Actually, of course, the father had never H: And how did you handle that?
stepped out, but the mother had taught the daughter E: The father brought her here. He stayed the first week
to believe that he had. And building up her emotions to see to it that his wife didn’t come to take daughter
and then starting to attach them, by immediate men- home, and I did everything in the world to build up
tion of her father’s rights, so she became protective of the rapport between daughter and me. I used light
her father and favorably inclined towards his rights. hypnosis on her just for the rapport, and in teaching
At the same time it gave me an opportunity to let her her the goodness of her body underneath that wrap-
father really make up for her mother. ping of blubber. I could praise her body, tell her how
H: Did the father and mother go back together? attractive it was; it was still completely wrapped. It
E: I don’t know if they formally reunited. But I do know was covered not only by her clothes, but by a layer
that he’s been staying a week, two weeks, a month at of blubber. She hadn’t seen the beauty of her body,
a time with her. The mother is an excellent golfer, and I was talking about it, and so it was rather a
likes outdoor life, a marvelous companion, but her remote thing about which I could talk freely. I gave
husband accepted my statement that if his wife picked her a good narcissistic appreciation of her breasts, her
a row with him on the golf course, he could think of belly, her thighs, her mons veneris, her labia, the soft
some other place he wanted to go immediately, turn inner skin of her thighs underneath that layer of blub-
on his heels and leave her there. I’ve seen the mother ber. And her mother had impressed upon her that she
here a number of times. They live in California. Time was a fat, hideous, undesirable child. The mother’s
and again I get long telephone calls from the mother. raucous laughter at the little girl when the little girl

[PAGE 125]

240 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 241


stood in the bathtub to take a bath, and the mother hands off and nobody around here touches you, will
raucously laughing at that hideous child. that be all right?” “Just so nobody tries to tie me up
H: Did the mother really do that, or did the girl just think with nothin’.” So I said, “Go ahead and scream, really
she did? get it out of your system.” Holding that syringe, I
E: The mother did it. Because I wondered if the mother waited until she threw her head back, opened her
had, and as I told you 1 had the mother here, and she mouth for a nice scream, and I squirted the sodium
justified it on the basis that when she got pregnant amytal into her mouth. (Laughter) She said, “White
against her wishes her husband ran out on her. boy, I don’t understand it.” I said, “Go ahead with
your scream.” She swallowed it.
* * * Finally, when she asked if there were 15 minutes
gone by, I said, “Well, I don’t think so and I thought
E: This great, big, six-foot, fat colored woman marched it was going to be 20 minutes.” She kept on scream-
furiously up to the nursing station and said, “Fust Ise ing, and yawned. Yawned again. She said, “White boy,
gonna just yell, fo’ bout 15-20 minutes, and then I’se what did you shoot in my mouf?” I said, “I didn’t
gonna break the bones of everyone around here.” She touch you. I asked your permission to go about my
had a history of being violent and disturbed. So the business, and you told me I could, as long as I didn’t
nurse called me, and she also notified the male super- touch you, and I didn’t.” She yawned a few more times
visor, who sent a half a dozen men up. The colored and said, “White boy, did you give me some sleepin’
woman sat down in a wheelchair, and she said, “White medicine?” I said, “Yes.” She turned to the assembled
folks, keep away from me. I’se got my yellin’ to do, group and said, “You folks, there’s a doctor as knows
I’se gonna do it, and then I’m gonna break your bones.” his business.” (Laughter)
So I promptly asked her, “Do you mind if I sit in this She was a psychotic patient. My assault on her was
chair about this close to you?” She said, “White boy, an utterly ridiculous assault, wasn’t it? Literally, at
as long as yo’ mind yo’ own business and lets me a psychotic level, because you don’t give medication
scream, you can sit there.” So I called the nurse over by squirting with a squirt gun, do you?
to me and told her, “Get me a syringe and put about IT: It’s remarkable how it was all right as long as you said
twelve grains of sodium amytal in it, dissolved.” what you were going to do, and as long as that was
The colored woman was really raising the roof with what she said she wanted done, within her limits.
her screams, taking a nice deep breath and then scream- lv: Y defined my limits, and her limits: a clear understand-
ing at the top of her lungs. I signaled to the attend- ing. Charlie was a disturbed patient, and he stated
ants, “Keep away.” As she was taking a deep breath, that anybody that came into his room would be
I said to her, “Do you mind if I go about my business, beaten up. I pointed out to Charlie that he had to be
doing what I should do?” “It's all right, white boy, so put in restraint, and apparently I would have to do
long as you don’t touch me, but don’t talk too much it. I said I was coming into the room, and he knew
to me.” I waited until the next deep breath, and said, very well he wouldn't have to hit me to knock me
“If something else touches you, as long as I keep my down. He could it it with his little finger. I repeated

[PAGE 126]

242 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 243
So
it enough times to know he understood me, and I “G.” He used to sit on the ward and do nothing. One
walked in. “As long as you can do it with your little ony day the ward doctor finally decided he should get out,
finger, it won't be necessary for you to hit me. You so when they took the ward group out they urged him
only want to hit and knock something down, you're out the door. They got him out on the grounds, and
not just interested in pushing them down. You want the whole group was moving along, including him, so
to knock them down, and with me it’s a little finger.” they figured, “We'll let go of his arms at least.” They
So I walked in. Charlie said, “I don’t understand that. weren't going to drag him any further. So they let go
(Laughter) But if you want to put me in restraint, put and he kept walking. He walked absolutely straight
me in and let me think it over.” I put Charlie in re- ahead in the line in which they had last been directing
straint quite a number of times. When I was off duty him until he walked into a tree and bruised his head.
it was a six-man job. Now that certainly seems to be a case in which he
H: That’s a peach of an instance. topped them in a way in which nobody got any satisW: Let me think it over, too. (Laughs) faction out of it. Carrying out what he was apparently
E: Because I was a man, I was the doctor in charge, and asked to do to the letter to such a degree that he in-
yet you can't knock me down
— you can just push me Dl jured himself and threw the blame on them.
down. E: Yes, and nobody was satisfied.
H: You meet the patient’s needs. W: Now I wonder what is the difference, the essential difE: I proved to him that I couldn’t possibly meet his needs ference, that determines whether everybody loses or
in knocking somebody down. (Laughter) whether some satisfaction is obtained?
E: The satisfaction that can be derived from dissatisfac-
* * * tion.
W: What determines one or the other?
FH: We begin to suspect that one of the purposes of schizo-
E: I think it starts in the learning process. The teaching
phrenic symptoms is to top in some way. That he can of the child to learn to enjoy satisfactions. When you
put his mother or his family in their place very nice- deprive him of the opportunity to learn the joys of
ly if he does it in a psychotic way; they can't handle satisfaction, then when he strives for satisfaction, he
this. hasn’t learned to enjoy it.
E: But he can't get any satisfaction out of it. With the If: How do you prevent him from learning to enjoy sat-
schizophrenic, the parents top the patient, or the pa- isfaction?
tient may top the parents; but neither one of them 17: Y don’t know if this is pertinent or not; Tl find out if
gets any satisfaction, any real satisfaction, out of it. it is. Mother Kincannon, or Ma Kate as I called her,
H: Yes, I think that's true. and others, was my landlady, 70 years old, illiterate,
E: While in the hypnotic situation, no matter who tops, unable to read or write. She took in university stu-
both get satisfaction. In normal life situations both dents and school teachers as roomers. For some 20
get satisfaction out of topping. years she'd been trying to get school teachers to teach
W: Yes. That reminds me of the story about my patient, her how to read and write. School teachers undertook

[PAGE 127]

244 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Some Psychotic Problems 245


to teach her. I watched the last two school teachers ing lines. Was Ma Kate delighted to find out the let-
work with her. They used a classroom technique, such ter “A” was two slanting lines, one slanting one way
as you would use with a little child. Ma Kate was 70 like the side of a roof, the other slanting the other way
years old. I could see nothing really wrong with the he
like the side of a roof, and a straight line. She started
teachers’ approach except it didn’t apply to Ma Kate. bite


in making words. “L-a-t” didn't spell anything. Two
After one whole semester, the teachers gave up. Ma 4
short lines can become “c-a-t.” Her construction of
Kate got very weepy about it. I told her I would words was utterly phenomenal. In three weeks' time
teach her to read and write in three weeks’ time. The emba

she was reading the Reader's Digest. Those teachers
teachers jeered at me. haven't forgiven me yet. Ma Kate had topped them
So I told Ma Kate to take the pencil “and hold it O


in all of their efforts —to her disadvantage. All I did
any old way you want to, make any kind of a line you was to teach Ma Kate to enjoy the satisfactions that
want. Now make another one” (demonstrating). I said, tei
she already possessed.
“That’s the way a pencil writes.” I said, “Now, here’s W: You put them together.
something else you can do. You can make a straight ir E: She could make a straight line up, and a flat straight
line, straight up and down. You can makea line that line. A slanting line.
way. You can makea line that way (in different direc- Enel
W: Something here about putting them together differ-
tions). You can make a line that way. You can make ently.
a circle, you can make a half a circle, you can make E: She had all the satisfactions of being able to make pencil
the other half of a circle, you can make the top half marks and to enjoy them.
of a circle, you can make the under half of a circle. You W: Well, now, if 1 could take “G” and do something so he
can make two straight up and down lines. You can could put together differently the satisfactions he gets
make three, you can make any number of them. You out of going ahead and out of resisting going, then
can make a straight flat one, you can make three, you he would live very differently. He uses them back-
can make any number. You can make slanting lines, wards in a sense.
any number of them, slanting in any direction. Now E: You try to get him to learn to enjoy his satisfactions.
go ahead, Ma Kate, fill up a couple of pages with H Well, the schizophrenic seems to get mad when he starts
those, because you're learning to write.” to enjoy his satisfactions. At any rate, this patient
She really enjoyed it. I said, “You can make a I’ve been working with has discovered that when he
straight line this way, and you can make a straight begins to enjoy a meal, when he finds he's getting
line that way. In fact, you can makea straight line some pleasure from eating, he gets mad.
that way too (demonstrating). You can make a straight E: Well, I think that if I had started out trying to teach
line that way. That's the letter E.” We went on Ma Kate to read by this method, 1 would have come
another page.
up against a stone wall. If my schizophrenic patient
Three weeks later she was reading the Reader's gets mad if he enjoys the pleasure of eating, 1 would
Digest. I didn't teach her, really. I just let her use teach him the pleasure of a clean plate. I’m thinking
what she knew. She already knew straight lines, slant- of the patient who had been tube fed for six months.

[PAGE 128]

PE Friebe

ine


sts


246 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 247


So I got a glass pitcher. The satisfaction I wanted have to do to please mother, then it gets in the way
that patient to develop was the satisfaction of seeing of enjoyment.
the quantity in the glass pitcher decrease. Not the E: You can lose a learning so quickly, so suddenly. I’m
satisfaction of being fed. But the satisfaction of the thinking of the army officer who doted on eels. Sta-
emptying of that glass pitcher. Then I doubled it by tioned in Texas. A friend flew in a shipment of eels
taking two pitchers half the size. And gave him twice to him. He ate them with great satisfaction, and then
the satisfaction. discovered they were rattlesnakes. He can’t look a
H: Is that a distraction technique? plateful of eels in the face now. A sudden idea and he
E: No, it’s a teaching technique. The satisfaction of being lost all the learnings aboui eating eels.
fed. Along with which I told him the old Joe Miller =
a
W: It reminds me a little bit of a story I once heard about
an intern in residency in Bellevue in New York. He
a
joke about the Chinese, presumably Chinese, cultural
pattern of burping after a good meal. And a good loud had friends who were fond of milkshakes, and he would
burp. Of course, in tube feeding him, pouring out the make them up a milkshake. After they had had the
fluid into the funnel and letting it run down the stom- milkshake and expressed their satisfaction with how
ach tube, I'd allow it to start down and the tube would good it was, he would tell them he made it up from
start to get empty, and then Id pour in some more the mother’s milk supply of the hospital. And quite
and put a bubble of air down in his belly. (Laughs) So a number of them vomited.
I got my burps. I didn’t ask him to enjoy the satisfac- E: And thereafter avoided milkshakes.
tion of eating. It was the satisfaction of burping. Ac- W: Presumably they did, yes.
tually, of course, a burp is a reverse when you eat. If E: I was discussing that point with a psychologist in Chi-
you can enjoy the reverse, you can enjoy the obverse. cago last week. His father and mother, during the war,
Because his reverse did depend upon the obverse. But always had cream for their coffee from the hospital
that was a safe way to teach him to enjoy his satis- supply of mother’s milk. They let some of their friends
factions, centering around eating. in on the secret, who still after all these years can’t
H: Now, it was also safe in that you weren’t demanding take cream in their coffee. We were discussing that
that he enjoy eating. problem of a suddenly violent learning.
E: Yes. H: Well, the violence of that is in the betrayal, isn’t it? The
H: His mother could have taken the way he ate as a state- deception? You're told it’s one thing and it turns out
ment about her, so if he didn’t enjoy his food, it was to be another.
a statement he didn’t like her. To avoid that problem = : The betrayal, the deception; but it can certainly cover
is safe, all right. a whole range of behavior.
W: It seems to me that the original question is not nec-
essarily so much one of—originally at least ~learn- * * *

ing to enjoy, but how a person learns not to enjoy
what you would naturally expect anyone to enjoy. If lv: Have a cigarette.
enjoyment of eating gets to be something that you IH: Vve got one, thanks.

[PAGE 129]

Some Psychotic Problems 249
248 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


E: Have a cigarette. He said, “What cigarette?” He said, “He extended his

H: You want me to take one? package to you.” “No.” Every effort to get him to recall
E: Would you like one? (He offers the pack and takes it that half dozen times I’d extended it and jerked it

away, offers it again and takes it away as if acciden- away —he had no memory of it at all. Spontaneous
amnesia.
tally.)
H: 1 could see what this would do if I didn’t know you were W: I notice you have “Balinese Character” here.* It strikes

illustrating something. a note in relation to that. Where mama says, “Come

E: That's right, what would it do? here, come here.” The child comes to her, and she looks
away.
H: Well, it would be exasperating, but you wouldn't quite
feel right about being exasperated. You'd feel you E: Hmm. And furthermore, he didn't want a cigarette to

were missing something. smoke. Until finally Paul went over and sat down be-

E: That’s right. They are bound to reach out and take it. side him, and after a while he accepted a cigaretlo
It’s an exasperating situation. They’ve got to do some- from Paul.

thing. I used this technique once in front of a group. H: Would this have worked, do you think, if he had known

I was sitting this way, in relationship to the chair (on you were doing this?
right of chair and to one side) and I had arranged very E: If he had known that I was doing something like that,
carefully that a young man there didn’t have any cig- se
he would have said, “Hand me those cigarettes, you
arettes. And he was practically a chain-smoker. I lug.” It was carefully worked out as an experimentu!

took a cigarette and then extended the package to procedure.
him. And I had Paul and Hugh and Dave primed. As FH: He had to believe that you were benevolent and just.
I started to extend the package, and he started to ex- overlooking it.
tend his arm, Paul said, “But Milton,” and I turned E: And through no fault of mine, too. He has to do some-

(turning to his right away from the subject and pull- thing; he has to make allowances. And you see my

ing the package away with him). I answered the ques- statement to Dave and Paul and Hugh and Joe was

tion, and then I remembered and extended (the pack- that I would induce an amnesia for a literally unfor-

age again). Then Hugh called me (he turns away, gettable incident. And do it in the course of just a few
again pulling the cigarettes away). Then I put the minutes. And even though everyone in the seminar

pack in my pocket, remembered, extended it again. declared I had done it, he still had no memory of it.
H: That's extremely significant somehow. What would
Dave attracted my attention. The chap was without
cigarettes, nobody was sitting around near him. It that produce besides amnesia? I mean, you scemed

had all been arranged. He wished for a cigarette. After to assume or know that that was going to produce

about a half dozen extensions of the cigarettes and amnesia. Would that kind of thing produce anything

taking them away, he just shoved his hands in his else related to it?

pockets and continued listening to the seminar and
discussion. After about 15 minutes someone asked *Bateson, G. and Margaret Mead, Balinese Character: A Photographie Analy
sis, Now York, New York Academy of Sciences, 1942,
him, “Did you get that cigarette from Dr. Erickson?”

[PAGE 130]

250 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 251


E: Well it produces rejection. atically always arranging it so they could not possiH: Rejection of the cigarette. Which is equally important. bly get that book.
When Paul first offered him a cigarette did he take it? H: What do you mean bringing it in?
E: No, not interested. He was too interested in the seminar E: Picking up a book to take to somebody. You see, you
discussion, much too interested. can do that very easily. You can get the book from
H: Then Paul tried it again and it took several times before the library and keep it out, and yet let your victim
he took one? know that you have gone to the library each day to
E: You see, Paul took a cigarette, offered one, smoked it; get the book. You know darn well where it is; you've
later Paul took another, offered it, and he turned it got it locked up. And so the book is out. The chap
down. I think it was three or four cigarettes that Paul knows that you have laboriously tried to do that favor
offered before he accepted one. for him. On one occasion I did it for three weeks, and
H: If that isn’t therapy I don't know what is. toward the end of the three weeks he said, “What
W: Yes. He was very interested in something else. book?” And I saw to it that he had proof that I went
to the library.
* * *
H: 1 see. Is there confusion about remembering the book
or the cigarette, or is it just simple amnesia in the
E: Since this is our last session, how about you... I guess sense that it doesn’t bother them at all?
you'd like to ask questions. E: It’s annoying and they tend to forget it.
H: Allright. Maybe we’d better start with a big one. The H: Then when it's brought up to them and they don't
more we think about it, the more we think that exam- remember it, do they seem confused? Or do they just
ple of yours when you offered the cigarette to the guy not remember it?
and then “inadvertently” turned away so that he had 17: They remember vaguely — yes, you did talk about some
amnesia and a lack of desire for cigarettes is the most book to them.
pertinent thing we can think of for what we think is Il: Well, on that first example of the cigarette, when Paul
involved in schizophrenia. In fact, that alone would asked him if he had been offered a cigarette, did he
be worth the trip down here, I think. Are there similar look confused or did he just not remember it?
kinds of situations that involve an offering that isn’t iv: He just didn’t remember it. But that damn trip to the
an offering but that isn’t your fault? library, that is reinforcing the memory but killing the
E: Tve played around with variations of that cigarette deal. interest. And very definitely killing the interest.
But right at the very moment I can't call to mind 11: What did you have in mind when you did it? Was it just
... there are at least a half dozen or a dozen others. an experiment to see if it would kill the interest?
H: Can you think of what more they produced besides iv: Find out what would happen.
amnesia and the lack of desire? W: Suppose then you wanted to recharge the interest.
E: Amnesia, lack of desire, loss of interest. Which now Ev: o recharge the interest? Drop it for a while and then
reminds me of one. That is systematically planning you can pick up the book in their presence, call their
to bring in a book for someone to read, and system- attention to an interesting thing. And you build up

[PAGE 131]

; '




ciar


252 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Some Psychotic Problems 253


enough affect in them so that they are willing to ac- alone. He had never broken 80. He just hoped to hit
cept the book. Otherwise, they're likely to put it down. 80; he'd do an 85, 90. And that particular morning he
And you see that in kids all the time. I can think of hit a 72 or 73. Something like that. He was so furious
one doctor’s kid — he promised to take them out for a that he broke his favorite club. He mentioned it to me
drive every Saturday afternoon, and every time he later. Another of my patients hit a 67 and came to me
got some housecalls. The kids wouldn't even let their and asked me, “Why did he get so mad?”
mother take them out after that. Father also promised H: Why did he?
that some Sunday morning, next Sunday morning E: His need for an altered adjustment to himself. He need
without fail, he would fix up that train table. Six not think of himself as a 73, 72, 71, 70, or 69, he could
months went by. I got disgusted with him and I told think of himself as a potential 67.
him Pd brain him if he didn’t fix up that table. The W: This means if he is more successful he can do better,
kids were all through playing with the train. They did and that also means...
help him fix up the table, and then walked out. When E: An altered adjustment.
he asked me about it, I asked him if he hadn't culti- W: It also means an altered adjustment with everybody
vated that action. After a couple of weeks I assigned with whom he is in contact, cooperation or competi-
him the task of going into that room Sunday morn- tion.
ing and playing with the train himself, until the kids E: But nobody else knows it.
got their interest regenerated. W: Yes, but he knows it'll be different.
H: Hmmm. Now it would be quite a different situation if E: He knows.
you offered the cigarette and the book and they got W: If it’s different when he's out on the golf course, it may
any idea that you were deliberately withholding. be different when he is in contact with anybody else
E: Then it would be just sheer resentment. I know how in any context whatever.
Paul and Joe and Hugh and Dave felt when they saw
me pulling that; they got mad at me—and yet they
knew it was an experiment on my part. Yet they were
angry about it; they couldn't help but react with an-
ger.


* * *


E: What is the basis of the anger the target shooter shows,
or the golf player, when he knows that his score was
less than such and such? And unexpectedly improves
it? The need for altered adjustments. I’m thinking of
one of my patients who went out on the golf course
early one morning to shoot nine holes of golf; he played

[PAGE 132]

Ordeals 255


with me, entertaining me. He started reminiscing about
our summer vacation a few years previously up on
Lake Huron. He talked about the swimming and the
fish and the albino frog we found. And the frog legs
CHAPTER 10 we ate. And the blue sky, highway, and the woods and
the wind in the woods, and the trimming of that tree
Etandil in the yard, and the poison ivy we dug up. And I had
Ordeals a sudden urge to say, “Burt, why don’t you take the
car keys and go for a drive.” But I suppressed it.
Burt kept on reminiscing, and then all of a sudden
while he was mentioning the food we had at summer
1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland. camp he said, “That reminds me of Aunt Bertha’s scal-
loped potatoes and ham.” Then he started talking
E: You accept whatever your patient brings you. For heav- about visits to Aunt Bertha in Milwaukee. And Allen’s
en’s sake, accept it and use it. If he wants to be re- behavior in bulldozing his food, and all my sisters and
sistant, you accept it. my parents. Again I got a sudden urge to suggest he
W: That’s one of the things that has struck us repeatedly take the car keys and go for a drive.
in reading your papers. But it’s hard to make the tran- From Aunt Bertha’s, and Allen bulldozing his food,
sition from reading it to really grasping it. because Allen put his plate up and just shoved his
H: There is a question whether you really accept it. That food in, he shifted to Allen’s curiosity about the chick-
is, if by accepting it completely you don’t negate it. ens on my brother’s farm. And Allen’s question, “How
E: I accept it completely, knowing that a minute later, or does the mama chicken nurse her baby chickens?”
10 seconds later, I’m going to reject it. Now I can pick And Betty Alice’s remark, “Allen, only mammals nurse
this up (he gestures with an object) and really hold their young.” I got the third impulse to say, “Why
it up there knowing I’m going to put it down. But I don’t you take the keys and go for a drive,” but then
am holding it there. But it’s going to be in the future I recognized it. In a little while he was finishing up
that I put it down. Therefore, I accept it completely, about Betty Alice’s erudition, and I said, “The answer,
even though I know I am going to reject it later. Burt, is no.” He looked at me and grinned and said,
H: You have the odd situation of an actor who can be weep- “Well, you'll have to admit it was a nice try, Dad.” I
ing in despair and yet perfectly well aware whether said, “Well, really not a nice try; you let me catch on.”
he’s being upstaged. But he really feels despair. H. All that was a maneuver to get the car and go.
E: That’s right. Now to illustrate communication in an- li: Yes, he had talked about things that had occurred at
other way. Burt was home on leave. I was sick and the end of a long car trip. Beautifully done, but I
Burt stayed home that evening to keep me company. caught on to it. “Well, you'll have to admit, it was a
We lived just outside of Detroit. Burt was gabbing nice try, wasn't it, Dad?”


254

[PAGE 133]

256 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Ordeals 257

* * *
E: Therefore, you inspire them. (Laughter)
FH: One of the things I’m curious about at the moment... I
H: One of the things we're curious about, and I don't know
had a woman who had anxiety attacks to the point
whether you can phrase it or not, is you assume that
where her hands were constantly wet with perspira-
you know exactly what a person should do and a large
tion. I suggested she get up and scrub the floors in
part of the problem is engineering them to do it.
the middle of the night and realize what a good home
E: No, that's not quite right. 1 assume, first, that they
she was making for her husband while she did this —
should do something. Second, 1 am willing to make
every time she was more anxious during the day than
an assumption as close as possible to what they should
she wanted to be. That perspiration just vanished.
do. Then it’s up to them to do the thing that I’m ap-
She got over her anxiety attacks almost without —I
proximating, but the thing that fits them, which I can
don't think she scrubbed the floors once.
only approximate.
E: You see, those punitive measures depend upon the naW: Well, I think that sort of fits in with what we were ap-
ture and character and personality of the patient.
proaching with patients that are better able to tell us.
H: Milton, I also had a 17-year-old boy, and I think he's
The patient can be fairly communicative; sometimes
now cured. I had him take a two-mile walk every
you can get him to tell you something that he ought
night when he wet the bed, and he carefully clocked
to be doing and isn't doing, because often he knows,
two miles with his automobile and faithfully took his
and then that can be fed back into an instruction.
walk. He went from wetting his bed every night to
Some of these people are very much aware of some-
once a week to—the last I heard it was once about
thing that they ought to be doing, and they’ve been
every three weeks. But he was eager to get over it.
putting it off every day.
E: Let's see. Where was that rehabilitation camp during
H: So that in general when you tell them something to do,
the war? They had 600 bed-wetters there. The army
it's not something they are going to find agreeable.
sent the major in charge of them up to see me. (Laugh-
(Laughter)
ter) I told the major what to do. I said, “Is there any
E: It would be inspirational to find something that's agree-
possibility of moving the latrine a couple of miles
able, that's desirable. It's just inspirational rather
away from the barracks?” He said he had full oppor-
than agreeable. (Laughter)
tunity of doing it. I said, “You'll have to play ball with
W: I hadn't noticed that most of the things you were get-
these boys, because if you pull brass on them they
ting people to do were particularly agreeable either,
won't like it. At 11 o'clock, full-pack, you too, march
Jay.
down to the latrine whether you need to or not. At 2
H: That's right. I tend to see it as in the nature of the psy-
o'clock, full-pack, march down to the latrine and back.
chiatric population of cases; it's very hard for them
At 4, march down to the latrine and back, full-pack.
to do something that's both good for them and pleas-
And explain that this separates the bed-wetters from
ant and that they enjoy and that they're successful at.
the non-bed-wetters.
E: Well, they'll fight against that.
H: Yes.
* * *

[PAGE 134]

258 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals 259


E: You can use the concept of energy with your patients. E: No, you don’t want to.
You can say a person is very much like an automobile. W: I got to where only a few is more than enough.
You wake up in the morning witha full tank of gaso- E: And his lame legs. You see, I said 100. I thought that
line, or a full tank of energy, and just running through would be a requisite number, but we'd start with 25.
the day uses up your energy. You go to sleep at night, His lame, sore legs all day long convinced him that
and you fill up on energy for the next day. You can he had used up plenty of energy. He had none left over
carry only so much energy within certain limits. Then for that. (Demonstrating panting.)
how are you going to utilize that energy? “You use it W: So with something that would make him lame like this,

all in worrying,” I pointed out to a patient who had you got it out of the way beforehand, but yet he had
a ritualistic, phobic, panicky reaction to his television a reminder all through the day.

broadcast. Forced panting, breathing, and for 15 min- E: His tendency was to reach down (Laughter) to those

utes he would stand gasping, and gasping, and chok- sore legs of his.
ing, and his heart would pound, and then they would H: You make it seem so simple, Milton.

say, “You're on,” and he'd broadcast over TV with the E: I know. I make it seem so simple. Was it simple the way

greatest of ease. But each day he became increasingly I looked over that obese woman?
more miserable. At first it started with a minute or W: No.

two; by the time he came to see me it was built up to H: No.

15 minutes. He was looking forward to 20 minutes, E: Yet it’s so simple.

30 minutes, an hour; and it was beginning to interfere H: Ym not saying it is simple. I’m saying you make it seem
with his other work at the station. I gave him that so simple.
E: Yes, but there’s an awful lot that you do.
concept of so much energy a day after I found out
what his sleeping habits were. As you would expect, W: You give these little instructions, or these little analo-
rather ritualistic. Always in bed at a certain hour. Al- gies, and they look so simple; but they’re covering
ways up at a certain hour. After I got that concept about five different things all at the same time. Like
of energy pounded into his head, I pointed out to the idea of energy. He gets it out of the way early in
him, why not use up that energy that he spent that the morning, but he’s got something so that he hasn't

way? (Demonstrating panting.) How many deep squats forgotten it when the time comes that he’s going to
would it take each day? gasp. He's still got the reminder that he’s carrying
H: You mean in the morning before he went to work? with him.
E: That’s right. (Laughter) I told him that I didn’t know E: Oh, Pll finish with what that chap did. He liked that

how much energy it would take, but that I thought use of his energy. He built up his knee squats, deep
he ought to start out with 25, even though I thought squats, as a health matter to reduce his obesity. Then

at least a hundred would be requisite. But he could he began going down to the gym to exercise, and he

start out with 25. Have you ever done 25 deep squats? began to enjoy that daily ritual of going to the gym.
He came back to me and said, “My trouble is recurW: Oh my.
ring. I really like those squats and building up my
H: I don’t want to.

[PAGE 135]

260 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals 261


body and reducing my weight and putting some mus- mow the lawn.” He said, “My wife has been after me
cles on me instead of fat. I’ve got a lot more energy.” for years, and I flatly refused to budge, but were buy-
I said, “How do you feel about it psychologically?” He ing one this month.” He's had no recurrence. He's got
said, “It distresses me psychologically, but I’m having a home. He's got a yard. He's using up all his excess
a recurrence. I noticed the other day I took three or energy.

four deep breaths, and the next program I increased W: Hes got a practically inexhaustible reservoir of demand
the number, so it is starting to build up. Now what there.
are you going to do, because doing the exercises won't E: There, yes. And his lifelong ambition. Yes.
work? I’ve got a lot more energy.” H: You don’t worry about recurrences of symptom par-
I said, “It’s a profound psychological reaction you're ticularly then?
showing.” He said, “Yes.” I said, “Well, suppose we E: No. You meet them. With the patient coming back it
work on it at the psychological level. Now I know your wasn’t particularly alarming; let’s see what was de-
sleeping habits. You sign off at 10 o’clock. You go veloping.
right home. You just summarize the day to your wife H: But what I wondered is how far this can go in produc-
and then you go right to bed. You sleep eight hours. ing a change? Have you ever had a stammerer go
You're a sound sleeper. You enjoy your sleep. You're through an ordeal every time he stammered?
a regular sleeper. After four hours’ sleep, get up and E: The stammerers are so darn hard to handle because they
do a hundred squats.” He said, “That I would really do insist so flatly and yet so absolutely that they want
hate.” I said, “Yes, you can really use up a lot of to talk correctly today and now, and on an entire
psychological energy hating that idea. How do you sentence. Once you can get them to be content to stut-
think you'll feel psychologically every night when you ter on 999 words in return for saying one word cor-
set your alarm, as you always do, realizing that you rectly, you'll have very little difficulty with those
can take up a lot of psychological energy panting in stammerers because they get over it. When they go
front of the microphone and the television camera? through those terrific ordeals of physically twisting,
You can take out an awful lot of psychological energy grimacing, waving their feet and the back of their
in two ways: one, setting your alarm for the regular head, and their shoulders and their hips, which is a
time, and psychologically considering with a great horrible ordeal.
deal of intensity of feeling how you don't want to get I can think of Joe—sitting in the chair, he would
up in four hours’ time to do deep squats.” That anal- wave both hands and both feet. He'd twist and grimace
ogy worked —for a while. He came back. and wiggle his entire body when you asked him, “How
W: That’s a tough customer. old are you?” 1 told him to sit very quietly and lean
E: Oh yes. I said, “So you have got an excess of energy.” back in the chair and listen carefully to what I said,
He said, “That’s right.” I said, “Now tell me what has and that I was going to ask him a question shortly.
been your lifelong ambition?” He said, “Po own my What he could do instead of waving both feet and
own home for my wife and my child.” I said, “It will both hands and his entire body, he could lift his foot
really make you sweat, won't it, to buy a home and this way. When T asked him, “What number comes

[PAGE 136]

262 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Ordeals 263


before two?” “One.” (Brings foot down) There’s your E: They punish themselves; but, you see, speech always
physical activity. You can hear it, you can feel it, and requires two people. The other person has to wait
you can do it. So I could ask him quite a number of while they speak. A lot of other symptoms — they can
questions — “Two,” “eight,” “nine.” (Putting foot down, have their symptoms, like claustrophobia, all by
or tapping it) Took his mind off of this type of activ- themselves. They can have their claustrophobia and
ity, but he was still going into activity. But it was a it doesn't touch the other person. It may annoy the
purposeful activity. It was a required activity. It was other person. But in this matter of defective speech,
an unnecessary activity so far as saying “one,” “two,” the other person gets it in the ear.
“eight,” “nine,” “21.” It had no part in the utterance W: Well, I see that in some ways it's more direct; but cer-
of the number, of the reply. From numbers we went tainly, it seems to me, and I think to both of us, other
to “yes” and “no” and so on. symptoms can be pretty powerful in influencing and
II: ve just been seeing one of those intermittent stam- disturbing people that are involved with the patient
merers, and it’s a lifelong deal. I was thinking of set- too.
ting up some sort of an ordeal she had to go through E: Yes, but you see, the neurotic person who is late, they
each time she stammered, to see what would happen. make other people wait for them. But they're late to
I was wondering if you've ever done that? She doesn't the show that they're going to attend all alone, and
stammer on every word or every line, but she does hit the theater doesn't mind. They may arrive after the
a word every once in a while and then she goes through last show has begun; they're late —the theater doesn't
a facial contortion and gets it out. I was wondering care. They may arrive at that choice restaurant just
about the possibility of setting up some sort of an before it closes up. Of course all the choice dishes have
ordeal that she has to go through each night if she has been exhausted. They have to take what's left over.
stammered once during the day, or twice during the W: Well, I think that the next day they would tell some-
day, or whatever she decides on. I wondered if you'd body about this rather vividly in such a way that
ever done that? they provoke a reaction.
!’: Vm awfully wary of setting up ordeals for the stam-
E: That may be, but then it isn't the restaurant. It's the
merer. owners who are the remote unknown background.
IH: Why is that? H: It’s pretty hard to have a symptom without its...
17: They punish themselves so terribly. They punish other E: Indirectly influencing others.
people so terribly. Now there's no punishment involved H. Of any sort. Because it's always some kind of extreme
in that sort of thing, is there? Neither of you nor me behavior, and you can't live with somebody with ex-
nor anybody, no punishment there (stamping foot). treme behavior without being tied up init. But you're
1: What if the punishment is good for them, productive? kind of uneasy about putting a stammerer through
lv: The stammerer has so much punishment in his soul; he a punishment ordeal?
punishes you by making you listen and wait and wait. Is: Yes.
W: But isn’t the same thing a good bit true with most peo- Il: lave you ever done it?
ple with severe symptoms? They punish themselves, Hy: I've thought of it, and I’ve tentatively approached it,
punish other people? and fell otherwise about it.

[PAGE 137]

264 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

W: Did you ever ask one to stammer?
E: Oh, yes. “You see, I really don’t know exactly the pat-
tern of your stammering. P'd like to get the pattern
so I know what labial and dental and palatal sounds
are involved, if any. Whether it’s consonants or vow- CHAPTER 11
els. So will you stammer for me?” They know that I'm
treating them as a physician would treat them for an
ulcer. He’d examine the ulcer to find out. There is Substituting Symptoms,
nothing insulting or punitive about it. But they never
really like it. Puzzles,
H: They sure don't.
E: They don’t want you to know the labials. They don't Passing Examinations
want you to know the palatal sounds.
H: Well, it's a part of speech therapy now to encourage
them to stammer a bit. I’m not sure how much good
it does; I’ve seen only a couple of stammerers, three,
and all of them had been through speech therapy, and
1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.

none of them have benefited by it. I don’t know who
W: We have one question about hypnosis. Can you really,
does benefit by it.
E: Have you ever encountered a patient that has benefited directly suggest away a symptom? If so, is there any
real evidence about whether a substitute takes its
by the speech therapist?
place or not?
H: No.
W: No. I had a stammerer, and I had a woman who was
E: You see, that’s an awfully silly superstition that if you

a big, mature woman who hada little tiny girl's voice, remove one unpleasantness it must be replaced by

and they had both been through the routine and it another. It’s the most unthinking, bitter superstition

hadn’t worked. But it’s a flourishing institution.
that I know. The whole practice of medicine is based
on symptom removal. You go to the doctor because
H: It is. Graduates people every day.
you hurt, so he gives you something so you feel bet-
ter. You don’t deliberately go out and get a worse
hurt. You break a tooth so you go to the dentist and
he corrects it—so you go out and break a leg? No. If
you suggest to a patient directly in a trance state, “I
want you to stop smoking cigarettes,” he may accept
that. He may stop. Anytime that he has a need for
a replacement for that thing, what does he do? He
smokes Luckys instead of Camels. He goes back to
the same thing. You don’t go to the trouble of learn-

260

[PAGE 138]

Substituting Symptoms, Puzzles, Passing Examinations 267
266 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

E: Yes. I can think of one retired soldier, aged 70. At age
ing a brand new thing; you go back to the old, the
56 he had developed tic douloureux. He had a couple
true, the tried, the familiar. You may modify it by try-
of operations — I saw the scars — and he described the
ing Luckys instead of Camels. One of my patients
alcohol injections with ganglion . . . what's the name
said, “I’ve smoked every variety of cigarette that has
of that ganglion? For tic douloureux? That was when
ever been manufactured. That will give you an idea
he was 56. Every time his face healed up, he had the
of how many times I’ve quit smoking.”
operation; and the alcohol injections would last about
H: This is such a deep idea in psychiatry that one of the
six months. Then his tic douloureux would start.
things we've been tempted to do is to persuade a med-
As the man sat here, I had a pole light in the cor-
ical school, a psychiatric department, to get a grant
ner there and I watched his eyes. As he was talking,
to just suggest symptoms away. There is such an idea
explaining how he had that pain almost continuously,
that this can be done but shouldn't be done. In my ex-
the stabbing pain, I noticed his pupils dilating, con-
perience it is very doubtful that it can be done—just
tracting. I noticed the catch in his breath when I
banish a symptom and have it go.
would see the dilation of the pupil. I noticed the twitchE: You can suggest it away only when the symptom has
ing in his face on the right side. That accompanied the
become... well, you have to do more than just sug-
dilation of the pupil and the catch in his breath. So
gest it away.
when the man said he was suffering pain, I thought
H: I know. But there is this belief.
he was. But in the trance state, I explained to him
E: You can ask a person to lose his headache. Now when
that I thought the pain he was suffering was a habit-
you stop to consider, what happens to the headache?
ual misinterpretation, a rhythmical, habitual misin-
You lose it. You can suggest that he lose it now in-
terpretation of the ordinary sensations of the face.
stead of three hours from now. If he goes to bed and
That he was a victim of body learning, a conditioned
sleeps for an hour, hell lose his headache. He can go
response. I suggested he lose the pain. When he died
into a trance and you tell him to lose his headache;
seven years later, he was still free of that tic dou-
he comes out of the trance with his headache gone.
loureux pain.
Three hours later he’s not going to develop it. But if
FH: That's not quite just banishing it.
you'd left him alone in the ordinary waking state, he
E: No, but 1 gave him a chance to understand that he had
would have kept on with his headache until it came
a habitual misinterpretation. Once he got that under-
time to lose it.
standing, he could direct his attention against pain
H: This is such a common idea.
development. As he said, his nose didn't seem to beE: 1 have heard it said, “Cured of smoking, took up eating;
long to him. His face didn't seem to belong to him.
cured of eating, took up drinking; cured of drinking,
took up heroin; cured of heroin, took up a depression.” Then very shortly everything felt normal.

Well, of course that’s a fabricated history and it’s
false. The patient would have returned to smoking.
* * *


H: But you do feel that there are some symptoms that are
lv: A girl came to me who was constantly bathing, and she
just about ready to leave anyhow that could be ban-
had to dress a certain way in order Lo read her mail.
ished?

[PAGE 139]

268 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Substituting Symptoms, Puzzles, Passing Examinations 269


She could sit only on certain objects and live in a cer- Your therapeutic efforts run up against that brick
tain apartment. An exceedingly rigid, limited way of wall. In the trance state, in some circuitous way, you
living. Sometimes she bathed as much as 19 hours in circumvent the phobia, and then the patient says,
a single day, with that tremendous anxiety. She came “But I am the same person and I can be free of the
to Phoenix and stayed here. One of the first things phobia.” Then they start looking for and accepting
I did to her was let her tell me what utterly, utterly - any therapy that would correct the phobia. But pre-
intense anxiety she had to get herself clean. I let the viously, because of their absolute belief, they wouldn't
girl impress that upon me until I was thoroughly con- do it.
vinced. She sold me a bill of goods to the effect that Take one thing I do with these paranoid type of
she was completely absorbed and all wrapped up in people: They tell me that this is the only way you can
this tremendous anxiety. view certain things. So I let them educate me to that
As soon as that story had gotten across to me in effect until they are absolutely convinced that I un-
a thoroughly and most convincing fashion, convinc- derstand there is just this one view possible. And then
ing to her, presumably convincing to me, I pointed out I raise with them the question of planting 10 trees in
that, absorbed as she would be in this awful, awful, five straight rows, four trees in each row, and they
awful anxiety while showering, she wouldn’t mind if promptly tell me five straight rows, four trees in each
I watched her. That really jarred her, practically loose row would be 20 trees, and so I merely arouse their
from her teeth. That confronted her. She didn’t want antagonism and make them go way out on a limb
me to see. She had to admit that she just couldn't proving that, and thinking I’m all wrong. And then,
have me there. And I pointed out, “But you'd be so having done that, I point out to them there’s always
absorbed in your anxiety that you wouldn't know I a different way of viewing anything, no matter how
was there.” I pointed out to her that it wasn’t that bad, absolute it is. Then I diagram how you can have five
that she could be so absorbed that she'd be unaware rows of four trees each with only 10 trees. Well, that
of me watching her. I was willing to bet that I could is established with the same absolutism as their para-
rattle the door of the bathroom and she'd notice it. noid ideas. Then they have to view their paranoid
W: You didn’t even have to rattle it, did you? ideas from a different point of view.
E: I didn’t even have to rattle it. Then I began to just HA: You wouldn't, with a phobia then, give a posthypnotic
wonder if I would come over and rattle it. You pro- suggestion that would carry for a while to relieve the
duce a change in a phobic response in the trance state, phobia.
not as a means of correcting the phobia, but as a E: Oh yes, Pll do it this way. “You have this phobia, but
means of teaching the patient that the phobia can be it’s going to surprise you that some time next week
removed. The person with a phobia has an absolute between a couple of hours on the clock —it may be be-
conviction; “This is the way life is; it’s unchanging. tween 1 and 2, it may be between 11 and 12—you’re
Ill always, always, always have this fear; and nothing going to feel a sense of freedom from your phobia. It
can change it. I’m helpless. Everybody else is helpless. will surprise you. I don’t know how long it’s going to
There is nothing I can do.” last. Of course, the phobia will return, but you will get

[PAGE 140]

,|
dto


270 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Substituting Symptoms, Puzzles, Passing Examinations 271


that sense of freedom.” Then you've used a posthyp- He went through an awful lot of agony correcting
notic suggestion and you've used a hypnotic freedom that learning, that hypno-anesthesia. He said, “It’s un-
to further enhance their realization that it’s not an ab- comfortable, it’s uncomfortable.” I pointed out to him
solutely perfect thing. that he came here to learn something, about which he
knew nothing, that would help him. That he always
* * * got uncomfortable in the exam situation and then
panicked. Now here in this learning situation, he gets
E: First of all, a few comments on the patient I just fin- a little bit uncomfortable and he wants to correct it
ished seeing. He's got to take the state board medical right away, even though the discomfort arises from
examination. He has flunked it twice. It’s absolutely learning. I asked him to explain, since he is a M.D.,
imperative that he pass it. He completes about two- how could that numbness of his hands constitute a
thirds of it, does beautifully, and then he gets uncom- threat of any kind? He said it was uncomfortable. I
fortable, frightened, and panicked, and he quits. Now asked him if it was uncomfortable or an unusual feel-
he didn’t want to see me, because he couldn’t bother ing? He agreed that it was unusual, but that’s uncom-
seeing me when I was in his home town. Now he’s fortable. Am I going to get anywhere with him?
coming a thousand miles to see me. He’s got to be H: I don’t know, are you?
back home tomorrow. He wants to pass that exam. E: I don’t know.
I let Betty go into a trance for him so I could watch W: But you did get him to complete something that he
his reactions. He did not like the discomfort of his wanted to get out of.
lids batting, but he started to go into a trance as he E: Yes. He’s coming back later this afternoon, and I won-
watched Betty go in. He struggled very much against der if I can, if he will make any progress in acceptance
it. I told him to let them go ahead, but he said it was of the unusual, the unfamiliar, rather than interpret-
an uncomfortable habit. After I dismissed Betty, I in- ing it as uncomfortable. He also has the typical mys-
duced a trance in him by a fatigue technique, that is, tical conception of hypnosis.
just waiting and talking. He developed a perfectly H: Well, your goal when he panics like that on an examina-
beautiful hypno-anesthesia with his right hand, and tion is to do what? To get him to accept those feel-
of the left thumb and the left forefinger. That dis- ings?
tressed him terribly because he sensed this more than E: This is what I’ve done with the state bar exam students,
he did this. He became awfully uneasy and then he the state medical exams, high school students, college
began to feel a little bit strange. So I let him wake up, students, and board examination students that I’ve
and he told me he discovered his hand, so he corrected treated. First of all, I differentiate for them — as soon
that right away. He couldn't stand it to have hypno- as I get them in a light trance — differentiate between
anesthesia of the hand. He corrected this, and I put taking an exam and passing an exam. They go in there
him back in a trance, and he developed a very pro- and they try to pass the exam with every question.
found hypno-anesthesia of the left hand, completing Instead of carefully, thoughtfully, enjoyably writing
what he had started. an answer to a question, they put all the attention,

[PAGE 141]

272 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Substituting Symptoms, Puzzles, Passing Examinations 273


“Will I pass? Will I pass?” on each fragment of the ex- E: I did one over the telephone long distance. He paid the
am. I teach them the importance of just taking the bill. Tt took about 20 minutes, half an hour. 1 told him
exam, enjoying recording as much as they know on to get a chair, sit down, hold the phone, lean back, be
this question. Recording as much as they know on comfortable. He passed. It was after his third failure.
that question. A feeling of ease. “This is what I know, The junior who came in had gotten a flunk on every
this is what I put down. I'll enjoy putting down this, final exam, passed only on his class work and his six-
which I know,” and to move on comfortably from one week test, and mid-semester tests and so on. He said
question to the next. That’s the only way they’re go- he would like to get an “A” on at least one final ex-
ing to pass it, you know, if they write that exam with am. So all 1 did was say to him, “Well, it would be nice
an utter feeling of freedom. They write question one, to feel comfortable when you write an exam, and sup-
comfortably, “This is what I know, I'll put it down,” pose that this year, since you're a junior, you go in and
and move on to the next. happily write a D' exam. All you have to do is write
As one of the law students said, “I flunked that enough on each question to merit a D.' Write it hap-
state board twice. I was in a panic the first time, I was pily. Next year is another year.” He got an “A” on
in a panic the second time. This time I wrote the every one of his exams. You see, he could write a “D”
answer to the first question, and I felt good about it. exam comfortably. He didn't have to strive, he didn't
I enjoyed writing the answer to the second question. have to struggle, he was perfectly at ease. And he was
WhenI finished, I finished early, I went out and had only shooting for a “D.” He got all “A's.” Let's see, I
a smoke, a beer. Then my pal came out, and he said, saw him twice, two hours, in preparation. He came
‘Did you pass?’ That was the first time I thought over after it, and he asked me please to explain. He
about it.” He had done a simple writing of an exam hadn’t tried to get “A’s.”
with never a thought of passing. Well, he did pass. H: You told him to write a “D” on just one exam?
His friend didn't. E: I told him to write a “D,” a “D” grade exam, for all of
W: This is like the case, you told us once, of your friend them.
who was a golf player. H: For all of them?
E: Yes. E: Yes. So he could learn to write an examination comfortW: And you had him play one stroke at a time. ably. I didn't tell him what I expected him to do. But
E: One stroke at a time. He's a professional golfer now. you see, there was no overwhelming or frightening
That's one stroke at a time. You write comfortably, burden that he was carrying.
happily. H: In thinking over your work, one of the things that's
H: Well, when you suggest this to them, do you suggest most obvious, and it certainly struck me when I was
it in just the way you are suggesting it now? struggling to do a paper on your work, is that in
E: Yes. In a light trance or a medium trance, or, for that almost all cases you tend to encourage the person to
matter, a deep one. Every time they write the exam behave in a symptomatic way, and then you may add
that way I find they passed. something to that, or you may have them do it under
H: Well, you make it sound so easy, Milton. Do you usually special circumstances, but in almost all cases that’s
see them one session and do that, or what? what you instruct them to do.

[PAGE 142]

o

274 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson DETREE
Substituting Symptoms, Puzzles, Passing Examinations 275


as at aU
E: Well, take this junior in college. He had been writing head and ringing of the ears. All I did was encourage
“F” or “D” exam papers right along. You're sure he's that man to get worse, as an experiment. I didn’t do
going to do it. You would like to have him do it com- anything else. I told him I wanted him to get control
fortably. He got an “F” or a “D” in the past because of this and the way to do this is to be able to make
he fought hard against what he was doing. All right, it more severe.
now let him go along comfortably with what he's do- E: That's right.
ing. He's a good student. 1f he goes along comfortably H: 1 spent the whole time. I never once suggested it would
with what he's doing, he's going to write an “A” ex- get better, and the man progressively got better and
am. But as surely as he fights —so you give him the better.
task of writing a “D” exam, which he's been doing E: Well certainly. (Laughter)
right along. Then he doesn't have to fight against his H: Now, this is a point of view that is not common in psy-
symptom. chiatry.
H: Well, it has a little bit more to do with you than that, E: J know. Did you ever work with a wheelbarrow?
though, doesn't it? H: Yes.
E: What do you mean? E: You know how darn hard it is to push? Did you ever
H: I mean he comes to you for help in writing an “A” ex- drag it behind you? (Laughs) That's right.
am, and within that framework you encourage him to H: What's right?
write a “D” exam. Now this is a very peculiar situa- E: Sometimes you can push it ahead of you, and sometimes
tion for him to be in. you drag it behind you. Instead of trying to keep the
W: This means he not only can't fight the exam, he also load ahead of you toward the goal, you leave it behind
can hardly fight you except by doing better. you. But you get to the goal with it. 1 don't know if
E: Well, you see, I held out for him— he was a junior —that you include in the paper that illustration 1 gave about
the “A” exams could come next year. the calf. When I was a kid at home on the farm, one
H: But as soon as you see symptoms as a way one person blizzardy day, my dad was trying to haul a stubborn
handles another person, then if somebody comes to calf inside the barn with a halter. The calf was braced
handle you that way and you encourage him to behave with all four feet, and my dad was braced, and they
that way, he can’t handle you that way. were at a stalemate. 1 started to laugh at the funny
E: He what? sight. My dad said, “If you're so smart, you pull the
H: He can’t handle you that way anymore. He can't handle calf in.” So I grabbed the calf by the tail and tried to
you with symptoms if you're encouraging him to have pull it owt of the barn. (Laughter) You know what that
a symptom. calf did to me.
E: No, he can’t. (Laughter) W: Right on in.
H: 1 just wondered how much of your work you see that lv: Tt hauled me into the barn in a hurry. So we were all
way? I'll tell you what I did. I got experimenting with happy. That’s the way you handle patients, very of-
this once, and I took a guy who came to me for head- ten. As surely as the patient intensifies his headache,
aches. But it wasn’t headaches; it was pressure in the he unwittingly and unconsciously realizes, “I have too

[PAGE 143]

276 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


got control over this headache.” He says, “Making it
120 percent painful is too darn much, 115 percent is
enough, 110 percent is enough. Ninety-five is enough.
Tl settle for 85,” and down he goes. You don't even
have to tell him to diminish it.
CHAPTER 12
H: That's right.
E: All you've done is taught him to take control.

Brief Intervention

into a

Performance Problem


1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.


Hf: A man came to me for a difficulty speaking in public.
He gets very anxious when he has to speak. He's ar-
ranged his life so he has to speak all the time. He's
a curriculum director in a school system, and he's con-
stantly talking to groups. Now he can talk to a group
of school children without the least bit of difficulty.
If he talks to a group of parents, he has all this ex-
traordinary anxiety. Now what's the simple solution
for this?
E: (Looking in a file folder) August 24th, one hour; August
25th, two hours; August 26th, one hour. An exceed-
ingly talented concert pianist, a professor of music,
could play the piano incredibly, wonderfully, anywhere
except in a concert hall. An absolutely rigid .. . where
is that letter? When he came out, he had exactly four
hours that he could give me. He flew out and arrived
on the 24th, and he had to leave on the 26th. He
wanted to know what time I could give him — the four
hours.

201

[PAGE 144]

278 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Brief Intervention into a Performance Problem 279


For the first hour, you see my notes, utterly frag- ment, not an angular movement. Do you follow me so
mentary. The essential thing on the first day was this: far? All right. Then this matter of geometrical pro-
complacent cooperation only, for the trance. He closed gression. One learns a penny’s worth today, this week
his eyes when I told him to, he held still when I told or this month two cents’ worth, and so on.
him to, he levitated his hand when I told him to, and I told him that therapy was over with except for
it wasn’t levitation. He did everything, and I enjoyed the summary of the next hour on the 26th. In that
myself with the hour because I’ve got the note here: trance state he had to take that statement, and he had
“Actually capable of learning.” (Laughter) That sum- to place a meaning, a tremendous amount of mean-
marized it. ing, because his whole future was at stake. He was
In the two-hour session I described his trance of either going to give a public concert or his professor-
yesterday. As I talked about his trance of yesterday, ship at the college was going to be over. That’s that.
I really took it apart, his complacent activity. He He had his orders. They put up with him and his ex-
began wondering about that, and he went into a trance. cuses year after year, and by God, by Jesus, the Board
I got my hand levitation, I got the eyes closed; he of Regents has had enough of it. The professor is go-
didn’t even know they were closed, he was still visual- ing to give a public concert or else.
izing me as if his eyes were open, you see? So I went So the next day I put him in a trance, reviewed
all through that, and then I told him that I felt a musi- everything I’d said, and then delivered the punchline.
cian, above all others, should have fluidity in his music. “For years you have rigidly refused to play a concert
That music should be essentially a stream of melody, in the concert hall, and you know that music is fluid,
a flowing stream of sound, rhythmical and fluid. Never and that it should stream not only through and off
harsh and rigid. I hammered that home, which even the stage and through the concert hall, but the music
to you doesn't seem to have any meaning. should stream and flow in fluid fashion through the
Then I developed the question of learning processes, corridors, through the doorways, through the win-
how they are unconscious. How do you actually learn? dows. The artist is always a part of his music, and his
No matter what it is? You get the feel of it. You learn fluid movements of his hands. There's no room for
to type. You learn “a,” “s,” “d,” “f”; but you can't real- rigidities.”
ly type until you’ve got the feel of it. The feel of the Well, I got my letter. His public concert was a phe-
typewriter so when you sit down you feel right. There- nomenal success. The man went back, and 1 had one
fore, body attitudes should be free to fit into the fluid- of the most thrilling letters. He said he no longer had
ity of the music, and the hand movement on the key- to practice in that little studio room of his; he could
board should not be a straight up and down, or a go to the concert hall and practice there and play. His
horizontal. There should be rhythm in the hand move- students could come. And now I’ve got word from the
ments so the finger doesn't go from note “a” to note doctor who sent him here about the tremendous suc-
“b” by the process of lifting straight up from “a,” mov- coss of that long-awaited, and absolutely demanded,
ing straight horizontally to straight perpendicularly public concert. The man is brilliant, very very bril-
down to “b.” It should be a nice curve. A fluid move- lian.

[PAGE 145]

280 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Brief Intervention into a Performance Problem 281


H: Suppose you start over again and explain why this he could word it verbally. (Laughter) And how much
happened. better he understood, because I confessed I was tone
E: Well, his brilliance, his acuity, and my emphasis on the deaf.
fluidity of the music, and then pointing out that even W: So he was way ahead of you.
the hands should be fluid in their movements, that E: He was way, way ahead; but he had to sit there and
they are not angular movements. One does not do it listen. He had to elaborate, and elaborate, and elab-
this way, but he does it this way, with a curved move- orate. Now, don’t you know that ethnic custom that
ment, a fluid movement. No angles, no rigidities, noth- you find all over the world, where a stranger in a
ing stilted. country — he comes from a different country — you hapW: You got him very committed to this idea in places pen to knowa little bit about his country, so you very,
where he could accept it to start with. very courteously offer him the one insult of your culE: Yes. Where he had to accept it. Then that accusation. ture that will seem utmost courtesy to him.
He is a musician; he told me he was. He couldn't play H: Why do you do this?
in public. I have put that down as the most objec- E: You want to insult him, you see. So you offer him the
tionable of all things. Rigidity, angularity, lack of one thing in your culture that he can interpret as a
fluidity, absence of flow. In other words, I successful- courtesy. But which you know is an insult. You want
ly called his stage fright bad names. to insult him. But it’s your satisfaction in knowing
W: I can see that is what you did, but there is one thing that he’s insulted. You don’t care whether he discovers
that’s not clear—how you successfully called it bad it or not. Next week, when he discovers that he was
names. Because we've seen so many cases of some- insulted, it’s too late to feel bad about it, you see?
body calling a bad name unsuccessfully and producing W: This is like the native, who when asked certain ques-
the other result. tions, replied by giving the anthropologist a list of
E: But he didn’t know I was calling it a bad name. dirty words. This has happened more than once.
W: How’s that? E: Oh, you know the names of the many mountains and
E: Because at the end of the third hour, I said that I had rivers that are given in native language. The explorer
completed therapy. I waited until the fourth hour to says, “What's the name of that mountain?” The native
state that he was rigid. I had completed therapy, you guide says, “Stinking s.o.b. How would I know what
see. on earth you are talking about?” So the explorer says,
W: He couldn’t resist it because it was already all over. “Tell me again,” and he writes it down. You see, you
E: Yes. get Popocatapetal, or whatever that mountain is in
H: Um afraid that’s a little too tricky for me. Apparently Mexico, that you can’t pronounce.
you told him what he already knew, that music had H: Well, Milton, you have a way of presenting a case; you
to be fluid, and so on. did this, and the result was achieved here. When you're
E: Yes. I told him in a trance state where he had to listen pushed a little bit, then you say something more.
to me. And where he kept thinking how much better Now, obviously it was crucial that you make a point

[PAGE 146]

282 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Brief Intervention into a Performance Problem 283


that you were tone deaf so that he could be feeling room, Why do so many analytic patients stay year
how much better he could do this when you were giv- after year? Because they always do their therapy on
ing him this story. the couch, and they don’t take that couch home. They
E: That’s right. never take it to work. Therapy improvement is reH: But you didn’t say this the first time. Now, you say it stricted to the couch.
the second time. I wonder if you’re pusheda little fur- H: Do you think that part of this guy doing well in the con-
ther, what else is in there that is crucial? Now, why cert was a refutation of you, in some sense, or still a
all the business of fluidity? dealing with you, only outside the room now? Let's
E: Because he’s mentioned his stilted walk onto the plat- put it this way: Why did he do well at the concert?
form, his stilted movement is limiting. How it had Why didn’t he walk out there stilted as usual?
been going on year after year, and he was always E: He had to walk out there freely, fluidly.
forced to give the same weak excuses. H: He had to in relation to you, or because of you.
W: Then, when you talk to this musical expert about the E: The only way he could put me, a tone deaf person, in
necessity of the fluidity in music, he can't say, “no”; my place and keep me there was to prove conclusive-
the only way he can object to you is by going further ly to all the world the rightness of his elaboration of
by building it up much bigger. the fluidity of music.
E: He has to build it up, and build it up. And I am ignorant; W: Then in a sense he was proving that he knewa hell of
I’m tone deaf. Then I tell him therapy is completed. a lot more about fluidity than you do?
It’s completed with his enormous build-up. I’m still E: But he was in a trance, and he couldn't make mention
master of the situation because I will tell him when of it.
to come out of the trance. I'll give him a review, and W: I mean, when he got out there on the stage.
so the next day I hit him with the charge of rigidity E: When he got out there on the stage.

which has no place in music. H: That is, he had to write you a letter and tell you he did
H: Obviously, if you deal with this man in a particular way well?
in this room, he goes through some sort of a change E: Yes. Oh, there's no question at all about that. He had to.
which affects his life outside of this room. There is this W: He couldn't write that letter unless he did do well.
peculiar thing about therapy that you start with a pa- E: That's right.
tient who deals with you in a certain way. You man- H: Did you also expect him to write you after that?
age it so that he deals with you differently, and this E: Oh yes.
affects how he deals with others outside the room.
E: Yes. * * *

H: 1 wonder how much your assigning tasks is to get him
doing the same sort of thing outside that he’s doing F: Now that patient I mentioned yesterday, the pianist.
inside, or to extend this outside the room. Is that part I forgot to mention one important consideration, and
of the purpose in assigning tasks? you raised that question. He came for three days and
E: Yes. Because he’s got to take his therapy outside of the he told me so; therefore, he laid down the law to me,

[PAGE 147]

284 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Brief Intervention into a Performance Problem 285


most emphatically. He placed me under horrible re- H: But I would think, when you say that any techniques
strictions. I saw him the first day, then I saw him for to achieve the goal, when it's a goal of this sort, that
two hours the second day. At the termination of the any procedure you choose would have to be one in
two hours on the second day, knowing he was com- which you take charge.
ing back just one more hour, I said, “Therapy is ter- E: Yes, but not because it's personal.
minated.” Do you see? H: No, it's not personal.
H. He said three days and you said two? E: It's not a personal, emotional need on my part. It's a
E: And I said two. Even though he was coming back, just need for me to take charge to achieve that goal.
for a review. Now you can call that, incorrectly, a com- H: Well, I think it’s in the nature of psychotherapy, not
petitiveness or, what is that? One-upness? a personal need, except insofar that therapists have
H: One-upmanship. these needs.
E: One-upmanship, but it really isn’t. W: With this pianist, I wonder what reason did he give
H: Well, what is it really? when he came that he could not give these recitals?
E: It's a recognition of exactly how you have to handle the In other words, you shifted things around so that if
situation. It’s not a personal struggle. It’s the need he does not give the recital, this is rigidity. 1 was
to meet that situation so that it will develop adequate- wondering what his explanation was originally?
ly. You're using the same technique as in... E: His original explanation was that his parents set out
H: One-upmanship. to make him a famous musician when he was a little
E: One-upmanship. It’s the same technique. child, because of his unusual talent for music. They
H: It is. bossed him in everything. Supervision had been very,
E: But it isn’t for the purpose of putting the man up; it’s very rigid, and he had rebelled —not against the tal-
for the purpose of putting the goal up. He came for ent — but against his parents. And they weren't quite
therapy, let’s really put that goal up. Because I real- certain if they wanted him to be a pianist but...
ly don’t need to enter into competition with him. It’s W: His parents were rigid.
unnecessary. But the thing I want is therapy; the E: Yes. But his choice was the piano. While they liked
thing he wants is therapy. We've got a common goal, several other instruments, he preferred the piano. But
and you should be willing to use any technique to his parents had a preference for the violin. So in his
achieve that end. rebellion, he just rejected personally, for himself, all
H: Well, now that's putting it in the nicest of all possible other instruments. He made his selection of the piano
ways. But I’m not sure any technique will achieve that because he felt that it was a better instrument. In his
goal besides some kind of one-upmanship. teachings he teaches a lot of instruments. He can play
E: Yes. You're not certain that other methods will achieve the violin and various instruments. But his real sat-
the goal? isfaction is the piano. It’s a personal thing.
H: That's right. H: He also rejected public performances. What did he
ly: Yhal's right. But you should be aware of this technique, describe as his difficulty in giving a public perform-
that Lechnique, this procedure, that procedure. ance?

[PAGE 148]

286 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Brief Intervention into a Performance Problem 287


E: That he was so rigid — so stilted, I mean. So stilted and your time where you have no contact with people be-
so hollow and so stagestruck. cause it’s externally forbidden? Go down to the library
H: You shifted it to “rigid” after making rigid an unfor- and sit there and waste your time. There’s silence in
tunate thing for a musician? the library.”
E: Yes. Because it didn’t fit in with fluid music. Now, the What did Tom do? He was a curious person. He was
therapy was primarily oriented to the future, without intellectually hungry. He was socially hungry. He just
any real analysis, or real consideration, of the dynam- couldn’t stand it to sit there in the library just star-
ics of the past. Over and over again you have that sort ing, so he idled away his time picking up magazines.
of thing. Got to reading an article on speleology. Someone hapH: Now, you always tell a patient to do something. What pened to notice what he was reading. “Oh, are you in-
did you tell him to do? The way you described him, terested in that?” I don’t know how many caves Tom
all you had him do was listen to you. has explored. And he also took up skiing. Because he
E: Well, you see, he had to do a lot of thinking in his un- went, what do you call it, spelunking. In the group
conscious mind about the meaning of fluidity. About was someone who also did skiing. Tom turned out to
flowing. I forced him into that by confessing my own be an enthusiastic spelunker. (Laughter) The other
tone deafness and my own absolute ignorance of mu- spelunker was also a skier and took Tom up to Flag-
sic. My inability to even touch a piano key. He had to staff for skiing.
do a lot of thinking; and yet I described this matter The world changed. That social thing of an unsocial
of angular movement, with his fingers and hands over atmosphere of the library. Silence. Everybody’s there
the keyboard. I forced him into an analysis of that. for reading books; that’s not a place to make friend-
What fluidity there was. So he was doing something. ships. But when you stop to think about it, it’s a very
H: The doing was thinking? nice place to meet people and to form friendships.
E: The doing was thinking. Because sometimes you assign Some of my timid, inhibited patients who can’t make
a task with the patient knowing it’s an assignment, friends, I send them down to the library. It’s so nice
and sometimes you assign a task without the patient to see someone else read something you're interested
knowing it’s being assigned. But you know that there’s in. While my patients can’t make the advances, I know
no way for them to escape doing it. that other people can.
H: You've managed to require it of them. IH: You seem to assume that if you get somebody out inE: You’re required it of them. I can think of Tom, who said, to the world at all, somebody is going to make con-
“I just can’t find anything of interest. I just sit in my tact with them.
room and waste time. The days go by, and they’re so E: Well, isn’t that true?
long and dreary and depressing, and I do nothing. I
just waste my time.” I asked him, “Well, do you have
to waste time sitting in your room? Can’t you waste
time elsewhere? You're lonesome, you're miserable,
you have no contact with people. Why can’t you waste

[PAGE 149]

APPENDICES


Except for the recordings of him talking with groups in
his old age, there are few interviews extant of Dr. Erickson
doing therapy with patients. The following are two interviews. The first one is a demonstration interview. The second was an interview in his office where he introduced me
to a patient and talked with him about his therapy.


“AD

[PAGE 150]

INTERVIEW 1


A Depressed Man


The demonstration interview occurred in 1963 in an
Eastern city. A group of therapists brought to him cases
they were having difficulty with, and he talked with the
patients in front of the small group. The therapist involved
is listed here as Therapist 1, because at this time I do not
recall the name.


Therapist 1: The man I will bring in is a Ph.D. an engineer.
I’m not sure whether he still is, but at least until re-
cently he has been the president and organizer of a
firm. He's 32 years old, pretty striking appearance
he’s about 6'8” tall and a movie star appearance. He's
married to a second wife who is quite striking in ap-
pearance too, and also very tall. I’ve been seeing them
as a couple, sometimes seeing them together and quite
often seeing the two of them separately.
E: And her education?
T: She has an M.A. in psychology. He's an only child, and
just recently I saw his parents with him in an attempt
to try and get things going. This is a person who
hasn't responded to analysis. He was in analysis for
four years before I saw him. I’ve been seeing him and
his wife for about a year. He's had ups and downs,
sometimes feeling quite elated and expansive, particu-
larly when things were going well early in the busi-


201

[PAGE 151]

A Depressed Man 293
292 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


ness, when he was first organizing the thing and get- which is, at this point, pretty much beyond him, I
ting things going. During these periods he tended to think, although they can barely scrape by. Once they

overextend himself and do too much, take over too moved into the house he got quite depressed, just
much control, and then feel that he was stuck with crashed out almost as suddenly as he went up. He's
a lot of responsibility after he did it. When he feels been pretty much this same way for about eight or
expansive he evidently gets bound up in a lot of power nine months now.

struggles with other people in the business, with his During this, when he’s depressed, he’s really impos-

wife, and concerned about control over the least lit- sible in therapy, and elsewhere too, I guess. He keeps

tle issue. just saying the same kind of thing over and over again
WhenI first saw him he had been sort of catapulted about how he’s so depressed that he can’t make any
into a manic period after having seen Don Jackson decisions and he feels that life holds nothing for him.
on a consultation basis. He had been sort of discour- He particularly holds on to the idea that there’s some-

aged about his analysis, and the analyst suggested thing wrong with his thinking. He can’t concentrate,
that he go see Don Jackson. Don had referred him to he can’t remember things at all; there’s something

me. Well, you know, just one visit with Don just shot wrong with his memory. He almost talks about it as

him sky high. He was really feeling good. He felt that if it’s an organic defect of some kind. He also has a
here somebody had listened to him for a change and tendency to find fault with everything. He’s discour-
an important person had validated his opinion. aged about therapy, he feels he’s lost confidence in me,
He came to.see me. The wife was eager to get start- discouraged about his marriage, about himself and
ed in some sort of marital therapy. She’s a very con- the business. Just anything you can think of. The
trolling person. I think underneath she is very inse- slightest detail he can just pick apart. Any sugges-

cure and dependent, but she really tests everybody, tion you make to him he can resist in some way. He'll
especially men, to the limit. She attacks him on the say he wants to do something, and then, if you agree
slightest pretext and just tears him to ribbons. When to do it, he says he’s changed his mind and resists it.
he gets depressed she'll call him a wet noodle, a seven- E: Let's see him now.
foot noodle, and just really devastate him. She's turned T: Okay. (Patient enters) This is Dr. Erickson over here
on me a time or two in therapy, and she really can be at the end of the table.
pretty melting in the way she handles you. : How do you do. Sit down here, please. This gentleman
This is her first marriage, and she didn’t marry until wants me to interview you.
she was about 29, I think. They’ve been married about Hmmm.
two years. When she met him, she felt that he was : You're a college grad.
sort of a godlike figure, a superman, and really the : Right.
ideal. : And an engineer.
Well, he felt pretty good for a couple of months, and : That is correct.
during this time he was expanding more and more, : You get depressed?
and one thing he did was to buy an expensive house : Very much so.

[PAGE 152]

294 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Depressed Man 295


E: Mmmm.
H: Right eyed.
P: It’s my specialty.
P: Well, okay, I started off that way intentionally.
E: And in your depression you feel you don’t want very
E: Mmmm. Will you put your hands up like this over your
much, and you're incapable of a lot of things?
head and clasp them and bring them down tightly.
P: That’s right.
P: Tightly, okay.
E: Yes. You're a college graduate.
E: Are you right or left thumbed?
P: Right.
P: Well, I guess I’m right thumbed.
E: Are you right or left handed?
E: Look. I’m right thumbed, and the dominant thumb is
P: Um right handed.
on top.
E: And you know that there's two sides to your body?
P: Okay, I guess.
P: Right.
E: How many years has your body known that, and you
E: Do you think you know them both?
didn’t know it, and you went through college? Your
P: Well, I think I can distinguish them. I can distinguish
hands just went along with you to college.
my right leg from my left leg.
P: Yeah.
E: Are you right or left footed?
E: It’s your brain that went to college, but your hand:
P: I’ve never thought about that.
learned more about right and left thumbness (han you
E: Well, are you right or left eyed?
did.
P: Oh, I guess I’m right eyed. I choose the right eye if I
P: Uh buh.
want to do something with one eye.
E: Do you suppose there's a lot of other things about. your
E: How would you find out if you’re right or left eyed?
self you don’t know?
You're an engineer.
P: Very likely. Things about my body, and probably some
P: Well, I suppose if I were trying to see something in the
positive things about my mind that I don’t know.
distance, or trying to study something in detail, and
E: And positive things about your functioning.
it had to be done with one eye, I would choose one or
P: Yes.
the other.
E: Do you suppose you know those things about function
E: Yowd choose one or the other.
ing in your depressed states?
P: Experiment.
P: Well, okay, I’m confused by your question.
E: Do you know Jay Haley?
E: Well, you're left thumbed no matter how depressed you
P: No.
are. Isn't that right?
E: He's the gentleman there with the smile. Keep both eyes
P: All right, yes.
open. Now take this watch in your hand and hold it
E: No matter how depressed you are, you're left thumbed.
like this, or like this, and look at Jay Haley through
Your body knows that all the time. Is a function
it (the circle of the band).
of the body. It’s a function of the nerve cells in your
P: Through—I’m sorry, I didn’t follow you, through one brain. Now, no matter how depressed you are, you'll
eye first? always be left, thumbed, and you can’t lose that learnE: Through one eye. With both open. Which is he using ing, or that ability, or that function, in the left thumb.
Jay, right or left eye? P: Mmmm hinmin.

[PAGE 153]

296 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Depressed Man 297


E: Now a friend of mine is making a study of the later- E: Yes, but it's broken at the middle. And so he never is
ality of the body. The right and left sidedness of the really, fully coordinated. It's like breaking step when
body. He's utterly fascinated. Eventually football you're marching. There's that awkward pause when
coaches are going to make use of it, because there's you break step. That's why he doesn't make a good
nothing more horrible than 6'6” of brawn and brain football player. Now, when you get depressed, what
and agility and speed, quick thinking, and right eyed, happens to you?
and right shouldered, and right handed, and right P: Well, I’m not good for much of anything. I seem to spe-
legged, and left hipped. Because he's a tragedy for the cialize in dwelling on mistakes I’ve made, or present
coach, inadequacies. Or the current vogue with me seems to
: Most of the strength is on one side, but there... be dwelling on what would have happened if when I
: Most of the dominance. graduated from college I'd taken a job and had to take
Yes. responsibility, instead of...
So: Because you can't make a man into a good football E: What do you mean, “inadequacies”?
player if he's right legged and right footed and right P: Well, I’m presently aware that when I try to grasp an in-
handed and right armed and right shouldered and volved concept, or a complicated concept, well enough
right eyed and left hipped. to understand it, that either 1 don't have the capabiliP: Would it be better if he were right hipped also? ty, or I don't want to have the capability. 1 have got
E: Tf he’s dominantly right or left sided, yes. In football, some kind of a block. And then I think back to the
which requires the body itself functioning as a totali- fact that in undergraduate engineering courses, and
ty. But in certain minor things, such as clasping one’s a good many graduate courses, 1 did well. 1 could
hands... there's a tremendous number of things. grasp moderately complex concepts. So, that's an inP: Well, would you like me to ask you questions? adequacy. Then the fact that 1 don't stand up to peoE: Mmmm hmmm. ple enough, to assert myself, and 1 seem to be afraid
P: Well, left hipped would mean that a man's left hip is to express howI feel. I have a wife who is very good
stronger than his right hip? at expressing how she feels.
E: No, that when he should be using his right hip, he's go- E: Is she?
ing to be using his left hip. P: Yes. Well, okay.
P: Okay, I guess. E: What's “okay”?
E: And in interference, or running the field, when he should P: Well, “okay” means, you said, “Is she?” and perhaps if
be using his right hip to knock the other guy out of his one goes beneath the surface, you see that when she's
pathway, he uses his left hip. And he misses. (Laughs) angry, she's really saying she's hurt. So maybe I'm
And the tackle is good for the opposing team. You suspicious.
see?
E: Where do you want to look, on the surface or underP: Well, the mental picture I get is somebody running in- neath? As an engineer, if I wanted to know tensile
Lo somebody with his left hip out, and I guess what's strength of a steel beam, I’d want to know about the
going on is that you're saying that most of the coor-
erystalization within the steel beam.
dination is in the right side of his body. P: Okay.

[PAGE 154]

298 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Depressed Man 299


E: Isn't that right? E: What was the name of that family? I’ve given you six
P: That's true. numbers, haven't 1?
E: So why would I bother to look at the outside to see if P: Yes, One Two and Three, Thirteen, Seventeen and Nine-
it were smoothly polished? teen.
P: Well, you might start with the outside, and you can tell E: What are those numbers?
something about the material from an examination P: Well, they're prime numbers.
of the surface. E: Well, certainly.
E: Yes, you might. But you never stop there, do you? P: Yeah.
P: That's true. E: That's right. They're prime numbers. You knew that all
E: 1 think so. Let's see, inadequacy or incompleteness of the time. Were you inadequate to answer that ques-
functioning; you said inadequacy. tion, or did you know about prime numbers all the
P: Yes.
time?
E: Is it inadequacy? Or incompleteness? I think you're ade- P: Well, all right, I know about prime numbers.
quate to walk across this room, but I know you'd walk E: That's right, but you couldn't answer the question.
incompletely across it. P: Yeah.
P: Yes.
E: Why? Because I planted an even number into it.
E: Now, TU give you a nice little question. It sounds like P: You did?
a riddle, and it can be used as a riddle. But 1 know E: One, two, three. And that even number throws anybody
you know the answer. and everybody off.
P: Hmmm. P: Well, you went one, two, three. I thought an obvious
E: There's a family of nine children, and the first one is
extension of this is...
Ps!


named One. The second one is named Two. The third E: Is a sequence of counting?
one is named Three. What are the last three names? P: That's right. This is one...
P: Well, possibly Seven, Hight, and Nine. You said a family E: I said it was a family. Not a sequence.
of nine children. P: Yeah.
Í ‘. Mmmm hmmm. And I said that the first three were
E: And you know the difference between a sequence and
bn


named
— One, Two, Three. Now what are the last three
a family.
named? I’m not mentioning the middle three. It must P: Is there anything that rules out a family being a se-
be for some curious reason. So what’s the last three quence?
names? I had a friend of mine working on that for a
E: No, there isn't. But I pointed out that I had deliberately
couple of weeks. omitted the three intervening numbers.
P: Well, through inadequacy or incompleteness I stop at P: Yeah.
the obvious at this point. E: So I said it isn't a sequence, it’s the family.
I : Is it inadequacy when the last three were named Thir-
P: Oh, all right. Okay, I’m confused, and I’m in a state that
nn


teen, Seventeen, and Nineteen? What was the name
I’m frequently in, which is that I feel there is some-
of the family?
thing I don't understand.
P: The last name?
lv: That's right.

[PAGE 155]

300 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Depressed Man 301


P: But it’s not going to do me any good to try and under- P: 1 feel a little confused.
stand it. Because there’s something in me that doesn’t E: That's right.
want to learn, and whenI get in this state, one of the P: And I, okay, all right. Some of what you were saying,
things that goes on in my depression is I look long- I wasn't listening to. Just the last 30 seconds or so,
ingly back to being a student, or an engineer in earlier I was, I guess, trying to piece together what you said
days, when I wanted to know something and I’d go before.
to somebody and ask. My mind cooperated in the pro- E: Is anything wrong with that?
cess of understanding, and then I took the under- P: Well, it's a crippling pattern in that a lot of things go
standing and went and did something. on that — around me that it would be to my advantage
E: Fine, and you described exactly what I wanted you to. to be attentive to, and to recall, remember.
No matter how depressed you are, your mind can take E: Well, there's a deuce of a lot of things going on all the
the backward trail. Back to those days in college. time, but are you going to give your attention to all
P: Yeah? of those things or to selected things?
E: Why don’t you turn around and back up into the future? P: All right, to selected things.
P: Well, it would be a good thing to do. For some reason E: That's right. How’s your crying feeling?
I feel a little bit like crying now. It’s the first time I’ve P: Oh, it's going away.
felt that way in a long time, but anyway... E: How far?
E: Isn't that a delightful experience —to suddenly come to P: Oh, you can probably bring it back.
that, for the first time in a long period of time? E: What other things could 1 bring back?
P: Yeah. P: Oh, possibly a conviction that Pl... that I will succeed.
E: Is it? You can change, can't you? E: How soon should I do that? Right now, today, tomorP: Yeah. Okay. There’s some part of me that’s violently row, next week, next month? I don’t see there is very
protesting and saying 1 won't change or, you know. much of a hurry about it. Do you?
I don’t know. I visualize my messy office and all the P: No.
problems at work that I feel I can’t cope with. E: What do you need to see? That’s another confusing
E: Well, it’s much easier to visualize your office than it question.
would be something that’s really painful, isn’t it? P: Mmmm hmmm.
P: That’s true. E: All you need to see is the fact that you can look forward
E: Mmmm hmmm. Therefore, in the matter of therapy, with confidence. Not all the time, for heaven’s sakes,
well, why stop at visualizing your messy office? I think no. I think you're entitled to what Longfellow said,
that you ought to be awfully curious when I say to “Some days are dark and dreary, and into each life
you, “Turn around and back into the future.” Then some rain must fall.”
you don't have to look at the thing you're afraid of. P: Mmmm hmmm.
Until you've backed far enough into the future so that E: I think you ought to look forward to those. But I think
it’s ahead of you. But actually then, in reality, behind you'd better also look forward to the sunny days too.
you. Even though it’s ahead of you, because you're P: Okay.
backing up. Can you get any more confused? E: How afraid are you of shedding tears?

[PAGE 156]

302 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Depressed Man 303


P: Not afraid of it. I think I did too much of it when I was today: hot dog or steak, cheap candy or bittersweet
younger. chocolate?
E: You mean you're caught up on it? Had more than your P: I don’t think I’m very analytical. I think I feel out of
share? step with life.
P: No, I think I have turned against what I was, which was E: Mmmm. You feel out of step with life.
somebody who liked to emote, and in a way 1 blame P: Yeah. People my age are having families and are plugged
myself and blame my wife. I guess they're emotional in on their jobs. I’m sort of a quivering bundle of fear,
patterns, and things that I went through that once and fairly convinced that I don’t have what it takes
brought me satisfaction, that I now feel I mustn’t do, to be a parent. That I don’t have enough self-respect,
or that are not valid. you know.
E: Well, you know, many children can eat that cheap glu- E: How much does it take to be a parent?
cose candy with starry-eyed looks. P: Well, I think you have to like yourself enough that
P: Yeah. you're tolerant of other people. And I think you have
E: I don't want it. to have some principles that you believe in, that you
P: But you don't want any? can stick to and not easily be talked out of. There has
E: No, I’m too old to eat it. to be something consistent that you believe in.
P: Yeah, yeah. E: Well, on the whole 1 would say that, in many, many
E: And I can think of the time at Christmas, when my ways, you are far superior to the feeble-minded citizen
grown-up sons came to visit me. I was out in the kitch- who's happily married, has an insecure job, and hap-
en preparing steaks. And a seven- or eight-year-old py kids.
boy came up and said, “What are we going to have for P: Yeah?
dinner tonight?” I said, “steak,” and he said, “Oh, can’t E: By the way, what makes you think you're inadequate?
we have hot dogs?” The older boy said, “Same old P: Well, I can’t look to very many jobs that I’ve done where
story, isn't it, Dad?” Because they remember when I didn’t lean on other people for help, or 1...
they used to want hot dogs, when mother and I ate E: Or did you give them the privilege of being supportive?
steak. P: All right, I did that.
P: Mmmm hmmm. E: How would this world get along without the people we
E: But now they’ve learned to look back with pleasure and lean on? This is a community world, you know.
satisfaction upon those emotional wants of the past, P: Mmmm hmmm.
and enjoy today’s steak. E: And how willing are you to lean on your strengths?
P: Well, okay. P: Well, I don’t know. I guess I’m not very willing. What
E: When you first married your wife, you wanted a certain you describe, at one time was very...
satisfaction, but that was three years ago, or there- E: I think fair play is an important thing.
abouts. And when she married you, she wanted cer- P: Fair play? Okay.
tain emotional satisfactions. That was three years E: You should focus on your weaknesses a certain amount,
ago. Now I wonder how analytic you are in your think- and your strengths a certain amount.
ing about who you are today and what your tastes are P: Yeah.

[PAGE 157]

304 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
A Depressed Man 305

E: If your wife has faults, for heaven’s sake, recognize
think of a friend of mine. She said, “I want to get in-
them. If she has virtues, for heaven’s sake, recognize
to the California Symphony Orchestra. I play a violin
them. She'll have superiorities and inferiorities. Well,
beautifully. 'm going to have an awful lot of competi-
you're a good engineer; you ought to be able to recog-
tion, I’m going to play a viola. I learned to play this
nize all manner of things, isn’t that right?
as well as I do a violin.” She auditioned for the CaliforP: Yeah, if you're a good engineer, and I don't feel I am.
nia Youth Symphony and got in.
E: Well, if you’re not a good engineer, are you a fair engi-
P: Very good.
neer?
E: Yes. And she is going to avoid playing the violin. She
P: Well, I guess I feel that I’m a bizarre engineer, that there
wants to be in that symphony orchestra. Your bizarre-
are some important things I’ve been able to do, and
ness can bring about certain desirable results. I don’t
some things that I haven’t done. To get ideas, for
think you can forget the confusions I’ve inflicted on
novel ideas, I’ve done pretty well. But to pursue in de-
you — because you cannot keep them in mind without
tail an analysis of something to understand why it
the need to drop one and go to another. To drop that
doesn’t work, or to be thorough in the design of some-
to go to another. And to drop that and go to another.
thing, this is something I have difficulty doing, and
P: So youre saying you don't think Tl forget these confu-
in recent times have resisted doing.
sions.
ly: Is that wrong?
E: You'll go from one to another to another to another.
P: Well, it’s wrong in the sense that it’s either being unable
Now suppose I would give you confusing directions
to do something or refusing to do something that peo-
in how to go to Chicago. If you definitely wanted to
ple are counting on me to do. If I don't do, I’m not pull-
go to Chicago, I could explain how you go from San
ing my share of the load.
Francisco to Tokyo, to London, to New York. I can
lv: 1 know that the first violinist is an excellent musician.
explain to you how you go from San Francisco to
Would you trust him with a bassoon?
Phoenix to El Paso to Dallas to Forth Worth. And exP: Probably not.
plain to you how you would go from San Francisco
lv: No. Would a good violinist want to be trusted with a
to Portland to Seattle to St. Paul to Chicago. And as
bassoon?
surely as you start going from one confusion to anP: Okay, probably not.
other, somehow or another you’re going to wind up
17: Should he ever desire that? You say you're bizarre, and
at Oklahoma City. (Laughs)
good in certain ways; for heaven’s sakes, what more
P: At the right point?
do you want? The bizarre musician plays the bassoon
E: At the right place.
in the orchestra. Because it takes a special type of per-
P: Yeah?
sonality to play a bassoon. I think the bassoon adds
E: And why should you be afraid of which route you take?
great timbre to the orchestra. So does the first vio-
Now Toyko, London and Paris, Madrid, Canary Is-
linist. Violinists are a dime a dozen...
lands, Miami, Florida might be an awfully confusing
P: The violinists are what?
way of getting from San Francisco to Chicago. It
le: Violinists are a dime a dozen in the musical world. I
ought to be delightful.

[PAGE 158]

306 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Depressed Man 307


P: Mmmm hmmm. E: You know, it’s been a pleasure for me.
E: If you want to go by way of Anchorage, London, Buenos P: Well, thank you.
Aires, that ought to be delightful too. E: And I’m interested to see what you do about these alterP: Mmmm hmmm. native routes.

E: I wonder what you'll pick up on the way, jumping from P: Okay. So am I.

one confusion to another? E: And you know what? What color kleenex do you like
P: Well... (Pause) best?
E: And what are the particular values in each depression P: Oh, I guess pink.

that you have? Because I suspect you have the mis- E: Pink? When you feel like crying, are you going to use
taken idea that depression is wrong. pink or white for this?
P: Well, when I’m depressed I’m, I think, less productive. P: Well, I'll probably ...
E: Mmmm hmmm. And when you get the rear wheels of E: You know, at Christmastime I always furnish my pa-
your car caught in a ditch, and you can’t go ahead in tients with green kleenex. I tell them to cry in the
first gear or second gear, third gear, well, I think it’s Christmas spirit. (Laughs)
awfully nice to shift into reverse, and then into first, Q1: Okay. (Patient exits)
and reverse, and first, and reverse, and first, and rock
* * *
yourself out of the ditch.
P: Mmmm hmmm.
H: That was a rapid half hour.
E: And I think you ought to enjoy it and really rock your-
self out of it. And not regret going into reverse. You've E: The manuevering of him. What kind of personal con-
tact did I make with him?
learned an awful lot about driving, handling a car.
T: Confusional? Confusional coach. (Laughs)
P: Mmmm hmmm.
E: Mmmm hmmm. And what kind of kleenex will he have
E: When I teach my kids to drive a car, I deliberately do
that. Tell them to get out of the ditch. When they around the house at Christmastime? (Laughter)
T: So one of the things was to take away, in a sense, the
catch on to the fact that's further into the ditch, then
gain of his—I mean, he says, “It's my specialty, you
they'll really learn something about driving the car.
know, the depression is,” as though there’s almost a
P: Okay, so Pm in a ditch, and you want me to be willing
positive value in it. So this is one of the things that
to back up to get out.
E: Get another head start.
you were doing, sort of redefining depression.
P: Okay. Well, what's backing up for me? Going back to E: It’s a ditch. You can get in a ditch. How do you get out

school? Or taking simpler tasks, or ...? of a ditch? You work in the ditch. But it isn’t threatenE: You can examine into your own feelings, your own ing. My 18-year-old son had a very vital experience
the other night. He was in a dark street, and two hood-
thoughts, your own attitudes, your own self-defined
lums came toward him. He recognized them as hood-
disappointments. I think the next person is coming
lums. They said, “Buddy, can you loan us a dime?”
Lo pick me up at this hour.
T: That's right. They wanted to see that automatic movement of his

[PAGE 159]

308 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Depressed Man 309


hand toward his pocket. My son knew he was in a It’s a confusion technique where you ask the patient,
tight spot. Why not put the hoodlums in a tight spot? in some way, to get uncertain and confused in his
What do you do to put somebody in a tight spot? mind so that he’s very, very pleased to accept some
Robert looked straight ahead and kept on walking. reasonably intelligent reply to a statement made by
The two hoodlums kept looking at him. “What in the him and replace that doggone annoying question. But
hell was that?” (Laughter) Robert came home and you've only built up a situation in which he’s literal-
said, “You know, I was a block away and they were ly, unwittingly begging you to say something he may
still standing looking at me.” (Laughter) It’s such a understand. Well, that’s the situation you want your
simple procedure. What could he do? Well, let’s do patient in. He comes to you for therapy, and he should
something that nobody on earth would ever expect. be open to the idea of receiving something from you.
Now this man, I wouldn’t attempt to hypnotize him So you have him set the pace. And after I watched
under any circumstances. that engineer walk in here and sit down, I thought,
T: One thing I forgot to mention was that he almost falls “All right, now let’s create a situation wherein he’s go-
into a trance by himself in therapy. ing to be very glad to hear something intelligent from
E: Not today. me.” And he did take a great deal of pleasure in the
1’: He'll sometimes get very sleepy, and if you say, “Well, prime numbers.
don’t fight it, just relax,” he just goes over and starts T: He called me a few hours later and wanted to know if
having all sorts of hypnogogic imagery, and this sort he could come back today. (Laughter)
of thing. Why wouldn’t you hypnotize him? E: What did I do when I used that prime number thing?
I; : That guy was too much on the alert, watching me.
By


When did he first learn prime numbers? That simple
T: You meant that more today, but you might after a num- little thing reminded him and vivified for him the rel-
ber of sessions. atively remote, remote past. I opened wide the possiI 7: Maybe next time, yes.
a
bility of getting from him, easily and readily, grade
school memories, and I never mentioned grade school.
* * *
I wouldn't have needed to mention grade school; prime
numbers were all that was needed. It seemed to be
(The next day) such a silly little wisecrack on my part, a foolish lit-
tle riddle, but an amusing thing. Then I pointed out
17: Now that engineer. When I asked him that ridiculous that he was justified in not being able to answer be-
question about the nine children named One, Two, cause of that confusing thing, an even number. One,
and Three, and the names of the last three. Well, you two, three. Two odd and one even, and that directed
could really struggle with that kind of question. But his thinking into two categories about numbers, odd
you know the thinking that’s all going on in his mind. and even. And took it far, far away from such a thing
And while he was trying to solve that question, how as prime numbers.
much attention was he giving you, or you, or you? Now there are innumerable techniques. They’re all
Very little. Because that was an intriguing question. essentially the same thing. The clenched fist tech-

[PAGE 160]

310 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


nique. If you’re right handed, that’s really your good
hand. Your good hand writes and your good hand
feeds your face. His good hand shakes hands and, oh,
any number of things; and therefore a state of tension
INTERVIEW 2
means a bad thing. You know it, and I know it; and
how do you get a state of tension? And that’s unpleas-
ant, horribly unpleasant. You’d much rather have the A Phantom
relaxation of the good hand. What have you taught
him? The clenched fist technique brings on tension,
and you yourself relieve it. So, if you want to, you can Limb Pain
associate that clenched fist tension with any unhap-
py thing you want to, and you can associate the nice
and good feelings with the goodness of your right
hand. What happens? The tension disappears. But In 1968, when Dr. Erickson was older and more limited
you've asked him to associate the tension of the physically, he allowed me to sit in on an interview witha
thoughts of his mother-in-law with this (clenched fist), patient who was quite old and, like Erickson, had export
and the goodness of getting along in life and facing enced a great deal of pain. Before the man came in, Dr.
reality and enjoying life with a nice, comfortable relax- Erickson described the problem as one of a severe pain in
ation over here. The conditioning process that even a “phantom” limb, an arm that the man still fell. was nero:
dogs can learn in the laboratory. Well, I’ve used up his lower chest in a cast. The man was 72 years old and
my three-quarters of an hour. had beena floor layer all his life, so he had other aches und
pains as a residue of that work. Dr. Erickson was interest,
ed in the man’s awareness of his other physical difficulties
as the phantom limb pain disappeared.
The patient arrived in Dr. Erickson’s small office.

E: You haven't met Mr. Haley, have you?
H: How do you do.
P: How do you do, sir.
E: He's the one who wrote this book.
P: 1 was very much interested in the piece you put here
on the front. I don't know anything about, Lhe wril-
ings, but “a unique approach of psychotherapy” that.
is a unique approach.
IH: I would agroe. (Laughs)
P: 1 think that the first day that, | came here, when Dr.

All

[PAGE 161]

312 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
A Phantom Limb Pain 313

Erickson started to talk to me, he gave me some con-
P: Yes it is. I’ve had...
fidence because he was confident he could do some-
E: Now, today you mentioned the rectal difficulties. Now
thing for me. And IJ have confidence in him. I think
there are some other things that came from working
between us we make a good pair, don't we Doctor?
in that position.
E: Well, in therapy. (Laughs)
P: Yes, I had tremendous back trouble over the years.
We're getting along better anyway.
E: That's right.
: What's happened since yesterday?
P: And I've had sciatic nerve trouble. I was in traction one
: I think I’ve been very comfortable, all day yesterday.
time 41 days from it.
I’ve got a little pain this morning, but I kind of got
E: Yes.
rid of it.
P: In fact, in 53 years It about wore me out all over.
E: What about your restless legs?
P: Beg your pardon?
(Dr. Erickson asked him to stand up and demonE: What about your restless legs?
strate for me howa floor layer works and the difP: Oh my. We won't mention that.
ficult physical effort involved. He did so, describE: Why?
ing the work in some detail.)
P: Well, you know, Doctor, it isn't my legs so much, it's
my rectal area. It is just really something. It's just
P: Ordinarily, they say, a man in that business only lasts
like my leg; it jitters and shakes too.
about 15 years, but my legs really held together 37
i: Well, I know that. (Laughs)
years in a row, and about 16 years before that, just
P: Of course, my foot doesn’t.
off and on, not constant. All together, pretty near 53
lv: Why didn’t you mention that yesterday?
years.
P: T never thought of it. I just, I was thinking about my
E: And now you've had freedom from pain today, or some
leg more than anything, but my leg doesn’t bother me
pain.
much until late in the evening. Seems like maybe
P: T have a little, not very much. If it never got any worse
when I get a little tired or something.
than this, 1 wouldn't complain.
lv: Allright. You have several other things you haven't yet
E: What about... you do know you'll trip again? Don't
mentioned to me.
you?
P: Since yesterday?
P: Pardon?
17: No. Concerning the results of your wood laying, your
E: You do know that you will fall down again?
floor laying.
P: Oh yes, I do. I know that, Doctor.
P: Oh, the results of it.
E: But you'll pick yourself up faster.
iv: Well, restless legs came from that.
P: Yes.
P: Ob, yes.
E: And you wont fall down quite so hard.
17: The cramps.
P: Maybe not quite so often.
P: Yes, the cramps that...
fy; (Laughs) That’s right. And are there any particular
a
Ps : And the muscle losses.
changes in the pain today?

[PAGE 162]

A Phantom Limb Pain 315
314 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

P: Not too many, about 12 or 13, something like that. You
P: No. Just normal. You mean in the arm itself? Where the
should have seen me when I got here.
arm should be, mostly just below the elbow, and not
E: That's what he's interested in knowing.
just from here down to my hand. Just to the edge of
H: How were you when you got here?
my fingers. But my shoulder isn’t hurting today.
P: Pardon?
E: Now, do you want any suggestion from me today about
H: How were you when you got here?
your pain?
P: I was just pretty near out of my mind. I don't know how
P: No. I think I’m getting along pretty good.
much you know about this thing, this pain, but there's
E: 1 think so too. All right. Give me an appointment form.
only one person who can tell you, and that's somebody
P: You gave me an appointment for 11 on Monday, Doctor.
who's had it. When I came here it just felt as if I had
E: That’s right. All right now. If you want to watch the
fallen down and a truck had run over my arm. Just
TV here, it would be all right.
right down across it, you know? WhenI had this acP: Oh, I'll just watch it. And I’m also interested in the San
cident and they took me to the hospital and performed
Francisco Giants baseball game. That’s home, where
the preliminary surgery, the two bones came sticking
I live.
through my shirt out into the open air. 1 raised my
E: It may be on one of the stations.
head up and I was laying with my left hand like that.
P: Oh yes, it’s on there now. But there’s a lot more ball-
The two bones in my arm were sticking right out in-
games.
to the palm of my hand. I had four broken ribs right
E: Well, what questions do you want to put to him?
Rn


under. They put me in the hospital, and the next day
H: 1 can’t think of any at the moment.
my arm started to swell up. The circulation stopped,
P: Does Mr. Haley know we're going to Flagstaff Thurs-
and the next day it started to turn dark, and the next
day?
day, of course, I had gas gangrene. The next day they
E: 1 haven't had a chance to tell him that.
Pa


took it off. They decided to take it off at 25 minutes
P: Oh.
to 9, and at 10 minutes to 9 I was on the operating
17: Vve used him as a subject in the class there. I thought
e


table. No preparations, no nothing. Nothing like a
you would want to get acquainted with him.
tranquilizer for pain. So as I lay down on the operatH: I gather he's a good subject?
ing table, I was really looking at my hand. And my
P: Well, you know, Mr. Haley, at almost 72 I do have a
arm was laying just like here where it is now (show-
... Lhave a fairly good mind. It’s active. And I have a
ing missing arm). Here is my arm, here is my elbow,
fairly good memory. But if I could sort in my mind all
and here is my hand. That’s the exact position I was
the things that Dr. Erickson taught me, then I could
laying in on that operating table.
say I do have a memory. I can sort some of them,
Well, they gave me an anesthetic and took my arm
most of them. But what I should have done - I wrote
off, and the minute I came out of the anesthetic there
and told my brother, I said I regret now one thing —
was my arm. It’s been there ever since. It’s just em-
that when I first went to see Dr. Erickson, that when
bedded in my brain so deep that it’s something that’s
I gol back to my hotel I hadn’t made notes on what
hard to gel out. I caused just quite a shock.
I learned, which would have been a big help.
They've done everything for it. They Look me over
II: low many Limes have you seen him?

[PAGE 163]

316 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Phantom Limb Pain 17


to the University of California Medical Center to Dr. P: Pardon?
J. A., supposed to be one of the finest neurosurgeons E: What happened the first morning, April 111,"
in America. He’s head of the Neurosurgery Depart- P: Well, Iremember very distinctly. I told you what hap
ment at the University of California Medical School. pened to me, about my wife dying, and you told me
He severed a nerve in my spinal cord up here, to dead- I resented it. I resented getting hurt. | was afraid of
en the pain in my left arm. And it got too much, and dying, but if I died I would get rid of this pain and,
that’s why Thad... one thing, I’m just numb. Right oh my, you said so many things since then. Bul you
down through my face, the side of my face. I can't did take the pain away.
even tell when I use an electric razor on my face there. E: I what?
This side over here is just as normal as can be. That P: You took most of the pain away while I saw you. And
didn’t help. then it came back though.
Two weeks later the pain—it stopped the pain for E: How did I take it away?
two weeks. But it gave me one of the most violent P: My eye on the corner of that, I looked through that, and
headaches a human ever had for a month. They put I think you just talked me out of it.
me in a convalescent hospital and kept me there about E: Mr. Haley saw me do that to a woman this morning.
three weeks until I got rid of my headache. By that P: Oh. Well, it works. “A unique approach,” the way you
time the pain had come back in my arm worse than described it. I think the thing that impressed me
Pd ever had it before. I’d just about given up when most, Dr. Erickson, of anything — you told me to say
I came over here. But we did take —oh, a week, maybe what I thought, didn’t you? Well, I think that the se-
ten days — before I began to get kind of discouraged cret to the Doctor—his secret—he sits here, and I
because I didn’t seem to be getting any better. Ex- come in here sometimes feeling just miserable, you
cuse me, but, I don’t know, it was a week ago today. know. I tell him how I’m feeling, and he sits there for
I told you, Doctor, I went out of here walking on air a few minutes, and taking my case in relation with an
or something like that. I’ve been getting better ever anecdote, happening, things that have happened to
since. other patients, and the things that have happened to
Il: Where did you hear of Dr. Erickson? his friends, to his family, to himself. You know, he
winds them all up together, and the first thing you
(The patient discussed various doctors he visited, know, lo and behold, I find out he’s talking about me
including a hypnotist who said he had a mental all the time. (Laughter)
block and referred him to Dr. Erickson.) You know, my brother wrote and asked me if Dr.
Erickson put me in a trance. I said, “No.” I said, “The
P: ...So then Dr. B. told me about Dr. Erickson, and he answer is yes and no.” I said, “But if you want the
called up and made an appointment. So that’s how I truth of the matter, Dr. Erickson puts himself in a
came to be here. It’s just something that fell out of trance.” And I said, “The first thing you know I’m in
the clear sky. And Pm very, very glad I came. there with him.” (Laughter) But he has done me a
ki: What happened the first morning? world of good. Al least he's given me some confidence,

[PAGE 164]

318 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
A Phantom Limb Pain 319

and I just know that someday it won't bother me at
E: And if you've got too much competition on the TV at
all because he’s told me so.
the hotel, you can see the games on one of the two TVs
E: You’re getting the know-how.
here.
P: Yes. 1 do know how to help myself.
P: Thank you. I’m glad to have met you.
E: You just make this movement.
H: Thank you for letting me sit in on this.
P: This hand out there like that, that never quivers, or
P: Til see you Monday at 11, Doctor.
nervousness or nothing, the thing comes up, you
know, and the first thing you know it's turned over,
(Patient leaves)
and it's just like you're getting manna from heaven
or something. Unique method.
H: Well now, what did you do with this man in the first
E: And your thumbnail.
session?
P: Thumbnail, yes, a thumbnail.
E: 1 had him fixate his eye on the corner of the clock, leviH: You’re staying in Phoenix for the treatment. Do you
tate his hand.
plan to go back to San Francisco afterwards?
H: The real one?
P: Oh yes. I must. I have a... you see, my wife just died
E: Yes. I knew better than to touch that arm with all that:
the 15th of June. I don’t have any people up there,
pain and the bone sticking out.
there's no reason on earth why 1 should go up there,
FH: And he still feels it with the bone just like it was? Stick-
but I have a house full of my furniture that my wife
ing out?
and I had. I have a five-room house I rent when I’m
E: Yes. And I can free him of the pain. He didn’t know
there. I rent out my back bedroom. You need com-
whether he was in a trance or not. He thought it was
pany, you know. Sometimes some fellow, you know?
necessary for me to go into a trance. His unconscious
I’ve gotten a dog, and I belong to the Los Gatos
mind could listen to me and his conscious mind could
Senior Citizens Club. I’ve got quite a lot of friends.
wander around, and I think I took a couple of phone
I got a card from them this morning, there’s almost
calls during his hour without his noticing it. I sug-
400 signatures on it. Glad that I was feeling better.
gested to him that he shouldn't try too hard to get rid
I write to them, and they write to me. I don’t know
of all of it, but it might be a good idea to get rid of
where else I would go. I think my brother—I have a
some of it. He might let it flow all through his hand,
brother, two brothers, that’s all the family I have left.
through his hands and to his fingers. But as far as spe-
My immediate family. They both live in Los Angeles.
cific instruction, his own unconscious mind would de-
I think I may move down there but, oh, I don’t know,
cide on the right thing and it would decide if he want-
I was down there a couple of times visiting, and that
ed at least temporary relief. So that he could build up
terrific smog there just... I lived there long years
his confidence, and it was his confidence that need-
ago in '41 and the smog was unheard of and unknown.
ed building up, not mine. But I was absolutely posi-
It was beautiful, clear.
tive that his unconscious could do all that was necesE: Well, are you comfortable enough to leave?
sary, and I would be agreeable in working with his unP: Oh yes, Doctor, I’m very comfortable.
conscious mind. To let him go at his own pace, based

[PAGE 165]

A Phantom Limb Pain wel
320 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


on his unconscious mind—but since I knew more needy. In helping the person to accomplish some
about working with the unconscious mind, from time thing. Put the open palm out, for the reception of aid.
to time I might alter the direction or the course of his Now, all through our lives, all through our liletime of
pain. A baby learning to walk doesn't happen to stand experience, we learn thal sort. of symbolic language
up and walk without ever once slipping and falling
* * *
down. And sometimes 1 might even push him so he
would fall down, but it would be because he might be
going in the wrong direction. And I would like to have H: This man, I thought, said that in that first, session you

him be interrupted in walking toward freedom from talked to him about how he was afraid of dying. He
pain. 1 might have to push him rather hard and sud- phrased it in an odd way —he was afraid of dying to
denly in order to swing him around because he had get rid of the pain.
his eye on the wrong goal. E: Because when he died he would get rid of the pain.

H Can you explain when you use that approach? What 1 H: And you say that you didn’t discuss this with him?

mean by “that approach” — I mean that distinction be- E: Oh no. A patient never gives you an orderly account of
his life experiences. He jumbles similar things from
tween a conscious and an unconscious mind, and how
he can do consciously one thing while his unconscious various periods of his life in the same paragraph, and

does another, and yet you're going to influence his un- that way you have to sort out the different times and
conscious? It’s a very complex thing you're doing places and you can’t really be certain. And with all

there. that it is very symbolic communication. I expect he

I’: Y know it’s complex. I’m doing it that way because, in
Ps
may have been told by some doctor that he might get
rid of his pain when he died.
the first place, I don’t want to build any obligation
H: Well now, he described you as being very explicit, and
of arguing it out with the conscious mind. You heard
him say today his hand is so steady, doesn’t shake or explaining the situation to him in the first session —
anything, and it turns over so smoothly. that his wife died and he was angry about this and

II: He said, “Like manna from heaven.” lonely and that he was in pain and was thinking about
E: Well, of course you recognize why he turned the hand
dying himself and so on. Now this is just not the way
it was at all?
over.

H: No, why did he turn the hand over? E: No. Because he can think of Dr. B. in terms of me. And
lv: You just explained it. when he says, “doctor,” well, who led him to the recepIl: Like manna from heaven? tion of hypnotic relief of pain? Dr. B. directed the
lv: Like manna from heaven in his right hand. What I was course of action that resulted in the loss of pain. But
I’m a doctor too. Things equal to the same thing are
saying, the gift | was giving him, dealing with his
open extended palm. You see, you speak of yourself equal to each other. B. is a doctor; Erickson is a doc-
as a communications expert. Words can be words, or tor. Therefore, B. equals Erickson.
II: Well, do you recall when you first saw him whether you
they can be symbols, and the open palm means what?
were concerned about his being suicidal?
It's pub out. for receiving, and the outstretched hand
lv: No. (Pause) No, I don't. As he phrased it, it might be
is what? One is offering aid. Aid for the poor and the

[PAGE 166]

322 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
A Phantom Limb Pain 323

so interpreted. You see, I’m still not certain whether
had relief from pain. I hope you remember two partic-
he’s been married twice. But I think he has been. And
ular statements he made. He said he was suffering un-
I have, in his presence, told a class he was alone in
bearable pain, came in, sat down, and I levitated his
this world, no relatives, just friends.
hand. I turned it over and then he said, “It’s like the
FH: And it wasn't until now that he mentioned his brothers
manna from heaven.” Then I told him I had levitated
then?
his hand, and I turned it over so his hand was in a reE: I’ve learned he had two brothers.
ceiving position. It was several sessions later I reH: Well, this raises interesting problems about how you
marked to him that relief from pain was like manna
describe therapy. Because if you took that man’s de-
from heaven. When he demonstrated that to you, with
scription of what you did with him you would look like
his palm extended, he said it was like manna from
a very different sort of a therapist.
heaven, putting it together. (Phone call)
E: That's right. Have you seen marble cake?
Mrs. E: Mrs. F. (On the telephone)
H: Yes.
E: Hello, Mrs. F. Yes. Mmmm hmm. I noticed in your voice
E: If you saw the baker preparing marble cake, the finished
that you have pain. All right. Now take a good posi-
product iooks entirely different.
tion in your chair, look at something, and recall what
IT: Oh yes, I'm sure patients have to make some sense out
I said, and nobody needs to speak to you. Recall how
of what’s happened to them, so they put it together
I told you to look at the corner of the clock, keep your
in some framework that is reasonable to them.
head still, and close your eyes. And I would say spend
1: It’s a framework that depends upon their understand-
about 15, 20 minutes with increasing comfort, and in
ings, and my statements are all studded with a wealth
about 15 or 20 minutes, take your time and awaken
of phrases and sentences that can be interpreted in
and be free of pain. Yes, about 10 o'clock. Goodbye.”
terms of his own life. As he mentioned this morning,
(Hangs up telephone)
I told him about this person, another patient, this gen-
Mr. Smith remarked that I told anecdotes about
tleman himself, and, “You find out he’s just been talk-
former patients, people in general, my family, and
ing about you.” (Laughs)
after a while he knew that I wasn’t talking about any
In the anecdote approach the patient has long had
of those people. I was just talking about him. And he
the experiences of listening to you tell a story and
said that after stating, separately, that I went into
wanting to tell you his story. And if I want to find
a trance first, and he later joined me. I think that’s
out in ordinary social conversation if so-and-so has a
a very pertinent summary.
brother, I'll say something about mine. It won't be
The thing I want to take up with you today is this:
long before he starts talking about his.
You know about the ways of communication; you
II: Okay. 1 would agree with that. I don’t see what that
know Ray Birdwhistell. We learn those nonverbal
has to do with the relief of pain in the situation.
ways of communication. We think of the nonverbal
fe: All right. Now T talk about other patients who have had
as not spoken communication, but nonverbal commu-
pain, who get relief from pain. Now he has had the ex-
nication also includes any casual conversation that
perience, in the past, of having had pain and having
does not mention il, but, which does bring forth memo-

[PAGE 167]

324 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson A Phantom Limb Pain eh


ries and understanding, such as the outstretched hand —most people can’t last more than 15 yes laying
and the receiving palm. And whatever you say may floors. But he lasted 37 years. Ironwood tree. Broken
not necessariliy be related to a verbalization of receiv- branch, probably the wind smashing: around the cor-
ing manna from heaven, but the outstretched palm,
or rather the receiving palm, and the subsequent men- H: Wait a minute. The wind smashing, I don’t understand
tion that relief from pain is like manna from heaven. that. Having the wind smash around the corner of the
H: This analogy business again. Now you must have some tree?
timing which you're watching, and if they begin to E: Of this high place.
connect it with themselves, do you then shift it fur- H: Oh.
ther away from them? E: That had obscured any view of that tree until you got
E: I'm very likely to shift it over to them as soon as I see to the tree, or rather got the tree within your view,
them doing it. Mr. Smith said, “First Dr. Erickson and saw the broken branch caused by the wind smash-
goes into a trance, then he tells me things, and I join ing around the corner. Broken branch, broken wind,
him in the trance because he wasn’t talking about all the smash.
of those other people. You suddenly realize he was H: Mmmm hmm. And that would bring forth what from
talking about you all the time.” him do you think?
H: Well, when you tell a particular anecdote, would you E: If I wanted to know how many relatives, I’d start look-
rather the patient at that moment didn’t know it was ing around the ironwood tree for mesquite bushes.
about them, or would you rather they did? And I would learn about his relatives, because a tree
E: They shouldn’t know it's about them. doesn’t stand alone. “If I should be the last leaf upon
H: So if it begins to look like they’re relating this to them- the tree.”
selves, you drift away, making it further from them? H: Why do you prefer to do it that way rather than askE: 1 drift away at first to make it further from them, there- ing about his relatives?
by eliciting a further effort to understand. Then when E: If I don't know anything at all about his relatives, and
I see them beginning to apply it to themselves, and he specified that date in June, which means he will
when I see them stepping over and joining me, then be in this alone, and I see that one ironwood tree with
I can shift explicitly to them. Sometimes without even a broken branch. Wind that swept around that high
completing the anecdote. Because we all have so many, rise. Broken branch, broken limb, smashing wind. I
many memories that we don’t recall, are unaware of. would look around for a small sage bush, higher mes-
Now if I really wanted to find out about Mr. Smith’s quite bushes, any old-timer out in the desert, and the
background, then I might describe driving across the tall tree.
desert, camping out, roaming at a high point, and sec- H: Well, granted that you can do it that way and get this
ing there a lonesome ironwood tree. Apparently onc information, why is this, to you, a better way than
of the branches got broken by the wind smashing asking them about it?
around the corner. Now the anecdote doesn’t have to E: Because when I ask you about your sister, brother, par-
be true. But you phrase it correctly. An ironwood tree ents, then you put them into a social frame befitting

[PAGE 168]

326 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

your education. When I do it in this indirect way,
there’s that broken branch, smashed, and I’m looking
around for small sage bushes, taller mesquite — grand-
children, relatives that are taller than grandchildren. INDEX


Abortion, 199 The alcoholic who hated her
Advanced Techniques of Hyp- mother, 184-190
nosis and Therapy, Haley, The alcoholic who agreed to
Jay, (Ed.), 101, 167, 176 give up his clothes, 109-110
Affairs, 67, 217 The aphonic woman no one
Alcoholism, 109, 113, 184, 209 heard, 34-43
Amnesia, 249 The boy who spoke in neolo-
Analogies, 106, 154, 306, 317 gisms, 223-224
Anxiety attacks, 258, 270, 273 The depressed girl whose po-
Aphonia, 34 sition revealed premarital
Arithmetical progression, 36, affairs, 217-219
52, 60, 83, 279 The draftee who could only
Arthritis, 209 urinate through a tube, 153-
Assertiveness, 297 154
Asthma, 83 The drug store phobia that
occurred once a month, 73
Back pain, 85, 313 The enuretic who had to walk
Balinese Character, Bateson, 20 blocks, 55-57
G. and Mead, M., 249 An enuretic couple, 101-102,
Bateson, G., 249 167
Bind, 166, 168 The girl with affairs, 6-7
Blanking out thoughts, 40 The girl with painful menstru-
Blocking, 46, 48, 205, 297 ation, 2-5, 7-14
Body image, 3, 5, 7, 16, 28, 30, The girl who was afraid of her
69 own body, 16-24
Body language, 218 The heart phobia man who be-
Brief therapy, 1, 8, 21, 27, 31, lieved he was dying, 81-83
286 The hypnotic subject who
wanted to be on top, 179-
The case of: 180
A bathing compulsion, 267- Inhibited Ann, 123-149
268 The inhibited student with a
The absent minded driver who crush, 193-197
forgot her fear of certain The insomniac who polished
streets, 121 122 the floors, 54-55
An aleoholie pilot, 110 113 The insomniac who had to

[PAGE 169]

328 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Index 329


The case of (continued) came performance anxiety, The woman who vomited for Haley, Jay, 101, 167, 176
think about horrible things, 277-286 her relatives, 45-46 Hallucinations, 220, 232
58-59 The scratching compulsion, 15 The woman who did not wear Headaches, 62, 209, 317
The insomniac who stood up The student failing to achieve panties to test the therapist, Homosexuality, 201
and read all night, 59 his mother’s goals, 198-199 88 Hypnoanesthesia, 270
The Italian boy with the fat The student encouraged to The woman who put her float- Hypnosis: automatic writing, 9,
lip, 90-96 write a “D” examination, ing nude men in the closet, levitation of hand, 38, 319,
Mama’s asthmatic boy who 273-274 232-235 subliminal speech, 39, and
became a worker in a bank, The television broadcaster The sloppy woman who dis- phobias, 269, and absent
83-84 with anxiety attacks, 258- covered her three badges of mindedness, 121, and resist-
The man with a snobbish 261 womanhood, 159-168 ance, 78, 160, 177, 179, 203,
mother who fell ill after The tic case of misinterpreted Change, and homeostasis, 42, 308, tasks and change, 203
lunch, 102-103 face sensations, 267 44, what is crucial, 202 Hypnotherapy, brief, 1
‘The man who criticized his The transvestite salesman Choking, 125
own thinking, 77-78 with compulsive behavior, Classification: of patients, 123, Identification, 239
‘The man who drove and faint- 28-32 of people, 150, of behavior, Inadequacy, 297
ed, 118-121 Tube feeding the depressed 153, of strength and weak- Incontinence, 24
‘I'he man who fainted on psychotic, 220-223 ness, 175 Inhibition, 123, 192, 193
streets and in restaurants, Tube feeding the man with no Communication, Bateson re- Initial interview, 173
154-158 stomach or colon, 226 search project, ii, non-verbal, Insight, 66, 99, 202
‘The man who paced the office, The tube fed man who learned 323 Insomnia, 54, 58, 59
177 to enjoy burping, 246 Compulsion: bathing, 267, house Interpretation, 74
The man who walked six miles The twin who wanted a sepa- cleaning, 67, scratching, 15,
transvestite, 28, washing, Jackson, Don D., 292
Lo avoid a beer garden, 113- rate identity, 46-52
114 The two men who were Jesus 33
The medical student who failed Christ, 229-230 Constipation, spastic, 72 Masturbation, 104
cxaminations, 270-271 The violent man who wanted Countertransference, 89 Menstruation, 2, 7, 22
The musician who could not to knock someone down, Mother, 169, 184, 198
read bass except backward, 241-242 Mute, 225
Delusions, 229
48 The virgin who was self con-
Depression, 24, 185, 217, 220, Narcissism, 27, 239
‘The mute boy frustrated into scious in a bathing suit, 106
286, 290 Neologism, 223
talking, 225-226 The washing compulsion, 33
Directives: motivating to follow,
The schizophrenic fat girl The woman who passed gas,
27, types of, 116, 177, as Obsessive, 81
whose mother abused her, 213-216
necessary for change, 203 One up and down, 41, 179, 225,
235-240 The woman school teacher
Displacement: of symptoms, 25, 284
The overweight depressed girl with verbal blocking, 205-
of time, 13 Overweight, 235
who hated her mother, 169- 208
Double bind, 41
176 The woman with aches and an
The paralyzed woman with alcoholic husband, 209-213 Pain, 267, 311
suicidal thoughts, 24-27 The woman with poor groom- Paralysis, 24
Enuresis, 55, 101, 167
A phantom limb pain, 311 326 Passing examinations, 270
mg, 27-28
Passive resistance, 73
The perfectionist. with weekly The woman with spastic con-
Fainting, 118, 154 Performance problem, 277
hoadnehes, 67 71 stipation who could not
Father hatred, 90 Permission, 31
The psychotic fal woman who baste food, 72
First interview, withholding, Personal prooming, 27
Lhreatened violones, 240 241 The woman who could sched-
[#O Phantom link, 311
The rigid pianist who over- ule her headache, 63 64

[PAGE 170]

330 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


Phobia, 73, 211, 268, 269 response, as habit, 15, 16,
Positive attitude, 182 displacement of, 25, causes
Prognosis, 153, 172 of, 31, 32, 65, 67, 71, 101,
Psychosis, 220, 240 102, purpose of, 15, 16, 31,
Public speaking anxiety, 277 37, 39, 47, 66, 67, 84, 87, in
Puzzle, 298 present, 32, 148, 178, as en-
tity, 180, individual context,
Regression, 10 ii, and legitimate pain, 12,
Rejection, 249 reframing and redefining,
Reich, Wilhelm, 104 307, recurrence of, 261.
Resistance, v, 79, 92, 160, 179,
203, 207, 208 Taking charge in therapy, 43
Test for body image, 5
Schizophrenia: in family sys- Therapist: understanding vs pa-
tem, 242, spontaneous am- tient understanding, 75, as-
nesia, 250, catatonic, 219, suming roles, 87, 153, role
ambulatory, 232, mother in psychoanalysis, 153, be-
abuse, 235 having inadequately, 187,
Self criticism, 77 giving advice, 195
Self perception altered, 252 Transference, 90, 176
Sexual inhibition, 118, 123, 158,
176 Unconscious: and withholding,
Sexual Problems: metaphor, 71, -7, and attention, 13, conver-
74, lower back, 85, denial of, sation, 73, and analogies
133, patient discussion of, and metaphor, 106, 108, 129,
134, inhibition, 123, 158, 130, 154, 157, 319, and use
and passing gas, 216 of symptoms, 67, discoverSilence, use in psychoanalysis, 72 ing, 98, insight, 99
Stammering, 261 Urination difficulties, 153
Stomach ulcer, 209
Suicide threat, 24, 199, 321 Violence, 240, 241, 247
Symptoms: history of, 31, 64, Voice problem, 34
relationship change, 146, Vomiting, 45
need for, 44, 62, use of, 45, Voyeurism, 105
143, 254, patient in control
of, 14, 45, 64, 66, 301, sub- Washing compulsion, 33
stitute for, 67, awareness, Weakland, John, 2, 91
127, patient shielding, 180, Withdrawal, 236
and past, 8, 48, as function- Withholding and communica-
al, v, 38, 39, 47, as systemic tion, 6, 180, 191
