
CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION vII

CHAPTER 1 Love and Marriage

CHAPTER 2 Confidentiality, Domination, and
the Absurd 19


CHAPTER Suspicion, Joint Interviews,
and Quarrels 60


CHAPTER Encouraging Relapses and
Copyright © 1985 by Jay Haley Giving Directives 85
All rights reserved.
First Edition CHAPTER Sex, Fun, and Impotency 113

No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means electronic, CHAPTER Metaphors, Shocking Experiences 143
mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, or
otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
CHAPTER Changing Views and Interview
Printed in the United States of America
Techniques 157


Index 174

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 84-052027

ISBN 0-931513-Oe-c
Published by Triangle Press
Distributed by W. W. Norton & Co., Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue,
New York, N. Y. 10110
W. W. Norton & Co., Ltd., 37 Great Russell Street, London,
WC1B3NU

[PAGE 003]

INTRODUCTION


These conversations with Milton H. Erickson, M.D.,
took place in the 1950s and 1960s when he was developmp a new approach to therapy. Many aspects of therapy
were discussed with him over those years. I have selected
for Lhis volume conversation about his therapy with marital couples. Other volumes deal with individuals and with
children and their families. Naturally, when talking about
mdividuals or families, issues of marriage come up, but in
(his volume the focus is particularly on the topic of marLire.

‘The conversations with Dr. Erickson were mostly condueted by John Weakland and myself with, at times, Gregory Bateson joining us. The study of this approach to
therapy was part of Bateson’s research project on communication. John Weakland and I visited Erickson every
year for many years to talk with him about the nature of
hypnosis and about how to do therapy. When he passed
(hrough the San Francisco area, the Bateson project always met with him to inquire into his ideas and his work.
Buteson was often present at those interviews. We had the
view al that time that an understanding of human communicalion could come out of the study of the process of
changing that communication.
‘These conversations were not conducted with publicaLion in mind but for research purposes. Therefore, they are
nol. a selection designed to present Erickson’s ideas to the
world. The fact that these recordings exist made it possible to Lranseribe them and present his work in his own


vil

[PAGE 004]

voll Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


word: Our imforent in talking with him was to explore the
nature of communication and to answer specific research
questions John Weakland and I were also in practice as
therapists and so our interests were practical as well as CHAPTER 1
seientalie.
Within the topic of the therapy of marital couples, I
have selected conversations with Erickson from different Love and Marriage
limes and put them together in as coherent a sequence
as possible, The interviews with him covered many topics
and were done at. different Limes with many interruptions
for patients, telephone calls, and periods of time between
1119, Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.
meetings. The reader might wish that a topic, which was
abruptly dropped, had been pursued, but because of cir-
Haley: If you were to describe what a good marriage is,
cumstances it was not.
how would you describe it?
At the time these conversations began Erickson and his
l'rickson: When I describe a good marriage to my patients,
therapy was so unique that it was difficult for us to under-
| point out to them that there are essentially four
stand. The standard psychodynamic therapy of the time
kinds of love. The infantile type of love, “I love me.”
assumed the therapist was a non-directive, passive listener.
‘The next stage, “I love the me in you. I love you beIn that framework Erickson’s therapy seemed different
cause you are my brother, my mother, my father, my
and strange and we struggled to understand what would
sister, my dog. The me in you.” Then the adolescent
seem more obvious, at least to us, a decade or two later.
type of love, “I love you because your dancing pleases
Although he was in isolation at the time of these conver-
me, and because your beauty pleases me, and because
sations, in the sense of doing a therapy different from his
your brains please me.” And the adult stage of love
colleagues, since that time the field has gone in his direc-
wherein, “I want to love you and cherish you because
tion and seeing couples and families, as well as doing a
| want to see you happy because I can find my hapdirective strategic therapy, is assumed to be the correct
piness in your happiness. The happier you are, the
way to change people.
happier Tl be. I’ll find my happiness in yours. I'll find
Except for editorial corrections and the arrangement of
delight in your pleasure and intellectual pursuits. Pl
the conversations from different times, the interviews are
find a delight in your enjoyment of dancing.” So, the
verbatim. What is here is what was said. The research-
mature love is the capacity to find enjoyment in the
minded will find a copy of the original recordings of these
enjoyment of the other person’s enjoyment. It works
conversations on file with the Erickson Foundation in
both ways.
Phoenix.
I: Just what do you think a good marriage is composed
Readers familiar with my book, Uncommon Therapy
of, or what a good marriage is? That is, you see things
(Norton, 1973), will find familiar cases since some of these
conversations were the raw data on which [ based that
book.

[PAGE 005]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Love and Marriage 3


wrong with a marriage in contrast or against a back- harmless thing. It’s a time-limited thing. He never
round of what's good. goes to excess, but he so thoroughly enjoys that.
I’ You So in a good marriage you'll see some of the, “I love I: Well, certainly a common marriage problem that I see
me.” You should expect that. You'll see some of the, is when one starts to enjoy something, the other can't
“lL love the me in you.” You'll see some of the adoles- seem to tolerate it.
cont. variely of your good qualities that please me. But lv: Yes. So many marital problems are built around the
(here should be a very considerable percentage of the idea, “We must share equally in all things.” I point out
enjoyment of the other person's state of happiness. so quickly, so thoroughly, to them that you can't
liaLl enough just to enjoy your wife's cooking. You share equally in all things, because biologically we're
ought Lo enjoy the pleasure she has in cooking. You totally different creatures. I emphasize the biological
ought not just enjoy the fact she keeps the kids quiet differences, which can't be disputed —the individual
while you're working. You want to enjoy, really, the difference, the fact that he was attracted to her
pleasure and satisfaction she gets out of dealing with because she was biologically different and had differ-
Lhe kids, even though you can't understand why that ent qualities. Then 1 point out that for the benefit of
particular dealing with the kids gives her so much sat- the children — and parents do wish their children well
isfaction. It’s beyond your capacity to understand, —that they want their children to have the advantage
but you're so glad she enjoys it. You know that as long of every possible opportunity. If father and mother
as she's happy, enjoying the inexplicable things, you're both go out of the home and bring back precisely the
going to be happy too. I point out to couples that hap- same thing, the children may get an adequate supply
piness in marriage so often depends on giving the of the same thing. But if mother goes out and brings
other person the privilege of enjoying those special, home something, and father goes out and brings home
peculiar pleasures that they have. Enjoying the fact something different, the children have a choice of two
that the other person is happy. You see, it’s the be- things. So mother goes out and takes in the Russian
ing mature, the adult stage, that I emphasize. I look ballet, and she comes back and tells the little children
for that sort of thing. A woman who says, “I just can't about the beauties of the ballet. Father goes out and
understand my university professor of anthropology looks at the desert landscape and really enjoys that,
husband enjoying those completely stupid western und the children listen to that. So the children have
movies. But for some strange and inexplicable, infan- the opportunity of learning to like both the ballet and
tile reason he likes them. 1 know all the particular ac- the landscape.
tors that please him most, and I always see to it that II: Well, what you look for in this enjoying the other's en-
I tell him when one of his favorite actors is going to joyment is some degree of autonomy of each one while
appear in a western.” She just can't understand it. But in a relationship.
she takes a great deal of pleasure in letting him have 17: Now and then you run across pathological sharing. A
that pleasure, which to her is infantile and stupid. But couple came to me, both had been unhappily married
it's so nice for her husband to be happy. It's such a before, got divorces, and when they met they decid-

[PAGE 006]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Love and Marriage 5

ed they would share everything. Well he liked westerns, and she liked musical comedies. So they went IT. YUwonder what you'd say about what goes wrong besides
Lo the show twice a week —one western, one musical pathological sharing; what goes wrong with a marcomedy. She gritted her teeth throughout the west- riage?
ern, and he gritted his teeth throughout the musical lv: Some people grow up in the conviction of the goodness
comedy. They both comforted themselves that they of their ideas. How many homes teach the goodness
were sharing. I pointed out, “You're sharing a com- of their ideas? There is only one religious faith, you
mon drama. As I understand it, your husband really know, absolutely only one. And anyone of intelligence
enjoys Lhat western, and you sat there hating it and would naturally send his sons and his children to Pogrilling: your teeth. What sharing were you doing? dunk College. No other college in the U.S. is fit to be
You weren
L even sitting in the same seat that he was, attended, just Podunk College. In how many homes
you weren't sharing anything except proximity.” I do you have that type of thinking? So they marry, and
pointed out Lo them how nice it would be, and I hauled the woman comes from Pumpkin Center College and
in Lhe puper showing them, here’s a western, here’s a the man comes from Podunk College. They never learn
musical comedy. This theater on that side of the to respect the goodness of separate ideas.
street, and this theater on this side of the street. Why Hf: 1 a wife has an idea, Pumpkin City College, and the
don't you go, instead of gritting your teeth, and real- husband has the idea, Podunk College, where they get
ly enjoy what you see on the screen. You can go at into difficulty is when they try to influence each other.
such and such a time, the movie's over at such and /: Yes.
such a time. You come out of the movie, you join each : That's when they get in a struggle and marital battles.
other, and you go for sandwiches. You have shared I:: And how many struggles are there? What is the name
a delightful evening. They couldn’t see it that way. of that island in Delaware where big enders, little endWhen she went to the bathroom, he went to the bath- ers, and that controversy on which end of the egg
room. They shared. (Laughter) They always ate the should you break first. The complete oversight that
same thing. They went to bed at the same hour. They you break an egg for the purpose of eating it. That
shared everything. Now they're divorced. They couldn't momentous question that brought about internecine
stand their sharing. Now that's an exaggerated type war—the two political points of view. The big enders
of pathological sharing, but autonomy is so tremen- and the little enders about how to crack a boiled egg.
dously important because the happy marriage is one I try sometimes when I can't get anywhere in getting
in which you have this individual accomplishing cer- the patients to understand, letting them set up oppotain things, that individual accomplishing certain site camps. Whether, for example, on December 5th
things. Each for the self there. Then you have the in- should they go out picnicking on the Birdie River, or
dividuals separately accomplishing certain things for 50 to the Arboretum; and the couple just arrayed
the other. Then you have the two individuals accom- against each other on that debate. They really battled
plishing things together. that question. Where did they go on that day that I
had picked out for them? I knew where they were go-

[PAGE 007]

G Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Love and Marriage 7


ing to go. They had had over a month’s battling. They good marriage. Or, if your marriage to A would lead
attended the Phoenix rodeo. to a bad marriage, it would be a different kind of a bad
IT: You mean you picked the day of the rodeo? (Laughter) marriage than the marriage to B. Because A is one
E: 4 picked the day of the rodeo, knowing that they would person; B is a totally different one.” So you offer these
attend. Then we went over that very, very bitter bat- premises. “Now can a bad marriage be turned into a
ilo. Shall it be the Birdie River or the Arboretum? good marriage? By alteration of your desires and
Why make an issue of it? wishes. You can have your mouth all set for filet
Weakland: This is a demonstration of how pointless that mignon, and then you'll find that they have oysters
battle is, is it not? on the menu. Now in your marriage, this marriage of
lv: Wes a proof demonstration, utterly surprising. They yours, you wanted certain things. Apparently they
battled up to the time they suddenly realized that it are not there. What are the things that are there? No
was rodeo day. (Laughter) Then I raised the question one person ever exploits all the possibilities of a mar-
of how many other things do you take divergent points riage. The richness of your own personality belongs
of view on and miss the rodeos because sometimes to you. It’s going to take your spouse quite a long
you get too absorbed to see the rodeo that's coming time, if ever he succeeds, in doing something to dis-
along. Because it isn’t as plain and easily recognizable cover all the richness of your personality. The same
as the Phoenix rodeo. There’s so many little things of holds true for him. It'll take you a long time. What
that sort that you can do. If you can’t get them to rec- are the things you want?”
ognize the futility and absurdity of diverse points of H Well, granted that it is from one point of view an indi-
view, to settle the future, then you let them encounter vidual matter, still I think you must have some ideas
a reality situation. about how any two people relate to each other in a
H: You seem to have a set of premises about what's a good way that’s going to make a problem, and how any two
marriage and what’s a bad marriage. We wondered if people don’t but relate in some other ways.
you could lay those out reasonably clearly. i

: You seem to think that there should necessarily be a
E: The major premise is this: that there is such a thing as problem. In ordinary everyday life with your friends,
a good marriage. And what is a good marriage for you youre very careful not to mention, with certain friends,
would be a bad marriage for me. What would be a certain political questions, certain religious questions.
good marriage for me would be a bad marriage for WhenI visit one of my friends in New Orleans, some-
you. In other words, the premise is that there is a good how or other we have extensive conversations and
marriage possible for each and every one of us. “What never mention the racial problem. It just never hap-
kind of a good marriage do you want, that is compati- pens to come up.
ble with you? You know very well that if you hadn't /1: I'm not saying there has to be problems...
married your husband, with your own natural procliv- ':
= [think that in marriage each of the parties ought to be
ities, you would have married someone else. Your mar- uware of the fact that there are certain blindnesses
riage to A would lead to one kind of a good marriage. (hat are incomprehensible, and that you just do not
Your marriage to B would lead to another kind of make an issue or a problem of it.

[PAGE 008]

B Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Love and Marriage 9


IT: Let me put it another way. Suppose in a week, or in a realities, in preparation for tomorrow. I can think of
period of time, you have eight couples come in, or at one of my friends who is in his 28th year of analysis.
loast eight problem marriages come in, and you want- (Laughter) He is earnestly seeking to understand his
ed to say how these were similar, granted the great conflict. He desparately wants to fall in love, to
variation of individuals. What was similar about the marry, to have a home and children. He’s desperate-
problems? ly seeking to find out what sort of conflict prevents
E: | usually feel that there is too much effort on the part him from doing that. He’s past 60 now. The calendar
of one spouse to convert the other spouse. says that he can't fall in love. The calendar says he
W: Yes, well that fits with what Milton was saying a min- won't have children. But he's paying his analyst for
ute ago about the positive. What I got from it was — five hours a week, exploring the question. All he has
make the most of what is there instead of looking for to do is look at the calendar. I told him back in 1934,
something else. “Listen, by 1940 you will have all the answers. If
H: Yes. you're not married by 1940, you never, never will be
E: You can have a completely delightful friendship with married.” Now I know he took what I said up with his
somebody who stupidly votes the wrong ticket. (Laughs) analyst. In fact, he's taken it up with several analysts.
Who idiotically goes to the wrong church. Who crimi- You see, he's outlived his analyst. (Laughter) But the
nally, wrongly, takes a false attitude on racial mat- coming around of the year 1940, good heavens, if he
ters. But you can have an absolutely delightful friend- didn’t say, “I do,” by that time, that ends it. You get
ship. In marriage you ought to wonder why your these men in their late 40s who come in to you so piti-
spouse can be so silly, idiotic; but every artichoke has fully. They tell you, “I went to college, I postponed
those petals that are discarded. The only way you can marrying that nice high school girl until after I got
enjoy the artichoke is by heaping up the discard, and through college. By that time she was married. In fact
ignoring it. Being grateful for that nice delightful, de- she was married by the time I was a sophomore in col-
licious, soft, base of the petal. lege. So I got engaged to a girl in college, but I postH: So the reform, or the effort to convert, is one of the poned marriage until after I graduated. She married
things you see that they have in common. someone else. I got engaged another time. We postE: They have in common. And the insistence on the right poned marriage until after I got suitably placed. She
to convert. That’s in error. They have the right to married someone else. All my life I’ve wanted a wife,
think that they can convert. But then they ought to a home, and children. I never did get suitably placed.
recognize so does the other person have that same I’ve never forgotten my desire. Now I’m 48. I’ve got
right. That establishes a stalemate. Well, why center a job working for my brother as a hired man on his
your life around a stalemate? And there are so many cotton ranch. I met a nice woman, she's a widow, she
other things. You see, I think therapy is primarily a hasn't had any children. She's had her menopause.
matter of getting people to function adequately within Would it be all right for me to marry her?” My ques-
areality framework. Thereality framework is that of tion was, “What else can you do? You're 48. You could
eating and living and responding today, in today’s marry a girl in her 20s or 30s and make her pregnant,

[PAGE 009]

10 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Love and Marriage 11


but you never can join with her in 20- or 30-year-old H: I notice how rarely you try to work on why a patient
anticipations for family; you're 48. If you’ve been does anything, as if you consider it irrelevant why he
afraid of marriage, and wife, and children all these does something.
years, you better pay respect to that fact. You say E: Well, look over the lives of a lot of happy, successful,
this woman you want to marry is 46. She's through well-adjusted people and ask them why. (Laughter)
her menopause, and she was never pregnant, She and It’s so nonsensical. They’re happy, they’re well-
her husband postponed pregnancy. 1 think you two adjusted, they like their work, they have got a joy of
have a great deal in common.” I saw the brother about living. Why should we analyze their childhood, paren-
a year after the marriage. I asked how the married tal relationships. They’ve never bothered and they are
couple were getting along. He said, “There's been a never going to bother.
transformation in my brother; he's actually become IT: But apparently even at the couple level, if you see a cou-
ambitious. He and his wife are working very nicely ple in a struggle with each other, you don't attempt
and they're building up a nice home. It's the center to work with them on why they have these attitudes
of the community so far as the children of the neigh- toward each other at all?
borhood are concerned.” A safe way of having chil- I’: Once in a while, you see a situation — I'm trying to think


dren. I don’t know how many community projects she of one —where you better give them insight.
entered into which centered around children. So did Il: Well, can you differentiate those from others?
he. Now why should I, in handling that couple, why lv: ’m trying to call to mind some specific case. Maybe I
should I go into all that horrible delaying about mar- will later. But now and then with a patient or a cou-
riage, the avoidance on the part of both of them? ple, you better give them insight. Not on everything
You're going to live today, tomorrow, next week. Just but on certain items.
thumping on the forces that entered into their 20s and Il: Now, by “insight” do you mean why they're doing some-
30s would serve no purpose. 1 think it's awfully im- thing they're doing?
portant for them to live today and take care of the Girl lv: Yes. A good deep analytical interpretation, understand-


Scout troop or the Boy Scout troop, and trick-or- ing.

treats on Halloween. Il: Well, if a patient does, as so many do, say, “I want to
H: One of the things that I’ve come to conclude, somewhat know why I’m afraid to go up a tall building.” And
reluctantly, is that helping a patient understand him- they are constantly working on why they have the
self, become more aware of himself, has nothing to do problems that they have, what do you do? You shift
with changing him. them away from the why, I gather?
E: Not one bit! ~

I shift them away from the why. “Will you tell me why
H: Well, I thought you would agree with that. (Laughs) you would want to go up in a tall building? Have you
It is bedrock to most psychiatry. They don’t know gob one single legitimate reason for going up there?”
how to talk to a patient unless it’s to make him more (Laughter) I think that's much more important than
self-aware. having Lo devote their lives to “being very careful to
E: Make them more self-aware, but they never do get the remember every day, every hour of the day, that
patient to become aware of the things he can do. they're afraid to go up in the tall building.” You know,

[PAGE 010]

Love and Marriage 13
12 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
you get home what time in the late evening?” About
a patient came here to live in Phoenix to get therapy
10 o’clock, 11 o’clock, between 10 and 11.” He has an
from me because of this fear of tall buildings. One
enormous practice. “Why didn’t you marry the girl
thing in particular that troubled him were three-story you were in love with?” He said, “Well, if I had mar-
houses. ried the girl 1 was in love with, we would have enH: There haven't been any of those for quite a while.
countered expenses in the matter of children, things
(Laughter)
of that sort, and I wanted to build my practice. So I
E: My statement was, “You have rented houses. You've married another girl I wasn’t in love with, because I
been afraid to buy a house because of three-story knew I wouldn't handicap myself financially with chil-
houses. I want you to go out with pencil and notebook dren. I always knew that I could divorce her and
and record the address of every three-story house you marry someone I was in love with.” And I said, “All
see. (Laughter) That way you will be able to keep right, now you've got an enormous practice. You're
away from them.” (Laughter) in the office from 8 in the morning to 10 or 11 at night,
H: Did he find any? does your nurse or your receptionist or your secretary
E: I teld him, to help him out, “You'll find one up in Peoria
bring in that sandwich?” He said, The secretary is
here about 20 or 30 miles away.” (Laughter) Then I pretty busy, so I have the receptionist, because my
named another one, and there’s no way to get that secretary can double as a receptionist.” He comes
one. “Those are places you can’t possibly buy — you home, and he eats at 10:30. He eats a meal his wife
haven’t got the money for it.” has prepared for him, goes to bed. A perfectly enor-
mous practice. He practices medicine seven days a
* * *
week. 1 said, “Now, besides your insurance do you
have any other property?” He said, “No, except the
E: I can think of a 60-year-old doctor; 30 years ago he was
house in which 1 live.” 1 said, “Your insurance on the
all excited. He had a brand new office, and he was go-
house in which you live, the total value of that is
ing to start up in practice. He was so excited that
what?” He said, “Approximately $70,000.” I said, “On
morning that he was a little bit late, and he wanted
what wildcat schemes did you waste your earnings?”
to be there on time so he had one fried egg, two slices
lle said, “Well, there's a mail order oil well up in Can-
of bacon, a slice of toast, and a cup of coffee. But he
ada, a mail order oil well in Texas. Then there is that
didn't have time to sit down and eat, so he just ate
uranium mine, mail order, in Canada.” I said, “What
the egg, the two slices of bacon, the toast, and drank
wus the smallest sum you ever sunk into each of
his coffee standing up at the table. He has been late
those?” “Well, never less than $20,000.” When he
to breakfast every morning for 30 years. He has had
saved up $20,000, he invested it. But you know imme-
egg, two slices of bacon, toast and a cup of coffee,
dintely when he tells you that simple little thing about
eaten standing up because he's late for the office. The
that breakfast of his, what all the rest of his life is go-
question that floored him was, “Even now that you
ing Lo be like. When he married a girl he didn't love
practice medicine very intensively, get to the office
because Lo marry the girl he did love would mean chil-
just about on time, always about five minutes late,

[PAGE 011]

14 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Love and Marriage 15


dren, that man’s going to have a life of self-defeat. You W: That’s it.
know immediately what the rest of the story is, you E: It’s complete emptiness.

have to speculate on the particular form it takes. You W: But they picked it really, both of them.
know he’s not going to have accumulated any savings. Ei: They fell into the habit of promoting it.

Doctors always fall for mail order schemes; they are H; Let's take this another way. Suppose you went to a wed-

poor businessmen. Thirty years of that. ding and you talked to a young couple right after they

H: If you see a series of problem couples, one of the issues were married. If you predicted that that marriage
you see is that they are trying to reform each other, would go on the rocks, what would you base a predic-

convert each other. Are there any other general prob- tion on?

lems in the way you look at what goes wrong with a : Well, if I talked to the young couple and I thought the
E
nu


marriage was going to go on the rocks, I would predict
marriage?
E: The couples that just simply can’t tolerate each other. it in such a way that they would both take exception

This doctor, for example, marrying a woman he didn’t tome...
II. Tm not talking now about how you would be treating
love — why on earth did she marry him? Her life has
them. But just in your own mind, how you would clas-
been one, literally, of poverty, disappointment, frus-
sify something being wrong with their marriage? I
tration; that late-evening meal that she serves him is
mean, suppose you had six young couples, just mar-
always a disappointment to him. She never remem-
ried today, come in here and you decided that two of
bers to cook him the things he wants. He always eats
the things he doesn’t want that she has prepared for them- this wasn’t going to go, that they were going

him. Here are two people that can’t tolerate each other to go on the rocks. I wonder what sort of things you
would be looking for to make that prediction?
who are bound in a situation of punishment of each
lv: The exploitation of the one by the other. I can think of
other, and self-punishment.
e.


H: Well, there's the class of marriage where the couple can't a marriage where there was a very nice, ornate wed-
ding, and then after the wedding the bride said, “You
tolerate each other yet they live together.
know, my very best friend comes from a very povertyE: Yes.
stricken situation. She has never had a chance to
H: A peculiar kind of a double —they tolerate each other
travel. Since we're traveling by plane, why not give
but they don't.
W: On her side, why she would've made this choice— my her a present of a plane trip with us? She doesn’t even

guess would be something around she wasn't love
in have to sit in the same part of the plane with us. We're
going to such and such a city, she can take a motel
with him either, but she could see that he was an am-
on the other side of town. She can have a very nice,
bitious, intelligent, hardworking young man that
pleasant trip. If we want to, we can invite her to have
would do things.
dinner with us occasionally, go swimming with us ocE: He's the outstanding doctor in three large communities.
casionally.” Well, there's a marriage you know right
His office is always open.
W: So in a sense they both got what they picked all right. away is going to fail. The bridegroom consented. He
had some money.
E: But it’s a... what is it that they’ve got?

[PAGE 012]

16 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Love and Marriage 17

W: Then you really know. If you not only get this deal pro-
with Joe. I want to stay married to him.” Joe’s state-
posed but the other one buys.
ment was, “A man has to have some kind of freedom.”
E: You know right then.
When I went into that question, “Why were you drunk
W: Yes. That just sort of puts the seal on it.
so that your wedding had to be delayed?” he said,
E: A month later 1 was explaining to both of them which
“Well, I had to say goodbye to the boys.” No sense of
lawyer they ought to go to. (Laughter) But it's perfect-
values. A few quick ones over the bar saying good-
ly apparent. You see other marriages where you look
bye to the boys is much more important than his wed-
at it, and you say, “Well, that marriage is going to
ding hour. You're safe in predicting.
fail.” Here's this bride, insists that the bridegroom
The promiscuous girl who falls in love with some
have, as his best man, the man she used to date, whom
nice guy. She dates the nice guy and she falls in love.
she wanted to marry, and who walked out of the situa-
She flatly refuses to go to bed with him. Her steady
tion. She's going to see to it that she stands in front
bed partner comes around at the usual nighttime hour
of the alter with the man she wanted to marry. Now
and finds that she’s put a bolt on the door. She talks
that marriage is going to fail. In what way is it go-
to him through the door and says, “Go away, I don’t
ing to fail? It’s going to fail in one of two ways: either
ever want to see you again.” She tells that to all her
break up, or the husband is going to find himself in
boyfriends. She’s had a couple of dates with this nice
a very peculiar role, quite possibly wearing a ruffled
guy. She’s fallen for him. She’s not going to go to bed gm


apron. (Laughs) You see that over and over again.
with him. She just hopes and hopes and hopes. She
Well, you know on the wedding day. I’ve got a fami-
pn


dates him. Pretty soon he falls in love with her. You
nn


tie


ly here, an old, well-established family. I’ve had grand-
know the marriage is going to be successful. She has
pa and grandma, all the sons and daughters, all of the
cut her patterns off. All that promiscuity has disap-
arene


in-laws, and some of the grandchildren as my patients.
on


peared. She went and bought that bolt to put on her
Sonny No. 4 fell in love with this beautiful, wealthy,
door. After a couple dates with a nice guy. That nice
charming socialite. She was very popular. Of course,
guy made a pass at her, and she warded it off very
his father was wealthy, his mother was a socialite, a
gently, nicely. She doesn’t know, she mistrusts her-
leader, from Phoenix. He got so drunk they had to
self, she puts that bolt there, she talks through the
postpone the wedding for an hour. Where was he on
closed door. She’s taking no chances at all, and no ef-
the birth of his first child? He was on a three-day
fort is too small to be ignored. She goes through her
drunk. Where was he on the birth of his second child?
wardrobe. Let’s see, Bill liked this dress, Dick liked
His wife went to the hospital, and he went to a motel
that one, Harry liked that one, Gerald liked that one—
with a mistress. The third child — his wife had raised
out in the garbage they can go. She hated to do it, she
such a row that he came to the hospital, held her hand,
liked those dresses. She starts looking through her
and so on. Then he disappeared for three days with
dresser and she puts out this souvenir and that souve-
another mistress. The fourth child — treated the same
nir and she literally cleans house. I think you can pre-
way.
dict very safely.
Then his wife came to see me. She said, “I’m in love
I can think of Marie, practically a professional pros-

[PAGE 013]

18 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


titute. That’s the way she made her living. She liked
the things that other men’s money could buy. Then
she met Donald. Marie came to me and told me all
about her past life of promiscuity. Her willingness to
accept an apartment as a mistress of some man, and CHAPTER 2
slip out to other apartments of other boyfriends. Then
she met Donald. She was tremendously attracted to
him. She hunted up a job, she hunted up a cheap Confidentiality, Domination,
apartment, she moved into that. She left her mink
stole, just got rid of everything. Then she told me, she and the Absurd
said, “I don’t even know if Tll ever see Donald again,
but I want him.” I really couldn’t give her any advice.
She was reacting naturally. Cutting herself off. She
was very careful before she agreed to marry Donald 1958. Present are Milton H. Erickson, Gregory Bateson, Jay Haley, and
to find out whether or not he wanted children. She John Weakland.
raised with him the question she might be sterile, that
he might be sterile. A couple that go into marriage II. When you deal with families, and you see one person
hopefully go in not knowing what the future holds. separately, and another separately, and all of them
She found out that Donald was perfectly willing to together, how do you deal with the problem of private
marry her and take the chance that she might be communication, of secrets between you and a family
sterile, and take the chance that he might be sterile. member?
They did have two children though. It’s the attitude lv: | get sanctimonious about that. (Laughter) I explain
toward the marriage of how seriously they view what very carefully to the patient that my interview is
they are doing. strictly confidential. I always keep interviews confi-
dential. Certainly I am not going to discuss what we
say to your father or your mother, your husband, your
wife. I keep interviews confidential. I don’t know what
you will do. But whatever you do will be all right. You
can handle it any way you want to. And you know,
a that’s exactly what I’m going to tell your husband,
that’s exactly what I’m going to tell your wife, that's
exactly what I’m going to tell your child. I’ve cleared
myself with all of them. Now if they start discussing
their interviews with each other, they’ve got to live
up Lo my statement that would be all right. But they
didn’t hear me put that in.


1)

[PAGE 014]

Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 21
20 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

but let me handle it and don’t say anything at all
B: Put which in?
about it.” And so I go out and meet them where they’re
E: That it will be all right. So they’ve got to justify their
waiting. I say, “I can see one or the other of you first
communications with each other, breaking the confi- alone. That’s the way I usually do things. I suppose
dences, by making it all right. “I’m sure that whatever I can do it this way. Ladies first.” “If it's the husband
you do will be all right.” They’re under a tremendous
who has asked, I say, “Well I suppose we can do it this
burden there.
way; we'll let your wife have the last word.” (Laughter)
B: You mean they will, in fact, talk about the interview;
H: You're just full of these clichés for resolving these situ-
they will keep those pieces quiet.
ations.
E: Quiet and peaceful in order to make it “all right.” “Pm E: Those clichés are part of the language. So the husband,
Un


sure that whatever you do will be ‘all right.’ PI! keep
who has asked to see me first alone, doesn't want his
it confidential.” That gives them full permission. I told
wife to know. I’ve done his wife a favor of letting her
them Tl tell that to all the others. So they each know
have the last word. She's rather smug about it. The
that the other's under the same obligation, and all that
wife who has asked — I’ve just followed Emily Post;
rivalry between them stimulates them to make things
ladies first. “At least that's one psychiatrist that
“all right.”
knows his Emily Post.” Instead of it being a fixed-up,
H: That's a complicated one, Milton.
prearranged set-up.
W: Yes.
I: Well, how do you handle it when you're seeing a famiH: You take the competition and concern about what each
ly and the wife calls and talks to you on the phone
other is talking about and shift it to making things
about her husband, and she says she doesn't want her
all right.
husband to know that she called?
E: You know, I had a husband and wife say, “We've had lv: That she has called? I tell her, “Well J’m not going to


our first decent talk with each other. We violated this
tell him, but if you get your husband here, you'll have
confidential relation, but we've had our first decent
to tell him something. If you want to come in and see
talk.” They made it “all right.”
me without your husband's knowledge, that's perfectH: You accept it, I gather, if one family member says, “I
ly all right with me. It'll pose some problems, but I
want to see you.” If they come to you out of the blue,
expect you can handle them.”
so to speak, with a telephone call, and the wife says,
1t: That's on an initial contract. How about when you see
“I want to see you alone, before you see my husband.”
them regularly and the wife calls you secretly, or the
You go along with that?
husband calls you secretly?
E: Oh, certainly.
I’: Vve had them try to make me betray my hand by givH: Then how do you handle the husband feeling resentful
ing me information —to have me spill it to the other.
because you and the wife must have gotten together
I’m very careful about that. Because I don't know
against him before he even gets in there?
what they want when they do that. 1 keep my interE: Oh I beat the husband to the punch. Because she usual-
views confidential.
ly hasn’t told him that she wants to see me alone first.
IH: (t's just that there's an emphasis among some people
I tell her over the phone, “Yes, [ll see you alone first,

[PAGE 015]

22 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 23


who are interviewing families on “no private communi- sary getting, bit by bit, the information from him. So

cation.” Everything has to be open and aboveboard. Tll need interviews with you.” All of a sudden she

E: Well that’s a dictatorial, autocratic, dogmatic state- comes out, “Are you treating me?” I say, “If you look

ment. Of course, my description of it as such is not over our interviews in which you gave me information

a dogmatic statement. (Laughter) But you have an about your husband, from time to time didn’t you

open agreement with the family, “You know, sooner point out to me how hard it was for you to get along

or later there’s the possibility that some of our com- with your husband’s misconduct and misbehavior? Do

munications with each other should be confidential. you think that you could maintain your equilibrium

Sooner or later it will be confidential. I know if the with a husband who is that ornery? Don’t you think

occasion arises with you, Mr. X, that you want that you need some advice on how to adjust to some of

respected. In fact, I know if it arises with your wife, that behavior of your husband? Do you really think
anybody could live with that bastard for 15 years and
you want it respected.”
W: In other words, Milton will handle this the same way not show something wrong? Tell me honestly. Would

as other things. He will put it under his hand from anybody in her right mind live with him 15 years?”

the outset. (Laughter) Do you see the type of question? She can

E: Only because they want that thing respected. tell me, “I think you're right. He's enough to drive any-

W: I’ve got a question Id like to ask. In treating a fami- body bats, and I’ve felt half bats many a time.” It’s

ly, now say you have a couple when the man has come a rather easy thing. You see when they attack me, I

to you for therapy. But the wife says, “There's nothing co not get defensive. Unless I can see a way of using
wrong with me; I don’t need therapy.” She has that it.


attitude. Now the therapist can bring her in by say- W: Well, what about the opposite?

ing, “Well look, I think I need to talk to you about the lv: What's that?

trouble in your home,” and so on. So then she always W: Becoming aggressive. Do you find a way to use that

asks, “Are you treating me, doing therapy with me?” at times?
lv: Oh yes. I have told a husband and a wife in interviews,
E: Oh, I’ve beaten her to the punch.
“Now you've been battling for all these years. Funda-
W: Okay.
E: The woman says, “My husband is a bastard. I’ve lived mentally, I think you’re two awfully nice people. Ac-

with him 15 years and I know heis, and he needs ther- tually, you've been horribly misguided in your behav-
apy, and he needs a great deal of it. I don’t need one ior. You're awfully emphatic in your statements, and

particle of therapy. He needs it all.” I can tell her, “Til that means you respect people who are emphatic in

agree with you, your husband does need therapy. You their statements.”

know it and I know it. Now my job is to get him to Rt: That's a good line.

understand that fact. But actually, of course, P'd like Hi: “You have shouted at your wife to shut up, and she's

to do this as expeditiously as possible, so Ill have to shouted at you to shut up. I don’t see why I should

have some interviews with you. Because I don’t want be the only polite one in this office. I don’t see why

to spend all the time that otherwise would be neces- I can’t follow your example and tell you to shut up

[PAGE 016]

24 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 25


when there’s good reason for you to shut up.” He is because I had antagonized her by accusing her of just
going to agree with me. But he is thereby committing slapping her husband across the face with that damn
himself that when I do tell him to shut up, there’s a mother of hers. I accused the husband of slapping his
good reason. wife across the face with those damn cars of his. They
H: Do you ever, with a family, push the family into an al- proceeded to prove me wrong. Now the husband has
liance against you to bring about some incident? written to me telling me all about disposing of the
E: Oh yes. cars, and saying that I was right. His wife sent, through
H: We can use an example of that. (Laughter) a friend of hers who knows me, the verbal statement
E: I’ve done that recently. I angered the husband and wife that I was right. It’s such a relief not to have her
against me. 1 can’t think of what it was. Oh yes. I an- mother visiting every day. She and her husband are
gered the husband and I angered the wife. I just got a getting along very nicely. He used to burn up every
letter from the husband. I got a verbal relay through time he came home from the office, seeing his mother-
a friend of the wife. I antagonized both of them against in-law’s car there. He’s a doctor. His wife would burn
me. They’d come out to Phoenix to see me, and they up every time she'd go out in the yard and see those
spent the agreed-upon time there. I angered them three foreign-made cars, or two of them and the big
very, very much. Because otherwise they wouldn’t car, sitting there useless. So now I’ve got two friends.
take therapy. The wife insisted on having her mother The only one that is problematic is the mother-in-law.
visit. The husband couldn't stand the old lady, and But you know, even if you do make the people angry
I don’t blame him one bit. The only reason his wife at you, after a while they will begin to recognize that
endured her mother was because her husband could they have been benefited very greatly. Whenever I
tolerate her mother even less. The husband was get- use anger to benefit a patient, I tell them, very simply, 7


ting even with his wife by having one big car for him, “You know the thing I’m really interested in is help-
ve


one big car for her, and he had three of these foreign- ing you. I really don’t care whether you like me or dis-
made cars, small, foreign-made cars. He couldn't pos- like me, so long as I can help you. Because you didn’t
sibly afford five cars for the two of them to drive. come here just to makea friend out of me. You've got
They had so much indebtedness. 1 got both of them a lot of friends who've tried to help you, and they
mad at me, and they went back home furious at me. haven't succeeded. I’m not just going to be another
They left without saying goodbye, and all the way friend, I want to help you. Of course, if I can be your
home on the plane confided in each other how mad friend and still help you, that’s all right too. It’s even
they were at me. The husband very carefully sold his better.”
big car and two of the foreign-made cars, because he IH: think what we're concerned about is the way you can
only needed one small foreign-made car. His wife sometimes antagonize a family so that they turn
didn't like to drive the foreign cars. He used that against you and gloss over the really basic differences
money to clean up some of the indebtedness. His wife between them, and they stick together when they
was so relieved; and she didn't want me to be right, shouldn’t really.

[PAGE 017]

26 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 27


E: But you don’t want that to happen. everything at the table. All the silverware was misH: No. This is why I was interested in whether you made mated. I brought the pork chops heated in the skillet,
them angry or not and how you did it. and I brought the warmed-up potatoes in the skillet.
I had the bread there. They were used to a butler and
* * *
a maid, and things like that. So I took my fork and
I dished out their pork chops. I scraped the potatoes
E: This matter of rigidity of people — two clinical psychol- out of the skillet onto their plates with my fork, and
ogists came to me one year at Wayne County General then I helped myself. Then I took my fork and speared
Hospital. Man and wife. One sent from one college, a slice of bread and tossed it gently. And I poured
and one sent from another, for an internship in clinical some milk for them. I had coffee for myself. They kept
psychology. They arrived together, and I was utter- up a running fire of conversation.
ly horrified that Yale would send men like that, and B: That you kept up.
that —I think it was Smith— would send me a girl like ls: Oh yes. On clinical psychology, opportunities for study
that. Two of the most rigid, inhibited, prudish, prim at Eloise, and so on. I picked up my pork chop in my
people I never want to see again. So rigid. They came hand, and J ate it. Then whenI finished I dropped it
in and it didn’t take long to get their history. They over my shoulder on the terrazzo floor. The dog very
both came from New England families—rigid and gladly got up and came over and cleaned up the grease
prim and prudish, only children. They had met be- spot, ate the bone, and went back to the corner. Then
cause their families thought that the other came from I speared another. After licking my fork I speared an-
the right kind of family. Everything of that sort. The other pork chop. When we ran out of pork chops, I
fact she had gone to Smith College hadn’t done the picked up another fork, hesitated, recognized that it
girl any good in the correction of her attitudes. Yale was a clean fork, speared a pork chop, some more
hadn’t done anything for the man. Betty was in the bread, some more potatoes. I tossed my second bone
hospital having a baby, so I invited the two to have over my shoulder and OT ate it. That’s the dog. Then
lunch with me. I cooked them lunch. I took them in | poured me a glass of milk, while I was still talking
the basement kitchen of ours at Eloise, and I slid a interestedly, and I tipped that glass of milk slowly
couple chairs out across the kitchen floor for them to over onto the floor. By that time they both said, “Oh
sit in. We had lots of dishes in that kitchen there. don’t, Dr. Erickson, don’t Dr. Erickson, don’t.” The
Various sets of dishes were stored in our cupboards. idea of pouring milk on the floor. Of course, the dog
I set the table. I had three different kinds of plates. came over and licked it up. I said, “You’re both about
I had mismatched cups and saucers. I put the milk ready to faint; you just can’t take it anymore.” The
on the table in the bottle. I fried some pork chops. We girl said, “No, I was trained you never put food on the
had a dog named OT trained to lie in the corner of the Noor; youre just about making me cry, I can’t stand
breakfast room. I cooked that dinner. I warmed up it.” Then I turned to her husband. I said, “How do you
some cold potatoes, I’ve forgotten what all. I had fool?” He said, “I feel exactly the same way as my wife
glasses for their milk of different sizes. Mismated doos, this has been the most miserable meal. I hate

[PAGE 018]

28 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 29


to say it but the behavior has been perfectly outra- been married less than a month, and you're talking
geous.” I said, “That’s right. Now really, do you ex- about a divorce. I don't know what kind of a coward
pect to do a Rorschach examination, a thematic apper- you are, but you ought to see at least one month of
ception test, an intelligence test, with a psychotic your marriage through to the bitter end. So kindly
patient and expect Emily Post behavior? Or are you shut up and listen to what your bride has to say to
going to go into a state of panic when a patient says me.” He did just that— he folded his arms and set his
something slightly out of the way to you? You've just jaw and listened. His bride said, “Henry doesn't
about passed out because I poureda little milk on the believe in making love in the right fashion. He wants
floor, because I threw bones on the floor. The dog all the lights off, he wants the curtains drawn, and he
cleaned them up, you can see the floor is perfectly wants to undress in the privacy of the bathroom. He
clean. You almost passed out because you thought the won't enter the bedroom unless the lights are com-
plates and cups and saucers should match. You want pletely off. I’m supposed to wear my nightie and not
things in perfect order, and you're not going to get take it off. All he wants to do is have sex relations in
things in perfect order on the ward. What do you the most simple fashion possible. He won't even kiss
think about it?” They said, “We have been discussing me.” I asked him, “Is that right?” and he said, “I be-
that and we've been rather alarmed.” They said, “All lieve in having sex relations in the proper manner
the way here we wondered how we would deal with without getting maudlin over it.” She continued, “He
patients.” But after that introduction, the girl went just seems to avoid touching me. He won't kiss my
to the ward. She came back rather shaken because I breasts or play with them. He won't even touch them.”
introduced her to the worst possible patient, as 1 did The husband responded, “Breasts are utilitarian; they
the man, to the worst possible female patient. At the are intended for infants.” 1 told him that my inclina-
end of the summer there wasn't anything you could tion was to sympathize with his wife, and he probably
say to them that could cause them to bat an eyelash. wouldn't like what I had to say. “Therefore,” I said,
But that rigidity that people have that's so built “you sit there and keep your arms folded and your jaw
in. You tell the patient that comes to you with this clenched. Be as angry as you wish, because I’m go-
rigidity, whether it's a family interview or not, there ing to tell your wife some of the things I think she
are some things that have to be discussed. Things ought to know.”

that have to be called by name. I can give you the ex- So I told the bride in what fashion I thought her
ample of a bride and groom who came to me after less husband ought to kiss her breasts and nurse her nip-
than a month of married life. The bride insisted on see- ples. I pointed out how he ought to kiss her and where
ing me. The groom said his mind was made up; he was he ought to kiss her, and he should enjoy it. As a
going to get a divorce. He could not tolerate the out- healthy female, she should enjoy it. Then I pointed
rageous behavior of his bride. He expressed, rather oul that human beings have an anthropomorphic
emphatically, an unfavorable opinion of psychiatrists. tondency. They name their guns “Old Betsy,” their
Finally I said, “Now you've expressed your opinion boats “Stay-Up,” and their cabins “Do-Come-In.” They
and I’m going to speak with equal frankness. You've have any number of pet names for possessions of var-

[PAGE 019]

30 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 31


ious kinds. I said I thought her husband, since he said her husband had turned out to be a pleasing lover and
he loved her, ought to have some pet names for her took a great deal of pride and satisfaction in the twins.
twins. She looked a little baffled, and I said, “You A couple of years later I visited their town and had
know they are twins.” and I indicated her breasts. The dinner with a friend who knew them. He said, “What
twins really ought to have names that rhymed, I said, a pleasant couple they are. ] remember how Henry
and I turned to the young man and put the matter to was when they first got married, but he has really be-
him firmly. I said, “Now tomorrow at your next in- come human.” Later on I got a card from them and,
terview, you will come in with twin names for your in addition to “K. and T.” there were several other ad-
wife’s breasts. If you don’t name them, I will name one ditions to the family. There’s your example of aggres-
of them, and you will be stuck with the name of the sion.
other, which will come to your mind immediately.” He II: Pretty aggressive. (Laughter)
stalked out of the office. Ir: Because what on earth can he do with that name, “Kit-
The next day they came in, and the wife said, “Well, ty”? He takes a great deal of pride and satisfaction,
Henry has tried to make love in a much better fashion. as Ann wrote in the letter, in the twins. Often in psy-
He seems to have more understanding, but he says chotherapy you meet problems by using that neurotic
he’s never going to name the twins.” I turned to him compulsion in a therapeutic way. His compulsive need
and said, “Are you going to name the twins? Remem- to avoid her breasts. I just used that compulsion in
ber, if you're unwilling to do it, ’Il name one with a relationship to her breasts. He just wouldn't kiss her
rhyming name, and you will be stuck with the name breasts. He wouldn’t touch her breasts, he wouldn’t
of the other.” He said, “I’m not going to be undignified play with them with his hands. He said they were
about my wife's breasts.” I suggested that he might utilitarian and they were intended for infants.
want to think it over for half an hour while we took 11: Well now, how do you connect this? You used it— I’m
up some of the other questions. So we discussed other not following you here for a moment. You used his
aspects of their sexual adjustment, as the wife wished. avoidance.
Finally, at the end of half an hour, I said to him, “Now lv: His avoidance, his compulsive avoidance, but I made
me


are you ready with the names for the twins? I’m ready, the entire thing compulsive in another way.
but I hope you are.” He said, “I just defy you.” I ex- //; You mean a compulsive rhyme?
plained again that I would name one, and the rhym- lv: A compulsive rhyme. And kitty, that’s an affectionate.
ing name would come to his mind immediately. When Titty, that’s an affectionate, and there’s no escaping
he again refused, I said to the wife, “Well, are you it.
ready?” She said she was. I said, “I now christen your I: Not in that context.
right breast Kitty.” (Laughter) The bride was pleased. lv: No. There's no escaping it. So all that compulsion be-
They were from out of state, and six months later I came centered around an affectionate—what would
got a Christmas card from them. It was signed with you call it — an affectionate naming of the breast. He
their names and “K. and T.” The wife wrote me that had to think about Miss Kitty and Titty. Kitty and

[PAGE 020]

32 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 33


Titty. And Kitty is such a nice term. So his compul- meet the test. Several of our couples and families are
sion was just reversed. this way.
H: That’s the tricky thing, the reversal you put on com- W: It could be seen as a statement, “Don’t push me around,”
pulsion. If they’re going to be compulsive, you might where it actually is a statement, “Are you a man or
as well compel them in the right direction. That seems not?” He doesn’t respond like a man, he responds like,
to be your approach. “Yes dear, I won't shove you too hard.”
E: Yes. Ann says that Joe turned out to be a very pleas- H: The couples I see in my practice too, this is a typical
ing lover. He really discovered what a titty was for. problem between them, or it’s certainly a manifesta-
(Laughter) tion of the problem between them.
H: You have an odd way of taking the usual clinical diag- E: Y can think of a couple that I handled in this way. The
nostic categories and somehow using them as an ap- wife liked to go out to dinner. She enjoyed going out
proach to the patient. I imagine with phobias, since to dinner, and her husband enjoyed taking her. But
it’s avoiding something phobically, you'd get them it was always a farce, it worked out that way. He
avoiding the right thing in the same sort of a way. would agree to take her any place that she wanted to
E: You use the phobia. The patient’s got a lot of strength go, and in looking at the menu, he would say, “You
and force built into that phobia, and therefore you use would like this, wouldn’t you?” He always chose her
that. food. “Would you like your steak well done?” Of
course, she wanted it rare, but how could she when
* * *
that sweet husband so thoughtfully and considerately
ordered things for her? He always picked the restauH: One of the things I would like to discuss is a typical rants and the table, and he always asked the orchestra
kind of couple where the wife is overwhelming her hus- to play special pieces for her. He selected the pieces
band and wishing she couldn’t. Where the husband for her without consulting her. It always worked out
is—I don't know quite how to phrase it —the husband that she never got the food she wanted. They never
does something, the wife objects or in some way puts went to the restaurant she wanted to go to. She al-
him down, and instead of overcoming her in this kind ways had to admit that it was a nice dinner, a nice res-
of a struggle, he steps down. She continually puts him taurant, the orchestra was very nice, everything was
in his place, and she doesn’t want to really. You get wonderful; and she would go home and be full of fury
this difficulty either in a sexual sphere or in just any and rage and helpless. He would always add, “You tell
kind of argument. me if you have any other choice. Well now, let’s see
W: In a case where she sort of challenges him, instead of the next restaurant that you would like.” So he always
taking it as a challenge he collapses instead of com- gave her an opportunity to correct him verbally, but
ing up to it. no time in which to correct him. So utterly sweet.
H: You can put it as testing. She's testing him all the time I1: | think this is another problem, but it’s a very pertinent
to see if he’s really the boss, and continually he doesn’t one. 1t's another one that we run into all the time.

[PAGE 021]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 35


E: Therefore, in a joint interview with them, he said he he had made the selections. Unwittingly, when the
didn't believe he did a thing like that. He certainly waitress took the order, he was looking at her menu.
wouldn't. He didn't believe he did it that way. He cer- I told her to say, “Yes, that’s my menu.” He said,
tainly wouldn't want to do it that way, and he ex- “What would you like?” Because she had the menu
plained it to his wife until she finally agreed, in my from which the choice had been made. Do you see
presence, that he didn't do it that way. Then she said, that? They had identical menus, but he had studied
“Y ou see what I mean?” (Laughter) And he looked just the menu and held it in his hand. She told him that
as blank as he could be. So I asked him if he would she wanted a filet mignon, let’s say, medium rare, and
be willing to take his wife out to dinner with his wife a chef's salad with Roquefort dressing. So she selected
asking him to drive down a certain street and surpris- each item from the menu which he had looked at. She
ing him with the restaurant. Actually, what I did was gave the wrong orders, of course. But she held in her
I listed —took a city map and I began listing the streets hand that particular menu. “I want you to select any-
that he would drive down. So many blocks, and at thing on the menu,” but this was hers. He kept look-
2200 he would turn right, drive eight blocks, turn left ing at his menu and closing it and asking her.
and go nine or ten blocks. I had him literally circle W: It’s almost as if he had actually marked the menu and
around the city. Here and there, turning right, turn- then handed it to the wife.
ing left, going east, going west, going north, going I: That's right. He was an orderly, meticulous man. (Laugh-
south, until it was the most bewildering sort of thing. ter) You see, that first trading of the menus, well that
As they drove, his wife read the directions. (Laughter) was his menu, the one from which he had made the
Until finally she said, “Now the next instruction is to choice. He marked it and then, all of a sudden, it got
turn right at the first restaurant. So they went into into his wife’s hands. He’s such an utterly, complete-
the Blue Grotto restaurant. I had that elaborate path- ly meticulous man. That’s why he carried sucha list.
way all worked out, and her husband by that time was B: How do you know what order of judgment is involved
so thoroughly in a receiving state of mind. (Laughter) in saying that he would, therefore, be meticulous with
She said, “Now it says here on the paper we enter the the second menu that he receives? Suppose with the
Blue Grotto, we walk past the first two booths, then first change of menu he has already said, “This menu
we walk past the table on the righthand side, and then that I first had is my menu without change, now it’s
we walk over toward the row of booths, then we walk come back to me.”
around another table.” So they just followed that. He I: My instruction to Evelyn was, “As soon as a waitress
followed along. The waitress came in and brought gives you a menu, you pick it up. She'll undoubtedly
them menus, She looked at the paper and she said, give him his menu second. Now you watch very care-
“Now we'll trade menus.” (Laughter) They read the fully, don’t open yours, as soon as he picks his up —
menus, he said, “Shall I give the order, dear?” She said, change. Before he's got a chance, but you've taken his
“Yes, Pll just trade menus.” Now he got the menu that menu away. Therefore he's got to abide by your
she had been reading, and she got the menu on which choice.”

[PAGE 022]

36 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 37


B: Had she chosen the restaurant or did you? ful time at the Blue Grotto, driving in that absurd,
E: Oh I chose it. You see I took the city map and mapped ridiculous way. Let’s drive the same sort of a way and
out this criss-cross back and forth. see what sort of a restaurant we wind up at.” So he
B: But he didn’t know that you had chosen the restaurant? literally repeated that 17 blocks west, 10 blocks south,
E: She had mentioned that she would like to go to this 18 blocks east, 7 blocks north, until finally they’d
restaurant, that one, and she hadn't been to the driven at random, hither and yon. Finally he said,
Blue Grotto, among a number of others, because he “Now after we drive 10 blocks more, let’s stop at the
tended to go regularly to about five particular res- first good-looking restaurant we see.” So then they
taurants. were at liberty to pick the first good-looking restauW: Well, among the things you've done there, to start off rant they saw.
with, is to set up a program—this turn left, four FH: So this became not a choice that would deprive her but
blocks, turn right, even more meticulous than his, but kind of a random choice?
which is obviously stupid as a means of getting some- E: It would be a random choice of the first good-looking
where. restaurant that they saw. And of course he was drivE: Yes. Because actually the Blue Grotto was almost on ing. I’ve forgotten which restaurant it was. If I re-
a straight line from where they lived. (Laughter) Go- member correctly, it was a Chinese restaurant on East
ing north and south, east and west, and finally wind- Thomas. She said, “That looks like a nice place, turn
ing up on the west side of town, almost in a straight in.” He was trying to take charge by following that
line. original pattern I had given them of taking her inB: Did he arrive at the restaurant in a rage? struction. Taking charge while taking her instrucE: He was amused, and he was thinking about how nicely tions. It was a new place. He had no patterns set up,
those directions worked out so well that he would ar- and his wife immediately announced her wishes. She
rive at the Blue Grotto. It’s a work of art from his was following the pattern of the Blue Grotto.
point of view. He was very meticulous. (Laughter) II: You seem to feel if you can get them to change their
H: Now you had her read your directions, and he would pattern once, the next time they'll also do it. They
follow the directions because they came from you; but won't fall back on the previous one.
by the fact that she was reading them, that made 17: Oh, to prevent that I said, “Now you're going out to din-
them come from her? ner a number of times more before Christmas. There
E: That’s right. are at least five places that you will not go,” and I
H: This is another alliance situation? named the ones they usually went to.
E: Another alliance. . Il: You cut off the previous ones.
H: Well now, what did this do in the way of setting it up lv: 1 cut off the ritualistic selections of the past.
so that the next time they spontaneously went out to IT: Why would you do it in terms of switching menus,
dinner with a different arrangement? rather than more directly in terms that she was to
E: The next time they went out to dinner, hubby looked make the choice?
over the situation and he said, “We had such a delight- lv: Say that again.

[PAGE 023]

38 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 39


H: Why didn’t you just instruct her to make the choice of centerpiece he'd bring home that weekend. He hand-
what they would have for dinner? ed her this out-of-town newspaper. She was horribly
E: Because he was one of those meticulous guys that took puzzled. Those flowers she received were a florist’s
the menu and read it very carefully. He examined that choice, and a practical joke. What did the florist do?
menu from the uppermost line on, right straight He put in roses, and he put in pansies, and various
down. He had read everything on the menu before he flowers that didn’t seem to fit together and match. It
ordered — systematically. was no effort at an elaborate arrangement. His wife,
W: Well, Milton covers more ground this way. He does of course, got this completely disarranged bunch of
something not only for her situation with the hus- flowers. The exact opposite of an ornate center-of-the-
band, but also about the husband's meticulousness, table piece. Her husband discovered again that he
as I see it. could present something to his wife that pleased her
E: Yes. And 1 knew from her descriptions how he would immeasurably.
examine the menu. H: Well now, apparently you assume that his previous
H: You don't interpret or comment on what a difficult po- choices were just a lack of understanding of what his
sition he puts her in by being so sweet and benevo- wife wanted.
lent? E: He was raised in the East in absolute formality. She
E: He couldn't understand that. But that Blue Grotto din- grew up on a farm.
ner was one of the nicest dinners he and she ever had. IT: Now if he consistently brought her what she didn't
She really enjoyed it, and she went all out in telling want, this was a sign of some resentment more than
him so. That was the first time he had ever experi- just a choice of his because of a lack of understanding.
enced that sort of gratitude. He used to buy her flow- lv: It was a lack of understanding with her, because he
ers, very thoughtfully, for the weekend. There would couldn't possibly conceive of how anybody would
be a table piece, centerpiece, of flowers, which always want anything else. That absolute rigidity. Their wed-
threw her into a silent fury. He never managed to get ding anniversaries were always celebrated with pomp
her the flowers she liked. It was always a completely and circumstance. She told me how she anticipated
ornate centerpiece for the table. I had him go down their sixth wedding anniversary. “We'll have a private
to one of those newsstands and ask a newsstand oper- dining room. We'll have the waiters, we'll have an or-
ator, “Have you got a yesterday’s paper, or have you nate cake. We'll have all the proper people there; all
got some out-of-town paper that’s left over?” He bought the proper toasts will be made, the right champagne.
that to take to a florist. He told the florist, “I’m play- We'll have a babysitter there the night before. We'll
ing a joke on somebody. I’d like some nice flowers. take a suite in the hotel in preparation for our sixth
Whatever you think would be a nice joke on some- anniversary.” So 1 told him, “Your wedding anniver-
body, a very nice joke. So I'll put the flowers in this sary’s coming up. It would be very, very delightful to
paper, just wrap it up and I'll present it to them.” So surprise your wife. Give her a surprise that is abso-
he walked into the house, and his wife wondered what lutely unforgettable.” So I outlined for him a surprise

[PAGE 024]

40 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 41


for her. He looked at me in absolute horror. (Laughter) W: Well now, we have the picture here that sort of high-
I said, “Go to your sister-in-law. I'll call her up in ad- lighted him. I wonder if there's anything you might
vance. She will give you the full instructions. I want say about — did she take a part in this picture or was
you to rent a pick-up truck. Go to the store and buy it all, so to speak, his doing?
sleeping bags and tents, and camping equipment. Buy E: She grew up as a nice farm girl in a nice, solid, substan-
bacon and eggs and hot dogs and hamburgers. Buy tial family. Then her father struck it rich. He got so-
your wife Levis and your sister-in-law knows the size. cial climbing ideas, and his wife had social climbing
She has the same size feet. Get her rough shoes. Then ideas. That's what led to her acquaintance with this
you drive into the yard tomorrow afternoon at four man. Her parents really approved. He's a nice guy.
o'clock. Tell your wife, “Here's your clothes, put them Her marriage occurred before she really knew what
on. You've got a surprise coming.’ Take her out to the the situation was, and she was caught in it. Since she
desert for a wedding anniversary breakfast before go- was such a nice, sweet, farm country girl, she didn't
ing camping out. After a night's sleep, you can real- know how to deal with the situation. But once she
ly do a little mountain climbing. Somewhere around learned a little bit, then her husband tried to take it
noon, cook another meal, and then get in the truck and over; but he had to take it over in a peculiar pattern
get lost.” (Laughter) By that time he was in the spirit that 1 had created for him, which gave his wife a lot
of things. He got in the truck and he said, “I don't to say about it.
know where this road goes, but we're driving down it.” W: I’m still wondering if, in addition to his benevolence,
Instead of returning to Phoenix, they wound up in perhaps she wasn't so sweet, that she was a little bit
Yuma. They had a very delightful time there, and then caught up in the same thing. She was going along
drove back. Absolutely marvelous time. Now he was with it sweetly, in a way that sort of reinforced his...
in to see me the other day, and they’ve been camping It: She didn’t know how to deal with it. She felt so helpless,
Pu


on weekends all this past summer. They thoroughly and yet she knew her wants. But you see that change
enjoy it. She grew up on a farm. She and her siblings her father and mother all of a sudden imposed upon
had gone camping. They had gone to Sunday school her after the age of 18 when father struck it rich.
picnics. They’d gone to Girl Scout camps, and camping : I think you tend, Milton, to interpret people's being
out overnight. He grew up in a wealthy New England mean to one another as a lack of understanding.
family. There was a butler and a maid, the upstairs : There usually is. (Laughter) He was not really mean to
heen]
y


maid and the downstairs maid, and the basement her; it worked out that way. She wasn’t really mean
maid and the cook, who did everything. He did what to him, but it worked out that way. She never did have
Emily Post said was proper. Now he has become a de- proper gratitude.
cidedly different sort of person. He looks me up about i : Well if she, over a period of time, never expressed prop-
three times a year to review his adjustments and his er gratitude, and never felt proper gratitude, and he
wife's adjustments. She comes in here about twice a over this period of time never received this gratitude,
year just to review things. there’s a pretty powerful resentful feeling building up.

[PAGE 025]

42 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 43


E: Oh yes. E: Quite often I’ve told a dominant woman, in very comH: This isn’t what you deal with. You deal with the lack plimentary terms, my appreciation of her competen-
of understanding rather than the resentment. cy. Then I raise the questioning doubt — my inability
E: Yes. Their sexual behavior was pretty terrible. She was to understand a woman of her intelligence neglecting
cold toward him. He had premature ejaculations. She to use the competencies of her husband. One of the
would get sexually hungry; he would have his prema- things I do in that connection is this: I point out that
ture ejaculation. Then when he did control his ejacula- biologically a man is quite another order of creature
tion, that was the time she was definitely not inter- than is the female. His entire philosophy of life is dif-
ested in sex and would unwillingly submit. And yawn ferent, his whole psychological functioning is different
during intercourse. (Laughter) So it was a pretty un- in relationship to children. It’s the mother who's one
pleasant thing. Socially he was so terribly polite, but completed sexual act takes about 16 years to com-
whenever they went out to the country club, he would plete. That includes receiving the sperm, carrying the
be so polite to somebody that unpleasant things unborn child, nine months of gestation, the lactation.
would develop that would embarrass her. It requires all of the physiological changes in the
FH: Well other schools of therapy would encourage them body, all of the physical changes in the body, all of
to express their resentment toward each other in ver- the transformations of the body that occur in the
bal ways. Talk about how they resented what each woman. That it includes taking care of the baby,
other was doing and go through that, and then work teaching it, nurturing it, educating it, and guiding it
into something better, and you just by-pass it I and protecting it through long years of childhood, and
gather? that biologically a woman is so oriented. When my
E: I bypass it. If the house is uncleanable, move out. (Laugh- dominant woman listens to that, she has a legitimate
ter) Because the important thing is to live in a pret- excuse for her dominance. But as surely as she accepts
ty house. If the house is uncleanable, move out. that legitimate excuse for dominance, then she lays
H: Well, a different sort of a problem — the problem of the herself open to the responsibility of utilizing every fa-
husband and wife, where they go out to dinner and vorable influence in the environment. Now among the
the wife has to initiate going out to dinner, and when favorable influences in the environment is this hus-
they get there she selects what food to have. There’s band of hers who represents another order of biolog-
always some resentment, on her part, of the fact that ical experience. Another order of biological learning.
she has to do the initiating of everything; and at the And since her child will have to live in a world of men
same time if her husband does more initiating where and women and must deal with both, and since her
to go, she objects. It’s sort of a reversal of what you're child is either a man or a woman, there must be an
talking about. Where the wife is in charge and the hus- adequate awareness of the biological character and
band isn’t. structure of the self, and the biological character and
W: If you decide to bring the husband up some, what reac- the structure of the opposite sex. The dominant wom-
tions would there be on the other side? an is literally made to recognize that she better utilize

[PAGE 026]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 45

those innate, inherent things in the biological struc-
he went home; and he opened in the morning for the
ture of her husband.
breakfast trade. Who ought to carry the keys? She
W: Have you another example where a woman insists on
said, “We both carry the keys. I always get there first.
being in charge and then resents her husband because
He's parking the car.” So I pointed out to her that she
he’s not in charge?
ought to see to it that her husband gets there one-half
E: I can think of the husband and wife who went into busi-
hour before she does. That was where the break came.
ness running a restaurant. She wanted him to manage
He carried the keys, and he opened the door, and un-
that restaurant, and she pointed out to him that he
locked everything. All the details of starting up a res-
should manage that restaurant. But, as he stated,
taurant. I had him list all the things he took charge
“Yes, now she tells me that I should run that restau-
of in that one-half hour. His wife arrived a half an hour
rant. I’m the busboy, I’m the janitor. I scrub the
late. She didn’t quite see the sense in arriving a half
floors, and she nags at me because I don’t do the buy-
an hour late. They had only one car. But I pointed out
ing. She nags at me because I don’t do the bookkeep-
to them that their home was only a few blocks from
ing. She nags at me because I don’t run the business.
the restaurant. If she wanted to, she could drive her
She runs it. But she points out to me that the floor
husband to the restaurant, or he could walk. But she
needs scrubbing. I really ought to get someone to
arrived at the restaurant completely out of step and
scrub the floor, but I can’t wait until somebody comes way behind. One-half hour behind him. There had
in and asks for the job, so I wind up doing it myself.
been so many things that he had already set into mo-
Then there’s no need of hiring someone to do it.”
tion. He was managing then, do you see that?
That’s how the situation was. The question was,
H: I see that as a breakthrough, but not entirely a solution.
how would I handle that? The wife had no insight in-
E: Once she yielded on that half hour in the morning, then
to the situation at all. She said, yes, she did want him she yielded on going home at 6 o’clock. That put an-
to be the man that ran that restaurant. She wanted other break in the day.
to be at home. She had some sewing to do, she wanted IT: Well, there is another side to this sort of a relationship
her husband to have something more than restaurant
that we see, and that is the husband inviting his wife
cooking. She wanted to do her own home cooking. He to take charge; while protesting that she’s always tak-
had to eat at least one meal at the restaurant, but why
ing charge, he’s also inviting her.
not have a home cooked meal instead of that restau- lv: He's inviting her, that’s right. Now I didn’t point out
rant cooking? Why not cook the very special foods to the husband, “Yes, you end up mopping the floor
with the special seasonings that he liked. That was when your wife wants you to because you invite her
her insistence. And her husband’s statement was, to tell you to mop the floor. You invite her to tell you
“Yes, that’s what she says; you can hear it, I can hear to scrub out the garbage cans.” Because he wouldn't
it. She'll be in the restaurant tomorrow morning.” So
have understood that. But he did begin to understand
what I did with her was to raise the question of who
that he was in charge for a whole half hour. That was
carried the keys to the restaurant? Who locked up?
what he could understand. He was a perfectly com-
it was somewhere around 10 or 10:30, 11 o'clock, that
petent man.

[PAGE 027]

46 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 47


W: Well, from what I’ve seen of families, that might take to dominate her husband. What did she want to do
a very critical amount of arranging by you simply to about it? She said she'd do anything in the world to
insure that he's going to get there that half hour ear- get over it. So I gave her the task of reporting to her
ly, and that she is going to get there a half hour later. husband. Now you quiz him thoroughly on every
I wonder how you really nailed that down, because point. You've got a list of the questions you always
I’ve seen them be awfully slippery on making any def- ask. Then I want you to frame parallel questions con-
inite change like that whatsoever. What I got was cerning your day's activities. She framed the ques-
that you ask her to see to it that he got there a half tions, and she quizzed her husband, and then she an-
hour ahead of her. swered for her husband her own questions about her
E: That was her management. (Laughter) Asking her to activity. Her husband was still being quizzed, but it
manage to defeat herself. always wound up with her being in her husband's role
W: She doesn’t see that this is happening; she sees simi- except that she was managing it by literally asking
larities but not the difference? her own questions of herself in reporting to her husE: Not the difference. Of course, that left her with the band. She had complete management. And you know,
breakfast dishes and the housework. She could be half she got so fed up with that. I took all of the pleasure
an hour late— you know, she could be 35 minutes late. out of dominating her husband.
That was another thing she didn’t recognize. In fact, FH: She handed him the list to ask, is that it?
she could be 40 minutes late. She could be an hour E: Oh no. She made out a list for me of the questions she
late. Thereby she was discovering that her husband always asked her husband.
could get along without her. Her husband was at the IT: Yes.
same time discovering that he could manage the res- 17: Then I had her make out a comparable list that her hus-
taurant. His wife was discovering the management band could ask her.
of their home, the importance of her other activities. IT: Well then, she gave him this list to ask?
It finally wound up that she ran the cashier’s desk i’: Oh no. And I told her to keep that list. You don't have
during the cashier’s vacations. In case of sickness of to refer to it to quiz your husband. But after you are
tars


an employee, when they were rushed, she would drop through quizzing your husband, you look at this list
in. that you keep in your handbag, and then you tell him,
I can think of another restaurant couple. Every day I have done this.
his wife went down to check to see if he was running II: Without his asking?
that restaurant correctly. He was utterly furious lv: Without his asking. You see, I put the management
about it. Yet he let her do it. He recited his lessons completely in her hands. But forced her to put herself
each day. She spent about two hours there checking into a... how do you pronounce that word ... recita-
up on everything. She'd drop in 1 o’clock, 2 o'clock, tive role.
3 o'clock in the afternoon. He was utterly furious; but W: But here that makes it even more so, when you get her
he'd recite his lessons, recite his reports. I asked her to put herself in that position somehow.
about that, and she said she couldn't resist that need 17: The last time I talked to them, oh, it was over a year

[PAGE 028]

48 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 49


ago, the only time she ever goes to that restaurant is E: Yes, but you see, so often the tendency is to look at one
when she drops in with some one of her social friends specific aspect of the central complaint of a husband
and orders something. She never reports on the house- and wife. Now there are a lot of other things between
hold. She runs that. And they built a new house, an the husband and wife. That restaurant was his entire
expensive house, and she’s running that to his com- life, and she was really interested in her husband. She
plete satisfaction. He has been in the restaurant busi- didn’t know how to manifest it.
ness, let's see, he is in his 50s— he started out as a high H: Let me pose a situation, for example: You're seeing a
school kid interested in restauranting. He had his first husband and wife. The wife had anxiety attacks which
hot dog, hamburger stand in his early 20s. He had a she is now over. But they have a relationship where
restaurant in Chicago; his son got asthma, they moved she is constantly protesting how inadequate the guy
to Phoenix. After all the years in Chicago, even when is. He doesn’t initiate anything. She has to initiate go-
she was dating him, she asked him his daily catechism ing out. She has to suggest this and that. He goes
on the running of his restaurant, before they were along with whatever she recommends. It reaches the
even married. So he invited that trouble. extreme that when she does housework on Saturday
W: One thing different in this is that she had some recogni- morning, he follows her. He just walks around and
tion of what she was doing. watches her do housework, making her very uncomE: But felt compelled to do it. fortable. Now she’s not happy with this situation. But
W: That’s different from the other couple. they get in terrific arguments when he does suggest
E: You see, she recognized it and felt compelled and so doing something, or when he does take a little more
helpless about it. Therefore, I utilized that feeling of assertive role in the marriage. Now this is the situa-
compulsion by letting her apply it to herself. tion; it’s an obvious situation, and it isn’t obvious
W: You got her to compel herself with that other list. what to do about it.
E: Compel herself with the other list, and that altered the 1: Well, what else is there about them?
character of the compulsion. How is your stock of HL. Well, it’s two college graduates, both of them feeling
this, and how is your stock of that? Her statement absolutely inadequate about getting a good job. He
to him—I ordered a seven-course meal for the house- works on a magazine. She was working as a typist for
hold. I bought two loaves of bread. The family is go- two years, and then she had her anxiety attack and
ing to have roast beef. quit. She’s now gone back to work there. That’s the
H: It seems so simple now. You have a way of looking at only job in the world she could have, and the only job
what’s going on. It seems obvious when you explain she could look for. She’d be afraid to look for a job any-
it; yet when someone tries to apply it to a couple or where else except at the University in the same de-
a family, it isn’t quite so obvious. partment where she’d been working before. So now
W: No, if we'd seen that restaurant couple, this might not they both work. She’s afraid to have children, afraid
have leaped to the eye. to have babies; this will kill her, she'll have a heart atH: Yes. tack or something of the sort. He is working on a mag-

[PAGE 029]

50 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 51


azine. He’s a journalism graduate. He isn’t happy with E: Yes. On inadequate things. On stupid, feeble little
the job. He'd like to be a writer, sort of, vaguely. They things. Why not a good fight? A good fight, and an
just live. They have very few friends. They have very intense fight?
little social life because they’re uncomfortable in W: But about something that’s limited so that they won't
groups. go on.
E: Do they save any money? E: That's right. I would try to make this following her—
H: They are beginning to save a little now. They were aw- I'd get the details from her, so I’d know how to utilize
fully broke for a period because she wasn’t working it. He follows her from room to room as she sweeps
and he was making a small salary. They're vaguely the floor. 1 would really want to penalize him horribly.
saving for a down payment for a house. But I’d want to penalize her at the same time. I’d build
E: And he follows her around, watches her sweep this up the situation with her. “Just see to it that he fol-
room, and then follows her into the other room and lows you through the living room, the dining room,
watches her sweep that room. Which one do you want the kitchen, the hallway; and sweep the floor very
to make mad at the other? carefully and let him watch you. And keep attracting
H: I don’t want to make either one of them mad; I want his attention. Say, ‘I’m sweeping up this corner.’ After
to make them a little happy. you've got the floor all swept, go and get that bag that
E: Yes. But so far, given what you describe to me, it seems you've got prepared in the kitchen. Start where you
to me what 1 would do in that situation is to cast began the sweeping, and take a little handful of leaves
around for some way of making one of them mad at and dirt and grass and put it there. Go through all the
the other in a rather unnecessary way. That is, now rooms, see to it he follows you through. Then tell him,
suppose I could generate a fight between you and ‘You know, next Saturday I’m going to sweep the floor
Gregory on the subject of, “Should you put a camp- again.’” Now, what will that do to her and what will
fire on the west side of this brook or on the east side that do to him?
of the brook?” How often are you going to be at that H: I don't know, what will it do?
brook? Not very often. Build up a situation where you E: Here's an impossible situation. You've got to do some-
can generate a quarrel in a situation that is not like- thing about it. You can't sweep the floor until next
ly to occur again. Neither wants to quarrel with the Saturday.
other. Both are going to have, if you can generate a IT: She would be instructed not to sweep it until next
good quarrel, an increased emotional respect for the Saturday?
other. And they never notice what you're doing to E: Until next Saturday.
them. IT. This would be discussed with her alone?
H: Well, they can quarrel, but they'll quarrel on the fact lv: Yes, and you do not discuss the matter.
¡A


that he didn't lock the door when they left. IT: She is not to discuss it with him when he says, “For
E: 1 know. God’s sake, we can’t leave this on the floor all week?”
H: Or he didn’t do this, or he didn’t do that. i J: That's right.
E

[PAGE 030]

52 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 53


B: The floor has not been particularly prepared. front yard; and then in the middle of that patch, put
- H: The floor has just been swept with him following her, a tin can, sit back and look at it, cramp it into place.
she then takes a bag of crap and goes around and Do the same thing in the backyard. Just ornament it,
sprinkles the crap afterward. Then she says, “I'll have your front yard and your back yard with various
to sweep the floor again next Saturday.” things. Then go over and clip one of your flowers, say
E: P've discussed with her what she's to do. So he is to fol- calla lilies, and take your scissors, and look at them
low her from room to room and observe uncritically, gently. Then bend over and half break off a calla lily
that is, verbally, vocally uncritically; and after she and leave it there.”
finishes messing up the floor, she says, “I will have A month later that neighbor just couldn't stand it.
to sweep the floor a week from now, next Saturday.” He wasn't out there to watch. He wouldn't watch his
They would both know that 1 had specified no discus- neighbor mow that yard. Wouldn't do anything. The
sion. They’ve got a week's time in which to deal with man's wife wouldn't come to the back fence and say,
a major problem. It's an impossible situation. “Y our children are too noisy; isn't that tattletale grey
I can give you another kind of example of that. One in your clothes hanging on the line?” The neighbor
of my patients said, “I just can't stand it, what my just abhorred the situation. It was a completely im-
neighbor does to me. Every time I mow the yard, possible situation. In a month’s time, that laborious
front or back, he comes up and follows right behind shifting of that refuse when he mowed. That neighbor,
me. He hasn't got much to say, he just watches me. who was set on driving him away from that neighbor-
And he's horribly troublesome. 1 don't like him and hood, couldn't take it.
he doesn't like me, and he's annoying the hell out of H: Why couldn't he take it?
me. I can't afford to sell my home and move to another E: How does this work? The man's acting crazy, and he
part of town. I’m just going wild, and my wife is quar- knew darn well the man wasn’t crazy. He had com-
reling with his wife. His way of getting even with me, mitted himself to a policy of driving his neighbor
his wife's way of getting even, is to have him follow crazy. The neighbor was really doing it to him. It
me around. If I tell him to get out of my yard, he just doesn’t make any sense to put an old piece of board,
stands on the edge and he watches me. He's driving and lay it down so precisely, yet you’ve cut four
me frantic. He gets home before 1 do, and he's sitting swathes of grass, it just doesn’t make sense. They
out there in front watching me. When I leave in the have since become friends. (Laughter)
morning he's out there watching me. He's driving me W: I realized that there's also the possible alternate on this.
batty.” Suppose that this might have been, on this case, a
I said, “Well, turnabout is fair play.” What I told this more difficult instruction to carry out. Suppose you
man to do: “Make a collection of pieces of tire cord, had had him ask his neighbor to watch him very care-
pieces of board, of tin cans, wadded-up pieces of news- fully, and observe very closely what he did, so that
paper. And mow three or four swatches across the he could really feel that if he made any mistakes, that
front of the yard. Go and get an old piece of board and he would have someone to check him up on it.
lay it down very carefully. Mow some more of the 17: But you see, by putting that trash down, he was ask-

[PAGE 031]

54 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 55


ing the neighbor to observe very carefully, and ask- cramp it into place. Now with this situation, 1 don't
ing in such a way that the neighbor couldn’t refuse. know anything about the personalities. It might be
He was compelling the neighbor. the wrong thing for the people you have in mind; but
FH: God, that’s a tricky one. you create an impossible situation, and you dont disE: He was asking. He was compelling, and there was no cuss it.
refusal possible. Any refusal of any sort would mean H: They’re both instructed separately not to discuss it?
rejection by the neighbor of the neighbor’s own pat- E: Yes.
tern. And rejection by the neighbor of the neighbor’s H: And the husband is surprised with what happens; he
own pattern, but not at the request of my patient. isn’t told what’s going to happen?
H: Not at the direct request. E: That’s right.
E: My patient was still asking, “Give me your attention.” H: He’s just told that it’s not to be discussed, without beH: But to return to this couple again, when you set up a ing told what is not to be discussed.
situation like this, which is impossible, what happens E: That’s right. You impress it upon him so thoroughly,
then? What are you trying to achieve with an impossi- and you impress it upon the wife so thoroughly.
ble situation? H: So what they’re faced with is a floor with trash on it,
E: My patient had become interested and pleased by his the sweeping done today, the sweeping not to be done
own performance. He had a satisfying sense of power until next Saturday, and no discussion.
and pleasure. He wanted his neighbor to keep look- E: That's right.
ing. He wanted a relationship with his neighbor, but B: And they have the Joneses coming to dinner on Wed-
it was impossible for him to foresee just what his nesday. (Laughter)
neighbor would do. But he wanted something in rela- E: To get one of my aphasic patients, one that had a cere-
tionship to his neighbor. But what that would be as bral accident, over one of the obstacles to her improve-
a result of that peculiar behavior, he couldn't foresee; ment, I told her husband, “Listen, I want you to buy
that's why they became friends eventually. a fish tank. Make it one of those 15-gallon ones. Set
H: Well, now if I instruct this wife, who is a meticulous it up in the den, and stock it with fish.” He said, “But
housekeeper, to go through this procedure: sweep the my wife doesn't like tropical fish.” I said, “I know. You
floor, pointing out how well she's sweeping the floor, can afford that tank, and you can afford the tropical
and then to go around and spread this trash... fish.” Those were his instructions. 1 said, “Now your
W: Now, does she point out how well she's doing, or does wife will tell you certain things to do about the fish
she point out just what she's doing? There's a certain tank. You do them. One of the things you say to your
difference there. wife after you set up that fish tank, You talk this over
E: Well, you see 1 had my patient mow three swathes of with Dr. Erickson.” So when she came in, I said, “Now
grass across the front of his lawn, and then rather pre- your husband has purchased that fish tank, he's got
cisely put that scrap of old board down, and mow so it well-stocked: You hate tropical fish. You hate aquar-
much more, rather precisely put down the tin can and iums. All right, now I want you every night at 7

[PAGE 032]

56 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 57


o'clock to take your husband in there and both sit B: The Koan, yes.
there and silently watch those fish for one-half hour. H: The Koan.
You don’t know why. Your husband doesn’t know E: He wanted his wife to talk, and she had the feeling she
why. Just spend one-half hour there, and keep ab- couldn't talk. But here’s an impossible situation. Some-
solutely silent, and you tell him that he is to remain thing really ought to be said about this.
absolutely silent. B: How did you terminate? I mean, how did you end it?
W: Which is the aphasic patient of this pair? E: 1 knew when to end it because her husband told me that
E: The woman. “Keep absolutely silent. At the end of the his wife was really talking more and more and more
half hour — you have a clock there that you can watch freely.
—you both leave the den, and then you can resume B: During the day?
normal living. Anything you wish.” It worked out E: That's right. That tremendous need to talk — the knowl-
very nicely. The woman spent that half hour desper- edge that tonight I’ve got to go and sit there silent-
ately wishing she could ask her husband, “What in hell ly. (Laughter)
goes on here? Why? What is Dr. Erickson trying to IT: You punish her for silence. You punish her with silence.
accomplish?” (Laughter) I wanted a tremendous mo- E: Do you call it punishment, or do you say that you are
tivation for talking. Her husband had told me that his using silence to create the motivation? You are infect-
wife liked to talk, but it was becoming increasingly ing speech with values.
difficult. She would just sit there and just look at him IH: It’s again what you continually do, accept what they're
when he tried to converse with her. He couldn't under- already doing, and have them do it on direction.
stand that fish tank. If the fish tank was a diversion, E: By the way, they both like tropical fish now. (Laughter)
look at the fish. Sit there silently. He wanted to talk Sundays they are very likely to go to some of these
to her, she wanted to talk to him. They could both aquariums that are open and look at fish. They can
look at each other, and they both could wish. I left both mourn when one of the tropical fish dies— when
them do that for about a month. You really ought to an angel fish dies or a Maui or something of that sort.
listen to that aphasic patient talk. W: And talk about it.
H: Did you forbid discussion about the tank after the half 1: Oh yes. Now suppose I had started in the orthodox way
hour? No discussion of the tank at all? of trying to build up her speech? This way she had no
E: None at all. It was an insoluble problem so far as they opportunity of any sort to resist building up speech.
were concerned. With no explanation. Her husband had no opportunity of antagonizing her
H: Well now, you pose apparently impossible situations, by his insistence upon speech.
or insoluble problems, in order to require them to W: Well, this is very familiar to me because over the last
solve them in some different way than they have in couple of years my father, who had a stroke two or
the past, that’s the idea? three years ago which left him weakened on the right
E: That’s right. side, has been going through a progressive process of
H: This is a Zen idea. opposition to his physical therapist. He comes home

[PAGE 033]

58 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Confidentiality, Domination, and the Absurd 59


and he says, “My God, how he pushed me around to- coldly, intelligently, logically reasonable. They have
day. I’m so damned tired that he knocks me out for problems because they are unreasonable and because
the whole week, and he doesn’t realize my situation.” they are illogical. Therefore, you meet them on their
He progressively cuts down the number of times he own ground.
goes to see him and gets himself more immobilized. W: On their illogical ground.
E: Yes. On the same patient, you know there’s nothing sil- E: On the illogical ground.
lier in the world than to try to write the name of your
home town when you're right-handed but you've had
a stroke on that side. Try to write the name of your
home town backwards with your left hand. It’s such
a silly, useless thing. Why do you hold a pencil in this
hand? I didn’t ask her to write with her right hand,
how could she avoid it? Those ancillary learnings. And
she could take out all the resentment she wanted
about my silly demand that she write the name of her
home town with her left hand backwards. She was ut-
terly delighted when she discovered she was writing
it. Then I asked her if she could learn to write it
bottom-side-up with her left hand. Upside-down yes.
What did that do to the muscle control of the right
arm? It’s an awfully interesting task.
W: That brings in to connection other movements.
E: That’s right. Now therapeutically, should I explain to
her how to move this arm, and how to remember, and
how to recall. Pfooey on that.
W: Well, if she’s like my father, he never likes to be told
anything...
E: But this patient, it’s awfully hard for anybody to rec-
ognize that she was once aphasic, once vegetating,
once horribly handicapped physically. Now I can sug-
gest anything, no matter how utterly absurd; she'll
do it.
W: Well, I take it to be a little absurd helps, doesn’t it?
E: That’s right because they cannot fight against absurd-
ity. People do not have problems because they’re

[PAGE 034]

Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 61


E: With the husband there. So often the answer is, “I’d
B


EE


rather tell you privately.” You turn to the husband
and state, “You know, I think it’s very generous of
aIN


your wife to want to tell me privately, because you
CHAPTER 3
E
oo


a

ia know she probably has some specific reason that she
wants to tell me privately. Because there is undoubt-

Suspicion, edly some doubt in her own mind.” The husband is re-
assured, but what have I done to the wife’s certain-
ty? Because she would like to have a doubt you know,
Joint Interviews, but I’ve only been talking to the husband about that
doubt. ’'m making it easy for the husband to leave
and Quarrels the room. The wife knows that. I’m making it easy for
her to tell this dubious suspicion. But it’s going to be
told as a dubious suspicion, though highly specific.
W: You change the meaning of privacy all around.
1958. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Gregory Bateson, Jay Haley, lv: You change the meaning of the privacy. You look at the
and John Weakland. entire need for privacy. It has a wealth of possible
meanings; therefore, you define it. You go out in the
B: What do you do with paranoid suspicion between hus- woods and you can camp here and here and here and
band and wife? here and here and here and here, and there. You look
E: These paranoid suspicions? them all over, and you settle and endow this place
B: Yes. with camping bags. Now when you actually examine
E: “Undoubtedly your husband has given you cause for it, has it got more camping values there than that
suspicion. You would prefer not to be suspicious of place? If you'd chosen that one, you'd say it had more

him. You agree, do you not?” camping values than this place. You pick a certain

Ry dy
: “Yes.” tree. Is it really any better than the other trees? No.
: “And that means that you are not going to scrutinize You just decide it is. That doesn’t make it better. The
carefully, because you would prefer not to be suspi- east side or the west side of a stream? For some faulty
cious, but you are, and there is reason. Don't you think reason you decide on the east side. But it looks like
it would be better if you scrutinize carefully and find a good reason. There’s a need for privacy. There’s a
out the exact reason rather than these vague, general, wealth of possible interpretations for that need for
unwarranted reasons? Now let's see, what could be a privacy. So you present one that is acceptable to all

specific reason rather than a vague, general, cloaking concerned. Then they go along with you, and they en-
reason?” She will start to examine. dow it. It’s your willingness to look the situation over
: This is with husband there? und sce the possible values of privacy. You don't limit


60

[PAGE 035]

62 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 63


yourself to the statement, “Well, of course you can a nice job. He had an ex-wife and two children. The
talk more freely if your husband’s out of the room.” court had ordered him to pay child support. He was
That’s only one of the values. $3,000 in debt for child support. He owed $1,700 on
H: When you treat an individual, inevitably, I think, you his car. He had no bank account. He wanted to put
must see that their mate is involved in their problem. in everything he had with everything his wife had.
The question is, how do you choose, or on what basis (Laughter)
do you choose, whether to bring the mate into it or W: He put in his debts with her bank account.
not? Whether to treat the marriage through the indi- E: He told it to me so simply. No matter how objectively
vidual you’re working with, or whether to bring them I named the things, he couldn’t possibly see the ab-
both in? surdity of it. He was giving his all to the common pot;
E: Yes. You try and get a picture of the plasticity of the she was giving her all. “You cling to each other, for-
mate, the responsiveness of the mate. In yesterday's saking all others.” He meant that, because your first
mail there was a letter from one of my patients. She obligation is to each other. You do not give away
came in to see me about preserving her marriage. As those things that you possess to strangers, and that
I listened to her and her description of her wishes and son of hers was a total stranger to him. If that son
her hopes in regard to her husband, the more she came to visit his mother in the house that she now
talked about it the less hope 1 had of preserving the owned, he should pay for his meals and his lodging.
marriage. When she brought the husband in, because Because why should he give to a total stranger? Now
I had to have him come in, my judgment was correct. this man is a college graduate. His wife's a college
Because the husband explained to me so quickly and graduate. That sort of pleasing discussion before mar-
so easily —in a marriage there should be a sharing of “ riage sounds so wonderful, so convincing. Now when
everything. There should be a community of proper- I heard her describe it to me, and then found out that
ty. An interest, an intense interest, of the one in the he wanted to charge for a meal when the son came
other. The putting of the other's desires foremost at over for a weekend visit from San Diego, right then
every possible opportunity. It was a beautiful discus- and there I knew there was no hope for that marriage.
sion. He said when he married his wife, naturally he You talk to the husband and you hear him put forth
turned over everything he had to her, and he expected all those ideas. Yes, he’s an intelligent man, but he
likewise. He didn't expect her to withold. That was wants his wife’s bank account, he wants the house she
an absolutely beautiful discussion— and completely owns put in her name and his name, and he shares his
meaningless. At the time he married his wife she had debts. She should help pay for the past child support.
a son in service. He explained that when you marry W: But there are times when you only see one of a couple
you forsake all others to cling unto each other. She at all, and other times when you see them both.
had a son in the service. She owned a house free and I; Now it probably wasn't necessary to see that man when
clear. She had a bank account. She had a job. What | heard about him charging for that meal for a week-
did he have? He had a perfectly beautiful car. He had ond visit. Against her straightforward account of all

[PAGE 036]

64 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 65

her discussions. Because there you've got that violent, took us right to the hotel. I wanted to bend overa hi-
annihilating contrast. biscus bush and smell the flower myself, instead of
Let’s take Jim and Ev. Their marriage, after five having a maid bring in beautiful bouquets, floral ar-
years, was coming to an end. They had agreed upon rangements from the hotel flower shop. Then we went
a voluntary separation before they came to see me. by a special car back to the airport. Loaded on the
They had nothing in common. No interests. Jim was plane, arrangements had been made so that we got
always doing the wrong thing. Ev was never apprecia- a special loading.”
tive of anything. Jim was striving. Ev was striving. H: So you had him describe it first and then had him listen
But they never hit upon anything of interest. They while she described it. You say that before you bring
had a beautiful honeymoon. He had purchased all the in the mate, you first try to get an idea of the respon-
tickets and made all the reservations and everything siveness of the mate. How do you judge when you're
was done in advance. His wife was not a traveled per- talking to one individual how responsive another in-
son, and the wedding present from the groom to the dividual is? >
bride was a wonderful and a complete surprise. Plane E: All right, now I see the mate sitting there and instead
tickets to Honolulu, reservations at the Royal Hawai- of listening to his wife and understanding, I see him
ian, a beautiful suite, two weeks’ stay there. Absolute- mentally figuring out the rebuttal. Have you ever
ly complete room service for everything, a small or- watched debaters? They don't listen to the argument.
chestra for chamber music, valet, everything. The two They are figuring out the rebuttal. What can I say
weeks cost him over $5,000, He had everything that that will distract the audience's attention from that
he could think of. All right, now I let him explain all statement, and so they're figuring out a rebuttal.
of that in Ev’s presence. Then I let him sit there in H: Well, how do you handle that?
shocked horror when Ev told about it. They stayed E: Well, then you've got an unresponsive person, you see.
in the suite for two long weeks. Everything was sent The question is, can you teach him to listen? Can you
up to them. If she wanted to do any shopping, some- teach him to postpone till next month any rebuttal,
body brought the dresses and the jewelry and the if there is a rebuttal necessary? Can you teach him
purses and the watches up to the suite. The dresses this isn't a debate, with rebuttal and counter-rebut-
were modeled for her in the suite. They never got out tals?
of the suite. An absolute kingdom within that suite, Il: Y know, I have a pair like that at the moment.
and she was the Royal Queen. The beauty operator W: Yes, I’ve seen several.
came up every day, bringing apparatuses to dress her H: That's an example of how you tell how responsive they
hair. Can you imagine anything as stupid as that? are when they're in the room, but when you're trying
And he held forth on how generous he'd been. Ev said, to decide whether to bring the mate in or not?
“But I wanted to put my bare feet in the Pacific Ocean. Io: If my patient wants the mate brought in, and if I think
(Laughter) I wanted to walk on the sand. I flew over the mate should be brought in, I try to figure out,
the ocean. I had never seen the ocean before. We land- from what scanty or generous amount of information
ed at the airport and there was that beautiful car that my patient gives me, the type of personality. Soon as

[PAGE 037]

66 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 67


I have formulated an idea of the mate, then I start E: Well, the thing is this: The husband's girlfriend is com-
formulating it the other way. The humorous way, and ing in to ask her for a divorce. The husband sees noth-
not the unkind and hostile way. ing wrong with the girlfriend coming in and asking
W: You say when your patient wants the spouse brought his wife to give him a divorce. What chances of sav-
in— are there situations when the patient either doesn't ing the marriage? Is there a marriage there to be'
indicate this or is pretty dubious about it, that you saved? Yes, she thinks there is. I don’t think so. I can
still might recommend it? be mistaken, but so can she. But I better consider
E: Oh yes. I think of my patient yesterday that you missed very, very seriously the possibility of her adjustments
seeing. She's coming to me secretly. She doesn't know after a divorce, after a separation. Her adjustments
whether or not she will want me to see her husband. in a continued marriage with a husband who behaves
I have the feeling already that I won't want to see her that way.
husband.
H: That you won't want to? * * *

E: Yes. My reason for that is this: They’ve been married —
what is it— six years? She mentioned yesterday how I: When you get some idea of how responsive a husband

he throws up to her as recent as yesterday a misunder- is, this affects your decision on whether to bring the
standing they had in the first week of marriage. husband in or not. Now if he seems to you a responH: That's a reason for not bringing him in? sive person, do you assume that you can just work
E: On a minor matter. It was an incidental thing. 1 won't with the wife and he'll adapt to her changes?
give the exact thing, but I can give you a comparison. I. After you've worked with the wife for a while and you've

A spilling of a glass of wine on her dress so it had to inquired about her husband's reaction to her changes,
be sent to the cleaners. Six years is an awful long time you frequently get an awfully good measurement.
to remember things as inconsequential as that. If he IT: 1f he’s reacting wrongly you'd bring him in then?
|: Sometimes, if he’s reacting very, very nicely, you rec-
can remember that, how many other inconsequential
things is he going to remember? His wife has worked ognize that you can speed up his reaction. If he’s re-
through all of the marriage to further their home, ex- acting wrong, but in what ways is he reacting wrong?
cept during the time she was pregnant. And she worked If it’s a sort of jealous wrong reaction, and if he’s
part of the time when she was pregnant. jealous about the improvements in his wife, then you

H: Well, why does this tell you not to bring the man in? haul him in very quickly. Sometimes you exploit that
E: How much of my time is he going to spend dragging jealous reaction by getting him to praise all of these
up all of these inconsequential things? What's his in- changes in his wife, intensify his jealous reactions.
terest really going to be? "hen only so gently mention, and indirectly mention,
W: What is your alternative then? Do you think that noth- the possible changes in his own behavior. He shows
ing can be done about him, or that something can be you. What is the motivation for a child learning in

done about him, or that something can be done about school? To please himself, that's right. To please the
the situation by leaving him off to the side? teachers, that’s right. To show his classmates, that’s

[PAGE 038]

68 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 69


right. To achieve learning too. There’s a multiplicity closely related to this one: Suppose the wife has come
of motivations for learning in a classroom. You've got in and told you a lot of information she considers very
to have some motivation. secret and confidential. Then the husband comes inH: Well, when you see, say a wife, and she tells you all to the picture. How do you handle what she has told
about the marriage, and it seems to you you'd better you privately up until then?
bring the husband in, what you sometimes get is a re- E: I tell my patients, “Ordinarily everything you say to me
luctance on the part of the wife, because of her attach- will be confidential. Now if there’s something that you
ment to you, to have the husband come in and give tell me that is highly confidential, and I need to dis-
the other side of the picture. Do you run across that? cuss it with your husband, I am going to lead the conE: I correct that immediately. I know a great deal is said versation around in such a fashion that he tells me the
about this transference relationship, and while I like same thing. Now you know that your husband is step-
to have my patients like me, and like me immensely, ping out on you. He doesn’t know that you know it.
I want them to like me in such a fashion that I, as a He would be utterly furious, and he would leave you,
therapist, can be pleased. If it pleases me to see the if he were aware that you knew it. He's scared to death
husband, the transference to me is going to induce that you will know it, and yet you do know it. Since
them to want me to see their husband, not an inhibi- you're my patient he's going to avoid telling me that
tion. for fear I'll betray it. Nevertheless, I’ve got to lead the
H: Well, what if the wife’s been slanting things, or feels conversation around in such a fashion that he will
she has? ‘spontaneously’ tell me that. But I’m not going to tell
E: When she feels that, I’ve already provided for that. Be- you whether or not he’s told me.”
cause I always stress to the patient the importance I: Well, that’s a complicated one.
of giving your side of the story. I express the impor- W: A nice little twist in that.
tance of that. 17: Don’t you see what that does? It makes her realize 1 will
H: That implies there's another side? keep things confidential, but Ill keep things confidenW: It also means you want to hear their side as their side, tial for her husband. I’m going to do the same thing
without meaning that I only want to hear your side with her husband, you know. So they are going to
if it’s the truth, so that it can be only one part of the have an absolute implicit trust in me, because I’ve told
picture without any derogation to it. each of them, “I won't tell you what your mate has disE: Yes. And I tell the patient, “In fact, in telling your side cussed with me.” There's a need for discussion. There's
of the story, I’m perfectly willing for you to exagger- an evergrowing need, and I’m going to utilize that
ate it wrongly.” I should be. But what does that do? need. The first thing they know, she's telling him that
It emphasizes the fact that there is another side of the she knows, and he's telling her what she already knows,
story. It emphasizes the fact that perhaps they exag- und then they can come down to brass tacks and work
gerate wrongly, but they share that same defect with out their adjustments, which they can't possibly do
their mate in exaggerating wrongly. as long as she keeps her secret and he keeps his seW: Well, we have another question that I think is probably crets.

[PAGE 039]

70 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 71


W: Well, somehow you tell them you'll keep things confi- E: Why hasn't the husband done one particular thing?
dential in such a way that it puts pressure on them H: Which particular thing?
to talk more to each other. FE: Go back and get a sperm count.
E: That’s right. H: Well, I know he could do that.
W: But I don’t quite see yet how it’s done. li: Why hasn't he?
E: Um doing the secret keeping, you see. H: I don’t think he wants to find out.
W: You're taking over the keeping of secrets so they have E: He doesn't want to find out. You never suggest that
to take over the talking. sperm count. In fact, you don't want him to, because
E: Yes. a sperm count can be faulty. There's a vas deferens
H: And you don’t advise them more directly that they on this side and a vas deferens on this side, is that cor-
should talk to each other about these things? rect? But let's go into anatomy. Sometimes you have
E: WhenI tell you I'll keep your secret, you feel very com- an accessory vas deferens too. You've cut the one, you
fortable about it. You are at liberty to choose whom haven't cut the accessory. The accessory now and then
else you can disclose your secret to. Because you know allows the passage of sperm cells. Now and then you
I won't ever disclose it, and Ill keep it, and so you can get a positive sperm count. In medical economics
have betrayed it to me, disclosed it to me, and you’ve there's been a recent report of vasectomized fathers
done it safely. You've learned that it’s possible to dis- with systematic repetitious sperm counts and the dis-
close your secret safely. Here’s a secret that requires covery that the men are fertile, but not consistently
disclosure and I’m keeping it. fertile. There's a lot of speculation, and it is known anH: Now this reminds me of a couple I’ve seen in which the atomically that you can have accessory vas deferens.
wife was hospitalized for addiction to Seconal. While It is known that sometimes in spite of knotting and
she was in there, her husband had a vasectomy with- tying and cutting out of a section that anatomically
out her knowledge or permission. About two months there is a restoration of the vas deferens. It has been
later, she discovered she was pregnant. He argued found out that sometimes you have viable sperm as
that possibly it was because he didn’t go back for that late as three months after the vasectomy.
final check-up, and therefore he was still fertile at the II. Given this couple, what would you do with them?
time. They had intercourse two or three months after 17: | would tell the man, “You know what the betting is.
the vasectomy. Now she’s all indignant and says she That you aren't the father. But now let's look into all
wants her husband to agree one hundred percent that of the possibilities.” I’ve already mentioned the one
it’s her child and his child. Well now, it seems pretty possibility of another man. Then 1 proceed to mention
obvious to me that it isn’t. the possibility of an accessory vas deferens, the possiE: It is pretty obvious to me that there's an excellent pos- bility of a restoration of the vas deferens, the possibili-
sibility. Ly of the continued viability of the sperm cells. Then
H: That it is? | mention the same thing is true on the right side as
E: Yes. is on the left side, so that's three more possibilities.
H: On what basis? (Laughter) That's right. When I do exactly the same

[PAGE 040]

72 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 73


thing for the woman, she thinks, well isn’t that beauti- emotionally involved with you and they just can't un-
ful, I’ve got this defense, and this defense, and this derstand. They're emotionally involved. You need to
defense, and this, and this and this. It’s nice to have tell it to somebody who can understand.”
so many defenses, how about this one? If she’s guilty, IT: And who's that?
she'll tell me. You see? So she gets defenses for her 17: Your psychiatrist, and your priest if you're Catholic.
secret. If she’s innocent, you will see that very, very There are too many marriages broken up. Á very, very
lovely look of relief from a false accusation. If she is nice girl gets herself seduced because she knew no de-
guilty, then you will see, “Now I have one more de- fenses at all to protect herself. Then she marries a
fense. I can share my guilty secret, and I’ve got all chap who has seduced any number of girls and gone
of those defenses.” out with any number of chippies. He finds his wife
H: Well, even if she’s guilty and you provide all those de- isn't a virgin, and then he throws it at her for the rest
fenses, you still put a pretty good idea in her mind of her life, which is wrong. She was literally a nice girl,
that she might have had an affair but she could still reared never knowing anything about sex, and she
be pregnant by her husband. found herself caught in a situation she didn't underE: That's right. Then you've created another problem. How stand. She didn't know what defenses were.
does she want to regard the baby? As her husband's Il: Getting back to this now, what you seem to be imply-
and hers? Or as her lover's and hers? Sometimes when ing is that you would encourage the wife not to tell
you see the woman, she is really guilty, but she can’t the husband?
quite muster up the courage to share that with you. lv: That's right. How’s that going to improve the matter?
You discuss abstractly that additional problem of You're going to disrupt the marriage. You're going to
how, in another such case, there is this problem of how create a wretched situation for that child. You're en-
the child shall be regarded. Since it can be the hus- dangering the marriage. You're endangering the wife's
band's, when she starts analyzing that problem and status. You're endangering the child's status, because
thinking about it, then she steps over the line and tells when he gets to be a teenager and a pain in the neck,
you the things she couldn't quite bring her courage his foster father is going to call him a stinking bas-
up to. So then she has a problem of reality adjustment tard. I can think of a very happy home. Three chil-
in the future. dren. Square-faced, blue-eyed, heavy-jawed. Father is
H: Suppose a wife did tell you that she had an affair and very proud of his three sons that look so much like
this wasn't her husband's baby? What would you push him. They were fathered by another man whom his
for in that situation? wife picked out because of that man's resemblance to
E: One of the things that I tell a bride-to-be who's had af- her husband, whose ancestry was similar to her hus-
fairs, “Your sexual life is your own private sexual life. band’s, German ancestry. Her husband married her
Nobody else can understand it. You can tell your psy- under false pretenses. Never told her he had a vasec-
chiatrist; if you’re Catholic you can tell your priest. tomy. She found out from one of his mistresses that
But you never tell your father, your mother, your hus- he had had a vasectomy.
band, and your son and your daughter. Because they're I: We assumes now that it wasn't complete?

[PAGE 041]

74 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 75

E: That;s right. He was my patient. He was a college
man.
He s never gone back for a sperm count. He is never ed children. She marr—ied what did 1 call him, Jack
going to go back. or Jim or Joe— with a promise that she could have at
W: Not now. least two children. He promised them. He felt very
£: I didn't forbid him to. I laid out everything for guilty when he told me all about it.
him and
for his wife. I'll admit that I loaded my frank and com- H: Peculiar marriage.
plete and honest discussion (laughter) by inflections E: What about these cultures where a man isn’t going to
and intonations. He's exceedingly proud of his three marry a girl unless she’s demonstrated her capacity
sons. His wife over the years hasn't deluded herself to bear children? What father? The father that came
but she literally reacts as if they were his sons. to her in a bachelor’s house.
H: Where did she get the idea to have them this H: What I mean by a peculiar marriage is that it’s a mar-
way?
E: She came in and told me what she was going to
do. All
riage based on deceit to start with. The man doesn't
she wanted was helpful suggestions so that her plans tell his wife the truth. She counters by having three
would be foolproof. It is a happy marriage, and children and doesn’t tell him the truth, even though
the
man is socially and economically successful. she’s aware of it. So you have a marriage starting, I
He's got
a lovely home. He's got a big business. He's a think, with considerable distance between the two and
well-
known businessman. continuing that way.
H: So you are willing to keep a secret of one partner
from
i: Allright, now take this example. You have two small
another partner? children and one hits the other. You know what can
E: Why certainly. I haven’t got the right to go go on, a battle royal for the rest of the day. So you
and blab
to Joe that Jean’s children aren't his. That'll rob
him
step out and you say to Nellie, “Johnny hit you and
of every bit of happiness, and he’s happy in his it hurt. Johnny, is that right?” “Yes, I hit her.” “Well,
mar-
riage. It will rob him of his children, he’s happy with do you want to fight for the rest of the day or shall
his children. He's got a great deal of pride in
those
we let Nellie hit you in the way you hit her, and then
blue eyes, that heavy chin that his three sons have youre equal?” So you cancel the one wrong with an-
that square face that they have. other wrong, but it’s done openly with the children.
W: Well, you know if you told him that they are not
his
Now Joe deceived Anne with his vasectomy and his
children, that wouldn't really be the truth either. promises that she could have at least two children.
E: Emotionally they are his children. Genetically Then Anne discovered through a set of circumstances
no.
W: Genetically no. But the more I’ve seen of raising that he had had a vasectomy. She’s never let him
chil-
dren, it’s raising the children to a very great extent know that she knows that, so he’s got his secret about
that makes them your children. the vasectomy. But so does she have her secret about
E: Yes. And that wife's very, very careful search the vasectomy.
for a man
of her husband's stature, general build, German ances- W: You're suggesting, maybe, sometimes two wrongs do
try, general appearance, college graduate —that make a right?
utter-
ly cold-blooded, calculating search. That woman want- E: wo wrongs do make a right. So they both share a guilty
soerot about that vasectomy. He doesn't know that

[PAGE 042]

Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 77
76 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


she knows it. She’s keeping it a secret too. He prom- Sometimes you aid them in handling the other their
ised her at least two children, guiltily. She’s had at way and let them turn it over to you.
least two children, guiltily. They share a common se- H: You mean they’re handling the mate in a certain way,
cret. Now you will say there’s a lot of sophistry in and you manage to aid them in doing that. Then they
that, but how do we react? Do we fall in love with a can leave it up to you to do it rather than them do-
girl because of this logical reason, or that logical rea- ing it. You can now direct it?
son? My father and mother have been married hap- E: The husband and wife who came to me because they al-
pily for 68 years. My father says the most charming ways battled when they went to the movies. It always
thing about my mother is that her nose points west — worked out this way: The husband would ask his wife,
in other words, she’s got a crooked nose. Can you “How about going to the movies this week?” She’d
imagine a more illogical reason? (Laughter) But how say, “Fine, if we don’t quarrel.” He would always tell
do we behave emotionally? On pure reason and logic? her, “Well, you pick out the night, and you pick out
So you deal with patients in accord with normal, illog- the movie and we'll go.” She'd say, “Of course I'll pick
ical behavior, illogical emotional reasons. I know a out the night and the movie and somehow or other
‘man who said the thing that attracted him to his wife, welll wind up at a different movie on a different night.”
first time he saw her, was rather a puzzle—she had He would always promise, but he'd always make that
a little bubble of spit in the corner of her mouth. business engagement, or he'd forget something that
(Laughter) That’s right. They’ve been happily married, was imperative, that she had to admit was imperative,
to my knowledge, for at least 20 years. The next time and they always went to a different movie.
he saw her she still had that little bit of, little spit in So what did I do? I suggested to them that they
the corner, well that’s an intriguing girl, how does she pick out a certain night and a certain movie and let
do it? (Laughter) me know. Then I told the wife to choose the movie.
FH: When you get a couple dealing with each other in a cer- It was the last night that movie would be shown. I
tain sort of a way —now when you get an individual arranged that as soon as I had my calendar straight,
and he’s dealing with you in a certain sort of a way, Td give them an evening appointment. So the wife
you accept that and utilize it—if you get a couple deal- picked out a movie, and I knew which one it was. It
ing with each other in a certain sort of a way, do you was the last night. I notified the husband about the
rene to accept that and exaggerate it or utilize that evening appointment. I had an opening. They showed
007
up. She was mad. Her husband suddenly realized, and
E: This concept of geometrical progression that I pointed he told me what a stinking trick it was. I agreed with
out to you. I so often use that and sometimes I ask him. I showed him my calendar. It was the only eve-
the person to manipulate his wife one millionth of one ning I had. They had wanted an evening appointment,
percent less. (Laughter) Now you can't possibly refuse if possible, and yet he felt it was a stinking trick.
to do that. Then there’s two millionths of one percent. What was he telling me? His own maneuvering was
You've asked him to quit dealing with his wife in a a stinking trick. When the wife saw him telling me
certain way—you do the same thing with the wife. that | had worked a stinking trick, that smug smile

[PAGE 043]

78 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 79

on her face, which encouraged her husband to de-
visited her friends in that neighborhood with a cer-
nounce me even more. Then she told him, “You know,
tain regularity. She never visited certain friends on
youre telling the doctor it's a stinking trick, when it’s
a Sunday; other friends she did. Some friends she vis-
the same trick you pull on me all the time.” He said,
ited in the afternoon, never in the evening. Others she
“Well, that’s right; the doctor couldn't help it, and I
visited in the evening only. Mother did quite a bit of
couldn’t help it.” Then he said, “You know, could you
reading. She had educational books for certain days
have given us an appointment next week?” I said,
of the week, novels for certain other days, and week-
“Yes. That’s right. I could have but I didn’t think of
ends she always read the Bible. On Sunday mornings,
it.” (Laughter)
and Sunday afternoons, at a certain hour she picked
W: You were too busy thinking of giving them an appoint-
up her Bible and read. Nothing altered that.
ment that night.
I encouraged them to go and buy a house. They
E: And he said, “But you could have thought about it, and
searched all over Phoenix, and mother had talked to
I could think about it too.” Another demonstration.
them about moving with them, and the difficulties of
packing up. I told the husband, “Your wife says that
mother goes with you. You say she doesn’t. Get the
* * *


house purchased. That’s a big enough problem, be-
A couple came in here rowing fearfully on this ques-
cause even though there’s no segregation here, you'll
tion of buying a house. The husband said, “We're going
find that real estate agents are going to be showing
to buy a house, and your mother is not going to live
you certain houses, that the price goes up horribly.”
with us.” She said, “We're going to buy a house, and
They were persistent. They finally bought a house
mother is going to live with us.” They both gave me
with a nice extra room and a den that could be made
a very nice history of mother. Mother was living with
into a parlor for mother.
them in that sprawling, poor-grade house in South
They told mother, in accordance with my instruc-
Phoenix. There was quite a patch of land there and
tions, that they were moving and what assistance did
they had enough water. Mother is a nice, old, neatly-
she want in packing? The mother looked at them in
groomed woman. Son-in-law is a college graduate,
absolute horror. That woman was fixed and rigid and
daughter is a college graduate; they both teach. The
regular and patterned in her behavior. When the op-
mother was a grade school graduate, a rather intelli-
portunity came to move, mother said, “I’m not mov-
gent woman. But she lives with her son and daughter.
ing away from here.” Daughter tried to plead with
Daughter is sterile, no children. They had a horrible
mother, but mother for the first time suddenly real-
battle. After they decribed mother to me, I drew my
ized that she wasn’t going to leave her friends. She
own conclusions about mother. Mother had very fixed
wasn't going to leave her garden. She wasn’t going to
hours. She always went to bed at a certain time. She
leave the familiarity of that place. Then the daughter
always got up at a certain time. I’ve forgotten what
and the husband came back and said, “You know you
items of food mother always had for breakfast. They
(old us to postpone the quarrel about mother living
had no such rigidity about their breakfast. Mother
with us until after we had the house. You told me to

[PAGE 044]

80 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 81


go along with my wife. How did you know mother if they were at swords’ points? They didn’t know how
wouldn't move?” I knew she wouldn't. Not with that it was going to work out, but they did agree that they
sort of a rigid pattern, always the same food for break- ought to postpone the battle, and let coming events
fast. You couldn’t put that kind of a woman into a settle it. While they described all of their pleasant and
strange neighborhood, a strange house. Not when she good adjustments in that poor home, which was ac-
visits her friends in this neighborhood — certain ones tually, of course, a good home psychologically and
in the afternoon, certain ones in the evening. emotionally, they didn’t realize what they were tellH: So the young folks were having a battle about some- ing me about mother. They were too close to mother
thing that would never come to fruition anyhow? to have any understanding of that rigid pattern forE: That's right. Those two teachers are tremendously grate- mation.
ful. They came back later and said, “You know, we've
always had minor disagreements. We're not having * * *
those anymore. We wait until the issue really comes
up.”
11. Well, now with some couples when you see them inH: Postpone the quarrel? teracting in a certain way, the husband doing certain
E: Postpone the quarrel. things with the wife, you’re likely to do the same thing
W: In the case of this couple and mother, did the mother with the wife as a demonstration for both of them.
give them to understand that she would move before- I Yes.
hand? HH: In what other ways do you accept what they're already
E: The mother really expected to move; daughter expected, doing? I mean, they’re dealing with each other in a
husband expected mother to move. I knew there was way that’s obviously reinforcing. He does something,
no possibility for mother to recognize it. She couldn’t she does something which forces him to do what he
possibly grasp it because she’s too tied up with her just did, which forces her to do what she just did, and
rigid patterns. Not until she was confronted, when she they go back and forth on it.
suddenly realized she couldn’t get out of her patterns. we — can think of another couple. She resented the way he
The daughter wouldn't have any appreciation because Look her out to dinner. He always insisted on at least
mother is intelligent, she reads good books and good a $25 bill for the two of them. Then he’d give a $5 to
novels. She's an intelligent woman. That's right. Moth- $10 tip. So she went out with him, first securing per-
er's still living in that place, and she's happy there. mission to order whatever she pleased, and she and
The husband couldn't realize it. There were no ways | worked it out. I told her husband to let her have her
for them to realize it. But they could recognize that own way on this particular outing in the restaurant.
they were happily married. They only had each other, She ordered filet mignon — $5.75 I think it was. Then
no children, and here they're venturing into a major after eating part, she said, “You know, this really is
move —a good home, in a much better neighborhood. xood, 1 wish I had ordered this other,” and she ordered
It would be a difficult thing, and they really ought not another $5 meat dish. She ordered a third. She ran the
to quarrel. Because how could they find a good home bill up thoroughly. She gave the waiter a $15 tip. She

[PAGE 045]

82 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Suspicion, Joint Interviews, and Quarrels 83

paid for the meal, and she gave the waiter a $15 tip.
He looked at all that wasted food and that great big cisco,” which is 30 miles. The husband said, “Well,
tip, because she didn’t finish the third thing, because Lhere's no need to go that far.” There's no reason why
that wasn’t so good, and she was tired of the restau- his wife couldn't go to San Francisco. But each move
rant. He came and told me about it, and he said, “You Lo go, he puts a damper on.
know, it’s just as stupid as my own behavior; did you i That's right.
put my wife up to it?” I said, “Did you see your be-
IH: Well, how do you handle that?
havior in any better way? Don’t you hope I put her Ile can’t stand to have her go, can he?

be Then you tell the husband, “Is it all right for you to go
up to it?” (Laughter) Yes, he hoped I had. You see, If. Right.
that took the accusation out of it— out of the denun-
ciatory thing. with her and drive the car?”
FH: And made it an example? /1- Well, in this particular case she can go if somebody goes
E: And forcing them to another emotional attitude by say- with her. The issue is around her going alone. If she
has a chaperone, it’s all right. o
ing, “Don’t you hope I did?”
4H: Now that's an example of getting the wife to do what I" Yes. Well, he's got long, long practice in this matter of
the husband is doing. his wife going here and there. Now what are the words
E: Yes. He's going to keep on wasting his money that way | used? He's had long practice and anxiety about his
until he sees it done. wife going here and going there. Is that right?
W: I’m curious how you arranged one detail within that. tl Yes.

How did you arrange that she would be buying the i": What is the essential word in that statement? From
dinner? what does his anxiety derive? What is the word I
E: I told her to take it out of her own special, personal al- used? His wife going here and there, isn’t that right?
lowance and to tell her husband, “You've always taken Going is the essential word, isn’t it? Now what hap-
me out to dinner. You've always bought me wonder- pens when his wife comes from Mesa to Phoenix?
ful dinners. Now even though it’s not customary, I’d Never mind how she got there. When she’s coming
like to do it.” alone from Mesa to Phoenix. You take the word ‘ goW: Just this once. ing” and you transfer it to “coming” back home. She's
E: Just this once. (Laughter) not going away from home, she's coming home. ]
FH: What we keep pushing up against here, I think, is this I: Allright. I can see how you might do this, but I don’t

W: You mean, in your case you would get around to talk-
question of how husband and wife reinforce each other’s
see how you do it.
behavior. Now I’ve been seeing a series of anxious
wives who can’t leave the house. In just about every ing about her coming, how he might feel about her
case, when the wife does start to leave the house, the coming, from San Francisco back home.
husband starts to get upset. You can see it at the ses- 1“ Oh, | commit him to the fact that he could not tolerate
sion. I raised the question with the wife about leav-
his wife going from Phoenix to Mesa. And I don't
ing, and she said, “Well, maybe I'll drive to San Fran- know how many times T'd use that word “going” unob-
irusively. But I really commit him to it. I would have

[PAGE 046]

84 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


“going” here, and “going” there, and “going,” “going,’
»”« ’


“going,” “going.” I’d commit him, T’d tie him to it, Pd
condition him to that. Then I would discuss some-
thing about a trip that he and his wife made. T’d find
CHAPTER 4
out about something of that sort. And the particular
driving on the way home, they were “coming” home,
and use that word “coming” and “coming” and “com-
ing” and “coming,” always in a completely pleasurable
Encouraging Relapses
fashion. You know, I’ve built up the situation how
comfortable he feels, there’s always somebody with and Giving Directives
his wife when she’s going. Then I'd have her come
home alone. Have her follow the same route that he
and she had followed coming home. But what he’s
done is put his wife in a car, and later I can mention 1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.
how his wife, “Let's see, she was going to Mesa to
Phoenix on that particular day.” She was, you know, IH: Another thing about couples: You get a couple who
going from Mesa to Phoenix. She was coming from have a certain sort of a pattern which they're busy re-
Mesa to Phoenix, but she was going from Mesa to inforcing, and you get them to do something different-
Phoenix. ly, one or both of them. How do you keep them from
H: So you'd get an impression that this was a need of this going back to the previous pattern? How do you peg
man, not to let her go, and transform this by shifting their change?
the “going” to “coming”? I; Oh, but you tell them that they really ought to go back
E: Yes. You first commit him to the word “going.” to the previous pattern.
I: To try it out.
I: And select out of it that which needs to be salvaged.
(Laughter) What are you doing? You’re teaching
them, “Don’t be ashamed of that horrible past pattern,
there’s at least something worth salvaging.” Just con-
sider the small child with a favorite toy that he’s got
to discard, that he won't discard, which is all worn out.
What do you do with him to get him to discard it? You
salvage a part. And then he can discard it.
Y: You mean, just keep the ear of that rabbit; then we can
get rid of all the tatters with the rest of it.
i: That's right. When your couple goes back to that pat-
Lorn, they really ought to go back to salvage some one

BH

[PAGE 047]

86 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 87

little thing, because then they are earmarking it for
we keep running into with various schools of handling
complete disposal. They’ve had plenty of lifelong ex-
families. That is the question of how much of what
perience of doing that sort of thing. We all have.
you see the couple are doing with each other do you
FH: Well, related to this now, when you get a couple who've
make explicit to them that they're doing to each other?
spent some years managing to keep some distance be-
Apparently you do very little of this.
tween themselves by antagonizing each other, when
E: Very, very little. You see, most therapy is directed to
they start to get close, and you manage to produce
the idea of presenting therapeutic solutions instead
change so that they do get closer, how do you keep
of presenting to the patients their ways of living hap-
them from panicking about this?
pily in the world of reality. That is, you explain to chilE: How do I keep them from what?
dren — good sibling relationships are established by an
H: From getting in a panic about this. Because naturally
attitude of sharing. Now the reality situation isn’t
they’re going to get a little threatened if they get
that. Sometimes you want to give your brother an ap-
closer or they would have got closer sooner.
ple. Sometimes you want your brother to give you an
E: The panic reaction is when they discover they’ve got a
apple. That’s not saying exactly the same thing. In
brand-new pattern of life that they're beginning to de-
the one way you phrase it, you present it in terms of
velop.
therapeutic concepts. Sibling relationships. SomeH: They're beginning to enjoy each other.
times you want your brother to give you an apple, and
E: Yes. 1 tell them, “How do you really handle a brand-new
sometimes you want to give your brother an apple.
set of dishes? Because you're worried about breaking
You've described sibling relationships. But too often
some.”
it’s done in therapeutic terminology. When the patient
W: Handle with care.
has to live in a reality situation wherein he sits in his
E: Handle with care (laughs) because it’s valuable. They're
chair and he eats his apple, and so on.
tremulous about handling that brand-new set of dishes,
11: Well, I’m not thinking so much of when the therapist
and they’ve had plenty of experience. Take your own
gives them a therapeutic solution. One of the theories
reaction when you get a new pair of eyeglasses. You
of therapies with couples or families is that you bring
never put them down like that (tossing them down).
them together and you get them to express their feelW: The set of dishes might even be something where they
ings about each other; then you point out to them how
could conceive of handling them carefully together,
they’re dealing with each other. Now I gather that you
and each one sort of cautioning the other one even,
don’t do anything of this sort. That when you see how
which is what they're doing with a thing like dishes.
they're dealing with each other you don't discuss with
E: Yes. 1 would likely use something as an illustration
them how they’re dealing with each other.
where there can be a loss without a destruction. Sure,
I": | try to avoid that. See how you hurt sister’s feelings?
you can lose a cup, you can lose a saucer, you can lose
See how you hurt brother’s feelings? See how you
a part of a plate, yet you've still got your dishes.
cheated brother? See how you cheated sister?
H: On this, there is one of the things that is unclear
to me Ht: Well, it isn’t done quite that way. (Laughs)
when you handle a couple, and it’s one of the things
hi; No, | know, but Pm rewording it.

[PAGE 048]

88 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 89


W: I suppose you can carry that to what you would do in- major part.” The type of thoughtful philosophy that
stead at the same level of terms, instead of, “See how such a father would give his daughter. The girl had
you treated sister.” received no sex instruction before she married. The
E: Yes. “See how you could have given sister something young man had been very thoroughly indulged by his
instead of cheating her.” So you’ve accused him of a parents. He had sex experience.
double sin; he cheated her, and he didn’t even give her Three months after the marriage, the girl discov-
anything. ered addresses and telephone numbers lying around
W: But he could have? the house. A flushed face and a patent lie was the exE: But he could have. planation for those telephone numbers. He even told
W: So you can. her to call them if she didn’t believe him, but his face
E: Yes, but he's committed two sins: He's cheated her and told her she ought not to call. But it wasn't a garage,
he didn't give her. and she finally did call.
W: But you're holding out the possibility of redemption When she got pregnant with the first son, it was
here. all her fault, her husband said. She pointed out that
E: Yes. she had worn a diaphragm in accordance with his re-
quest, that he refused to wear a condom, and that he
* * *
had told her that she didn’t need to bother to put the
contraceptive jelly in the diaphragm. “What the heil
E: I am seeing a very handsome couple. The husband is was she so slow about?” He didn’t even let her check,
an only child of extremely intelligent parents. He is as she always did when she inserted the diaphragm,
a capable college graduate. The girl is an only daugh- after it was in place, to see that it was really in place.
ter of very nice parents, except that her father had Then, after that night, he said, “Well, you won't get
some combination of diseases — arthritis plus emphy- pregnant from once or twice more,” and so the next
sema. He had a tremendous amount of pain, and he night, and the next night, he insisted on having in-
was bedridden much of her childhood. Her father was tercourse without any contraception. He still said it
the kind of man who could sit quietly with somebody was all her fault. If he didn’t exercise common sense,
and commune. He concealed his pain. He was cheer- she should have.
ful, enthusiastic, interested in his daughter. He When she was three months pregnant, various
taught her the actual value of money: “Be willing to women began to call for —let’s call him Bobby - with
spend money, but purchase the values money repre- cooing voices. He said he didn’t know any of these
sents. When you fall in love, fall in love on a perma- women at all. The cooing voices left their telephone
nent basis and really, thoroughly, enjoy being in love. numbers. He left slips of paper around the house with
Have a home that’s a happy home, give your all, noth- similar telephone numbers on them. She gave birth
ing’s too small to do to contribute to the happiness to her son. Her husband was out all night that night.
of the home. Fatigue is part of life, pain is part of life, Ile was out the night she returned from the hospital.
disappointment is part of life. But happiness is the He bought her a $30,000 house; he turned over all

[PAGE 049]

90 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson 91
Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives

of his checks to her. She was to pay all the bills. Of
She said, “Well, we could at least use those chairs for
course, it was her fault if his check didn’t cover the
a whole race and get that much value out of them.”
amount of bills. He incurred the bills, she paid them.
He said, “I'll give the chairs away.” She said, “We can't
It was her fault if she overdrew the checking account.
afford that money. Is there any way of returning the
It was her fault if there was not enough money in the
chairs and getting at least part of the money back?”
bank.
He said, “No, 1 bought them on a sale; there's no re-
You know, there isn’t anything to do with that guy.
turn.” “What are you going to do with the chairs?”
She separated from him temporarily, and he took the
“Let's just throw them away.” She said, “We can't af-
swankiest apartment possible in a nice hotel. Her final
ford that sort of thing.” He said that in an utterly ob-
reaction after seven years of that sort of thing is to
jective, dispassionate way, “Throw them away.” I dis-
develop absolute frigidity. Her husband is out of
cussed that with him. He said, “Well, it's only $12. I
work. She makes about as much sexual response to
made more than that in poker the other night. I won
him as she would make to that piece of driftwood. He
$250.”
has gone for six months being an absolutely, com-
I asked the wife, “What do you want to do?” She
pletely courteous chap in every regard, considerate in
said, “Well, I’m completely unhappy. I'll sit home. ru
every way. He held down his expenditures, except
watch my son grow up. I don’t like this. I cringe at
that there’s this one thing; he just can’t see that what
the thought of his getting in bed; he might acciden-
he needs to do is get rid of that expensive house, that
tally touch me.” I said, “What do you think about your
great big yard, the yard man that costs so much a
body? You're a beautiful woman, you've got a very at-
week,
tractive body.” She said, “Yes, I could have an affair
He took his family and son out to the races. He
with somebody; a lot of his friends have propositioned
said, “I’m not interested in going to the races, but
me. I can’t have an affair with them; they’re friends
we've got nothing to do this afternoon.” His wife said,
of his. I do know that the idea of an affair is very, very
“I’m not interested in going to the races, and sonny’s
tempting, but I’m not going to have an affair at least
too young. I'd rather go to a show or something like
in my present frame of mind.”
that.” He said, “Well, we’ve never really gone to the
Now I’ve seen them — I’ve seen each of them at least
races, we might as well go.” The wife said, “Well, I’m
six times. I’m no further along than I was at the be-
not going to enjoy it, it’s boring, I’m just not inter-
ginning. I can’t budge that girl. She's twice told me,
ested in even seeing the races on television.” He said,
“] could be tempted to have an affair.” There's no mis-
“Neither am I, but we've never been, let's go.” They
taking what she means. “I could be tempted.” Her hus-
went out. He hauled out of the trunk three of those
band is again laying — accidentally — telephone num-
folding chairs. She looked at them and said, “How
bers around. When I tell him that he’s doing it, he
much do they cost?” “Oh, I got them at a bargain sale
says, “No, you must be mistaken. I know I did that
at $4 apiece.” “Well, what did you buy them for?” “To
several years ago, but I’ve corrected it.” I would say
go to the races.” He sat down for about 20 minutes,
Lo him, “But you are still doing it.” He said, “No, youre
and the thing was boring, so he said, “Let’s go home.”
completely mistaken, I’m not.” I can say to him, “Well,

[PAGE 050]

92 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 93

suppose I gave you a telephone number, do you recog-
E: Yes, and therefore, with that type of patient, you know
nize it?” He said, “Yes, but I don’t know how you ever
that she’s going to provoke her husband so that she
figured out that I would recognize that telephone
will have a legitimate excuse to withdraw. You know
number.” Now if I can give him a telephone number
that he is going to arouse her, to attract her, and at
that he recognizes, and he can’t figure out how I got
the same time he'll do something so that she will do
it, I’ve asked him, “If I showed you that telephone
something so he has a legitimate reason for withdraw-
number in your handwriting, now what would you
ing. It’s a beautiful bit of manipulation.
say?” “Well, that's impossible, and yet if you did I’d
H: Now when they're threatened with getting close togeth-
have to reach the conclusion that my wife forged it.”
er, he’s going to leave some notes with telephone num-
“Then the question arises, how would your wife know
bers around.
what telephone number to forge?” He said, “I just
E: When that type of patient comes in to me, I like to help
can’t understand it at all.”
the woman devise the measure that forces her husH: You know, I’m not very clear on what you think is the
band to withdraw. I like to help the husband devise
problem with this couple.
the measure that forces the wife to withdraw.
E: I don’t know what the problem is. This woman is per-
IT: This is again accepting and encouraging what they're
fectly willing — well, she isn’t entering into the thera-
already doing.
peutic situation. She tells me that she could be tempt-
lv: Yes. As soon as I do the devising, they become depend-
ed to have an affair. She’s got that history of a father
ent upon me for devising. Then I can change the ma-
that she adored.
neuver.
H: Who was undoubtedly a disappointment to her.
W: And somehow it doesn’t seem possible to take over
E: Mmmmm, and here I am old enough to be her father,
what they are doing in this case that you've been tell-
and she could be tempted sexually to have an affair.
ing us about?
That much I know about her. So passive, so polite,
ti: | don’t know of a single, solitary thing that I can do.
and so courteous. But I’m getting nowhere. The hus-
I: You wouldn't instruct the husband in this case to leave
band —how can he be that blindly stupid?
a phone number around?
H: It’s a real art.
I’: He would blindly disregard me and continue to leave
E: It's a real art he's accomplished.
them around. (Laughter) It would be as if I hadn’t
H: You know, one of the points of view that we have, that
even told him.
I haven't heard you talk about particularly, is a kind
Il: We must be quite a character.
of Sullivanian approach that a couple doesn't get too
11: There's no way you could tell him to leave 50 phone
close without getting in a bit of a panic. That they ma-
numbers around every week?
nipulate each other so that they don't get to each
I: Another thing that he does every time he overspends
other. If a wife is concerned about her husband get-
and his wife rebels so horribly: He calls up his father
ting too close to her, sexually or otherwise, she's likely
and asks for $1,000. And gets it. Of course, that's
to provoke him in such a way that she can have a jus-
spent on debts. But he and she are paying the mort-
tifiable excuse for withdrawing. The husband is like-
gugo on the house. That comes out of his paycheck.
ly to do the same with the wife.
But his wife regards that as a falsification. She doesn’t

[PAGE 051]

94 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 95


feel that just because the money that goes to the FH: So that’s how she came in? Did you suggest they both
mortgage comes out of his paycheck that they're real- come in?
ly paying. E: No. A friend of theirs who attended one of my seminars
W: She feels they're not really paying it off because he's knew them personally, visited their home. They were
getting the thousand dollars from papa to pay on very, very fond of him. They are intelligent people,
other things he's getting into. they are likeable people, they're charming. That semiE: Yes. She thinks the $12 for the chairs should have gone narian, that physician, became aware of that situa-
on the mortgage and not be something that father- tion, and when he found out they were moving out to
in-law pays off along with lots of other stupid debts. Arizona, he said, “Do you want to see Dr. Erickson?”
W: Well, this brings us to a question —the most specific That's how they came to me. The wife said, “It's a
question we've had. In this case Milton doesn't think wretched home situation; there's no lovemaking. I
he can instruct this man apparently to do something, can't stand to have him touch me. I can’t stand that
and we were going to raise the question, what do you little-boy outburst of temper. He blames me; maybe
do with people who won't do what you tell them? that’s right. But we can be sitting looking at televiH: Yes. sion and all of a sudden he gets up and fires an ashtray
W: We find that some people will do what you say, and through a window. We can’t afford that. I didn’t see
other people seem very hard to give a suggestion to, anything on the television that made him do that. I
to carry out something. know darn well there’s something on the television
E: The woman, I’m pretty certain, would very, very glad- that he saw that precipitated it.” She thinks he needs
ly have an affair with me or would take my advice to therapy for his tendency to be a Don Juan. She thinks
have an affair with someone else. But that would be it’s psychologically and somatically wrong for her as
the complete destruction of any therapeutic relation- a young woman to live a life of abstinence.
ship, whether she had an affair with me or with some- H- Well, you often would talk about a couple like this, or
one else. The man just isn't doing anything. a case like this, and point out something you did that
W: With him you feel that you practically can't tell him resolves something. What is it that makes it so diffi-
anything, and with her you would only tell her what cult with these two?
would be the wrong thing to do. 1: Her utter objective passivity, her intellectualization. It’s
E: Yes. hard for her, a young woman, healthy, to be sexually
H: You couldn't tell her to reject her husband? abstinent.
E: No. !1: low come they haven't separated, haven't divorced?
H: What brings them in to you? I‘. They did separate temporarily, and he rented the ex-


E: What brings them in? Periodically the husband loses pensive suite in the hotel. They have this son. The son
his temper in a small boy fashion and smashes the is very much devoted to both parents.
panel in the door, picks up an ashtray and fires it 11: Well now, renting the suite, she has to keep charge of
through the window. Picks up a chair and crashes it that?
on the floor and wrecks it. Then he tells her, “But you hy Sure, she pays the bills.
won't have sexual relations with me.” Y” Why?

[PAGE 052]

Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 97
96 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


E: He turned his paycheck over to her. Put it in the bank. values dropped out. Can she tell you a nice joke and
She wrote the checks. Her name is on the checking laugh with the greatest of amusement? Yes.
account. The bills were sent to the house. She believes 1Y: What I’m suggesting is: Is it not possible to get the
in being honest with tradesmen. idea across to her that she’s being too emotional in
W: She’s so proper it hurts. all this and that she should think things over more

bi: I ask her can she feel her emotions thoroughly? Does
E: She pays the bills. She didn’t like the idea of paying for logically?
an expensive suite.
W: And she didn’t like the idea of going to the races, but she really feel happy that she can break down and use
she went, and she didn’t like the chairs. up a dozen sheets of Kleenex and then dry her tears
E: She didn’t continue paying for the expensive suite, be- and say, “You know, I suppose that cry did me a lot
of good.” . .
cause she let him come home. That way he couldn’t
entertain any women in that expensive suite. That’s W: I have the feeling that this intellectual kick here is one
right, you know. limb that you don't think you can go out further on
H: She won't get with him, and she won't get away from until that changes too. I get the impression you feel
him? she’s so far out on that, it is hopeless unless she comes
E: Mmmm hmmm. And she won't do anything about it. back, and you don't feel it’s possible to go and take
She's got the situation evaluated. He is dead certain that further the way you would take other things fur-
that that bland denial of his should be absolutely con- ther.
vincing. Have you ever seen a small child tell you a I: I can get her to laugh, to joke, to shed genuine tears,
patent lie and actually expect you to believe that he but all of a sudden that rigid control drops in.
didn't eat that chocolate, and yowre looking at his W: But I’m suggesting the other.
hands and you're looking at his mouth? He didn't even iv: What?
know there was chocolate in the house. W: That you emphasize the control.
W: NowI find myself wondering if she's really got that sit- lv: ve done that.
W: What happened then? .
uation evaluated thoroughly enough. 1 mean she's
thought about it, but are you sure she's really thought i: Nothing. It’s still her control, because she's got the same
it through? kind of deaf ear that her husband has.
E: Oh yes. “You did have some orgasms when you were W: Suppose she were a hypnotic subject, what would you
first married, and you enjoyed them. What type of or- do with her?
gasms do you think his mistresses have?” Now there's I’: You see, she has a history of about three times getting
something you either explore or you purposely avoid. very, very pleasantly drunk and raping her husband
You see? You don't want to think about it, or you've thoroughly, to his satisfaction and hers. She's told me,
got a tremendous morbid curiosity about it. The an- “So I got pleasantly high again and I thoroughly en-
swer? “Well, it seems to me that different women joyed it and I did it again, and I know 1 can let down
would have different types of orgasms.” That com- my inhibitions. I know that when I’m pleasantly high
pletely, highly intellectual statement, all emotional | can respond to him, but I don't believe in mixing sex

[PAGE 053]

98 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 99


and alcohol. That isn’t the right thing to do.” She’s so they're willing to do that because they're doing it
right, you know. If she were a good hypnotic subject anyhow. Then sometimes you catch them in a phase
Pd give her a very nice dream, a dream that she was where they have to do it whichever way. That is, you
drunk. T’d see to it within that dream that she had a put the time when to do it rather than whether to do
very nice dream and a tremendous comfort that she it, so that they're arguing about when not whether.
didn’t do anything. lv: Yes. One of my patients is on friendly terms with Mrs.
H: Comfort that she didn’t do anything? Erickson. I’ve forgotten what the assignment was,
E: That she didn’t do anything
— that it was really a dream. but my patient mentioned to Mrs. Erickson what I
T'd let her have the regret that she didn't take advan- had ordered her to do. Betty said, “Are you going to
tage of the dream. I can’t put either one of them in do that?” The patient said, “Why certainly, Dr. Erick-
a trance. It’s that passive resistance; I can’t outwit son told me 1 had to.” She said, “But why would you
them. I’m continuing the therapy. I’ve told her very, do anything as silly, as absurd and ridiculous as that?”
very openly, “I’m getting absolutely no place with you She said, “Dr. Erickson told me to. I do it. I always
therapeutically. Do you want to continue? If you con- do everything that he says, no matter what on earth
tinue, eventually I'll find your weak spot.” She said, it is.” Betty said, “But why?” She said, “You're help-
“That’s the only reason for continuing, you know.” Not less, you do it.”
any alarm or distress about that possibility — finding i’: That's what Id like. (Laughter)
her weak spot. Her statement is, “Further, if my hus- 1: “You're helpless, you do it.” I came out of the office and
band wastes money on nonsense, why shouldn't 1 my patient said, “You know, Mrs. Erickson has been
waste it where someone is trying his level best to do asking me why I’m going to do what you said, and I
something?” told her it was because you asked me to.” I said,
W: Suppose in that context you assured her that you were “That's right, I asked you to.” She said, “Yes, and 'm
doing great, but actually you just horsed around with going to do it, too.” Then she turned and said, “You
it. This wouldn't draw fire from them either? see how it is? He says, ‘I asked you to.”
E: She isn't going to believe that. 1 can't falsify the situa- IV: And you expect them to.
tion. That would be unethical. "hat tremendous attitude of expectancy. How do you
W: Oh, and she knows you wouldn't be unethical? resist it?
E: That's right. IV: Well, that's part of it, Jay— Milton expects they will.
W: You mean you couldn't push it to such a degree that IH: Yes, and when they don't do it, as I recall, you once said
she would have to recognize it? that you made it clear they had made an error and
E: You see, that deliberate statement that she could be they would never have that opportunity again. So
tempted, to see if 1 would be unethical. Just a notifica- that there'd be regret on not doing it; then they'd be
tion to me. Yes, she would wash all possibility of ther- more likely to do something the next time.
apy right down the drain. | should disguise this example very carefully. This womH: On getting patients to do what you ask, partly you do an, the wife of a physician, needed, let us say, a very
it by telling them to do what they are doing anyhow, painful medical procedure done which her husband

[PAGE 054]

100 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 101


could do very, very nicely, and quite properly, quite
that you're rather modest?” She said, “Well, I buy my
ethically. She was an excellent hypnotic subject who
dresses very carefully. I don’t like extreme styles. I
could produce any amount of anesthesia that she
don’t like blouses cut too low. I don’t like formal eve-
wanted or that she needed. Her husband was well-
ning dresses that are too low, that are very extreme. I
trained and well-experienced in hypnosis. The woman
don’t like these short dresses. I think a woman should
needed this procedure carried out, but didn’t need it
be very, very careful about exposing her body.” I said,
as an emergency. Her husband could produce a beau-
“We're here alone in the office. How would you feel if
tiful trance in his wife, absolutely beautiful anesthe-
I touched you on the knee?” “If you had some legiti-
sia, up to the moment that he would start the prepara-
mate reason it would be all right.” (Laughter) I said,
tion for this painful procedure. Then either the trance
“Suppose I had a legitimate reason.” She said, “All
would disappear, or the anesthesia would disappear.
right, you can go ahead and touch me on the knee.”
He didn’t want that pain there. He didn’t want a gen-
So I reached over and touched her on the knee. This
eral anesthetic; she didn’t want a general anesthetic,
way. She said, “I don’t know what your legitimate rea-
it had to be done. If not today, at least tomorrow or
son is, there doesn’t seem much sense in it.” I said,
the next day, or the next week, or some time this
“But there is a legitimate reason. I touched your knee
month. He called in several other physicians in Phoe-
for a legitimate reason, and I’m going to do it again
nix. Now they thought that it would be nice to do it
also for a legitimate reason.” She said, “I’ll take your
under hypnotic anesthesia. They produced a beautiful
word for it.” I said, “This time you'll find it even harder
anesthesia up to the moment. That was a horrible
to understand. I’m going to touch your knee under-
stalemate.
neath your dress.” She said, “Touching it outside my
He sent her to me, and I checked into the woman’s
dress I can see, putting your hand under my dress I
history. I told her, “Well, I don’t understand why you
just can’t see. But if you say it’s a legitimate reason
refuse to cooperate. Why you have so little control
Pl take your word for it.” So I touched her on her bare
over that. Let me find out something about your child-
knee. I said, “Do you feel it?” She said, “Yes, and I
hood. Were you a virgin when you were married, and
don’t like it.” I said, “You're a good hypnotic subject.
why?” “Because I was very, very thoroughly taught
Why do you feel it?” She said, “I don’t.” I said, “That’s
to be a virgin.” I said, “Weren’t you ever tempted?”
right, you can develop an hypnotic anesthesia instant-
She said, “No. I didn’t allow myself to be tempted.”
ly, easily, readily.” She said, “You did have a legiti-
I said, “How modest are you,” and she said, “I’m quite
mate reason then, and I know it now, for touching me
modest.” I said, “I noticed that you were very careful
on the knee underneath my skirt.” She said, “You
to smooth your dress down. How do you sleep at night
know, that’s astonishing. I’ve got that anesthesia in
—in the raw? Or with a nightie, an abbreviated night-
hoth legs. That anesthesia extends clear up to my
ie? A long nightie, pajamas?” She said, “When I’m
hips. I simply can’t move my body. That anesthesia
walking around I have pajamas on; in bed I can wear
is way up to my waistline, and I just can't get out of
my pajama tops. But I don’t see why you should dis-
his chair. That isn’t a pathological reaction, is it?” I
cuss this.” I said, “I’ve got some ideas. Do you think
said, “Now you're learning a few things. I’d like to

[PAGE 055]

102 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 103


have that anesthesia disappear.” She said, “All right, entirely.” (Laughter) A certain primness, a certain
now I can feel your hand on my knee again. I can strength of character, a certain uncontrollable loss of
move it,” and she tested it. I said, “All right, Um go- her anesthesia.
ing to take my hand off your knee. How about devel- H: This is an example of punishing them if they don't do
oping anesthesia?” She said, “All right,” and instant- something.
ly she had the complete anesthesia. You can see what W: Well, it came up on the context of how do you get them
kind of a subject she was. to follow an instruction. And I don’t know how you
I said, “All right, now you need this medical proce- got her to follow the instruction that if she didn’t go
dure that’s painful. Your husband can do it. You're a through the procedure, she would have to braid her
good hypnotic subject, you can develop anesthesia. hair that way and get the pictures taken of it.
Whoever has worked with you is impressed by your Iv: How can you refuse to do such a completely idiotic, silly,
ability. What do you think the next time you go to ridiculous thing to an obviously ethical, professional
the office, what do you think you'll do?” She said, “1 man? You know, you just can’t refuse.
know what I'll do. I'll go there full of good resolves. IH: You mean another way to get them to do something
As soon as he gets ready to start, I'll lose my hypno- is to have them do something idiotic?
sis, I'll lose my anesthesia.” I said, “You're rather dig- [': So completely idiotic, so completely out of context,
nified, aren't you? You're a woman of strong opinions. something that nobody would ever ask you to do.
This is what you are going to do. If your husband (Laughter)
hasn't got a camera, he's going to get one.” She said, II. Well, not many people, that’s right.
“He's got one.” I said, “Does he take color pictures?” i; Just nobody would ask you to do a thing as silly as that.
TM


“Yes.” “All right. Your husband is going to take some Then to take color snapshots of it, but destroy the
pictures, and you aren't going to like them. They are film after the snapshots are taken. You see, the whole
going to be utterly, completely, ridiculously absurd thing is so utterly, completely idiotically silly. Nobody
and immodest. Unbelievably so. But you're going to in his right mind would ever ask it. Since nobody in
do it. Because you've got two choices. One is to per- his right mind would ever ask it, it's literally unasked
mit that medical procedure. If you don't, I want you— and yet... (Laughter)
with the greatest of care, with absolute precision— I te, : If nobody in his right mind would ever ask it, it’s literal-
want you to braid your pubic hair into cute little pig- ly unasked?
tails.” She said, “You don't mean this.” I said, “Yes, I I. 'The alternative to dealing with that impossible situa-
mean it. You braid your pubic hair in those tiny lit- Lion is to yield in the current situation.
tle pigtails. Your husband is to take colored snapshots H: Well, that's pretty similar to your curing the involun-
of them, a whole row, and then you can take the film Kay by the voluntary. By asking somebody to wet the
out of the camera and destroy it before it’s developed.” CCL,

(Laughter) I said, “Call me tomorrow.” PYos,
She called me the next day and said, “We've got the N: She preferred to keep the anesthesia rather than do
color film, but we're going to use it for other purposes that?

[PAGE 056]

104 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 105


E: That's right. silly that I think I'll accept it really.” Why do you buy
H: Why did you involve her husband in taking the pic- some silly cards— because they are so absurd.
tures? Why couldn't she take pictures of herself? W: And this was a lady of dignity?
E: What would her husband say? What? (Laughter) E: Anybody with a great deal of dignity has to toy with
FH: I can see how this could make it more so, I just won- the idea of complete absence of dignity. To make a col-
dered if this was also related to the fact that her hus- ored snapshot record of absolute lack of dignity, and
band was going to do this operation on her, or what- yet to destroy it before it’s developed. Nevertheless,
ever? that doesn’t abolish the fact that a record was made.
E: Yes, well that’s part, but you see it dealt with that situa- If her husband is to be futile, let him be futile.
tion so completely, asking her husband to do a com- (Laughter) The choice is between letting her husband
pletely futile thing, and she’s turned it down. be futile and letting her husband be successful. Of
W: I wonder if part of the reason she can’t refuse to do this course, I’m the one that’s going to know that her pubic
is that it’s already come after the demonstration of hair was braided. I’m the one that’s going to know.
how you can lay your hand on her knee. There’s a very I’m going to share that with her husband. Is she ever
considerable demonstration there of how much she is going to let me know that she did? No, she was very
in your power, but she can get out of it with the careful to call me up the next day to tell me that the
trance. | mean, maybe she had the idea if she doesn’t color film was going to be used for other purposes.
braid her hair and her husband take this picture, my 1: This would be between you and her husband for ever
God, Milton Erickson is going to be over there doing and ever in that case?
it. (Laughter) 7: That's right. And she and she alone had the power to


E: No, because I quite simply told her, “Of course you can prevent it.
refuse to do this.” But I put my doubts into, “Of IH: Do you know if she told her husband what you'd sug-
course you can refuse to do this.” So I anticipated her gested?
on the refusal. 17: Oh yes. She told him with a great deal of glee and


H. You mean you put doubt on the word “refuse”? amusement — after the medical attention had been givE: Of course she can refuse (with rising inflection on “re- en. You see. I’m disguising it.
fuse”). I: Well, that's a real beauty!
W: Pll bet she had some image of “What happens if I do iv; She told me he leaned back in his chair and said, “I wish
Es


refuse?” T had thought of that myself.” He roared and roared.
E: But you see how intrigued would a person be by such with laughter. The word “braids” in some connection
an absolutely ridiculous situation. It’s intriguing to is now a standard family word. Always signifying
you, isn’t it? something funny, absurd and ridiculous.
W: Braids look very cute. (Laughter)
E: She's a good hypnotic subject. She's a very responsive * * *
person. Here’s an intriguing, absurd, ridiculous, ludi-
crous — what does it do to a person? “Your idea is so Ht: 'Vhere’s one particular point that I thought I would men-

[PAGE 057]

106 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 107


tion to you: That is the way I do certain things when
statement was that I could give his wife that sort of
I am interviewing a family group or a husband and
compliment deliberately, intentionally, and do it as
wife or a mother and son. People come to a psychia-
a demonstration to him. His wife, sitting right there,
trist for help, but they also come to be substantiated
hearing the discussion, would find herself unable to
in their attitudes. They also come to have face saved
reject the compliment. So I turned to her and said,
for them. Therefore, in dealing with them, I pay at-
“You know, unquestionably there are many women
tention to the fact that they want face-saving, that
more beautiful than you, but not for me.” That admit-
they want to be substantiated; and I am very likely
ted there were women more beautiful than she, but
to speak in a fashion that makes them think that I
it also said she was the most beautiful woman in the
am on their side. Then I digress on a tangent — one
world to my eyes. Now this woman has a Ph.D. She's
that they can accept, but it leaves them teetering on
highly intelligent. She examined that and said, “No
the edge of expectation. They have to admit that my
matter what I try to do with that statement, I'm so
digression is all right, perfectly correct. They didn’t
pleased you made it.” (Laughter)
expect me to do it that way. But they’re teetering
That's right, you're admitting absolute reality, but
there, it’s an uncomfortable position; they want some
you're transforming it into a purely interpersonal rela-
solution of that matter that was just brought to the
tionship reality which is genuine. So you're differen-
edge of settlement. Then they are much more likely
tiating between the hard, harsh reality of the world
to accept whatever you say. Because they are very
in general, and establishing the reality of the interper-
eager then for you to make a decisive statement. If
sonal relationship world, which is of importance to the
you made it right away, they could take issue, but if
individual.
you digressed, they hope you will get back and they
II: You have a way of presenting an idea in two steps so
are wanting you to make that decisive statement.
that the first step is impossible to disagree with.
Then there’s another technique in presenting ideas.
When you say, “Unquestionably there are women who
That is saying something so that they are forced to
are more beautiful than you are,” the “unquestionably”
agree with you, to agree with you regretfully, to know
is your first step. Then you follow it with a second.
that you're speaking the truth. They wish you wouldn't
If they accept the first, they tend to accept the sec-
and then you give it a last, second flip, which compels
ond.
them to accept it.
lv: Yes. You try to present the first step so that they can
I can think of a wife who's the victim of a very para-
measure it in any number of ways, and it's still valid.
noid husband. Her complaint was that he had never
It: Well, I gather from that example, you would assume
told her that she was attractive, but she was very
that if a wife protests that her husband doesn’t pay
charming. He always told her that lots and lots of
her enough compliments, she’s a wife who has difficul-
women were more beautiful than she was, that prac-
Ly receiving compliments. Would that be an assump-
tically every woman had as much or more charm than
tion of yours?
she. He said there was no possible way of giving his
I No, Uthat wasn't the assumption in this particular case.
wife the type of compliment that she desired. My
It, was simply in the paranoid nature of the husband.

[PAGE 058]

Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 109
108 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson

E: This man left his father and mother. He could not tolH: Do you assume that if he did pay her a compliment,
erate living at home because he was so filled with
she'd have trouble accepting it in that case?
doubts and fears and suspicions of his parents. Then
E: Not in this case. But her orientation was one of want-
at a social party he saw a very attractive girl, and he in-
ing it only, only, only from her husband.
quired her name. He began investigating her. All of his
W: They were both there at the time you made this pair
investigations of her proved that she was a very nice
of statements?
girl. So with a great deal of relief, he started courting
E: Yes.
her. She was a nice, sweet, innocent, trusting girl.
W: Then it was also in the nature of a demonstration to
W: I find that hard to believe.
the husband that there are two kinds of reality?
E: That was part of it. His response was awfully nice. He
* * *
said, “I wish I could have thought of it that way.” But
the next day he was just as paranoid against his wife
IT: When you see a couple who are fighting, do you ever
as ever.
analyze the tactics they use with each other?
H: You tend to treat symptoms as if they had something
ly: Very, very often. I get a couple in here, the husband sit-
to do with more than the one person with symptoms,
ting there, the wife sitting there, and he starts tell-
but at the same time you tend to make them quite in-
ing her what kind of a liar she is, and she starts tell-
dividual. I mean, you would assume, I think, with the
ing him what kind of a fool he is. I point out to the
paranoid man that his paranoia was independent of
wife that she could have described him as a fool in
his wife.
much more eloquent terms. 1 point out to him that
E: Yes.
he could have described her in much more meaningful
H: Instead of her being a part of it. Do you feel this is true
terms. I can also confess my absolute ignorance, “I
of almost all symptoms, or just the psychotic sort?
don't know that you're going to go that far out.”
E: It varies.
II: Do you give them examples of how they could have
FH: Let me put it this way. Do you think that a man of that
done it?
sort could find a woman to live with who didn’t need
I: Precisely. You get a nice, violent, verbal quarrel where
him to be that sort?
obscenity and vulgarity and everything is included
E: The paranoid system of this patient includes the whole
in the verbal descriptions. I know a few words myself
wide world. I think the only role his wife is playing
that I think improve upon any profane utterances.
has been to slow him down in his delusional, hallucina-
Then I can confess that, “I don’t know if you want to
tory developments.
say all of that about your wife.” I don’t. What does
H: You don't assume that she manages to be just secretive
il do to him? Well, does he want to say all of that?
enough to keep him suspicious? That there’s some-
That’s what I want him to start thinking. It’s rather
thing going on that he doesn’t get hold of? We find
shocking to him to have me tell him how he could im-
this fairly typical of a paranoid acting suspicious. He
prove his denunciation. The words sound differently
exaggerates the response, but there’s usually some-
coming from my lips.
thing that he is responding to.

[PAGE 059]

110 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Encouraging Relapses and Giving Directives 111


W: Yes. in her mind.” Can he deny that he can read her
E: Then, of course, I point out that I don't know if he wants thoughts? Can she deny? As long as the thoughts are
to go that far in his denunciation. Well, of course, I open and readable, you might as well say them be-
am a third party, and I don’t really understand, I’ve cause they’re out in the open anyway.
acknowledged that. But he’s starting to think. I do fT: I gather that with couples you don't bring the couple
the same thing to her. There you've got both of them in and get them talking to each other while you sit
thinking, “Do I really want to be that extreme in my ut- out of it at all?
terances?” If they are quick enough in their responses, E: Not very often. Once in a while.
I can raise the question, “While we're dealing with this IT: Why do you do it that once in a while?
matter, 1 suppose you both want to disregard the fa- E: Sometimes to get a better view of the acidity of the sit-
vorable elements for a while.” (Laughter) If they say, uation. (Laughs) Just exactly how sour it is, you see.
no, they don't want to disregard the favorable ele- II. Yes.
ments, they are committing themselves to the fact Is: Just how bitter.
there are favorable elements. If they say they want W: You know, I see something, Jay, where we tend to make
to disregard the favorable elements for a while they a lot of that, but Milton brings them in and, in fact,
are committing them... revises them separately and sends them out to interH: That locks them in. act. Instead of having them interact in the room and
E: ... committing themselves that there are favorable ele- trying to make a shift in it there. You send them out
ments that must be touched upon before the fracas to go camping.
is over. But I haven't told them that there are favor- lv: Yes. They come into the room to disclose their unhap-
able elements. 1 just raised a legitimate question. piness. I send them out to establish their happiness.
H: Yes, W: And they can leave the other here.
E: But it pushes their thinking around.
W: What if, instead of the couple having this sort of open * * *
fight, they are sitting there full of it, but not saying
it. lv: When I talk to a wife and husband together, at times,
E: Do you mean (demonstrating anger). the husband has the feeling, literally, that the wife
W: Yes. and I are alone and he’s an unknown, invisible, nonE: Mouth shut, fists clenched. participating creature seeing what his wife and J talk
W: “She’s a fine woman,” (said with mouth clenched). about. I’m handling her that way. Then I have the
E: Yl tell the woman, “Unquestionably you can read your wife observe the same thing about the husband. I can
husband’s mind right now and you know the kind of agree with the wife against the husband, and agree
things he's thinking. The kind of things that he hasn't with the husband against the wife. Each feels that I’m
got the courage to say, because I think it’s lack of cour- in agreement with them. But all I’m doing is substi-
age, I don’t think it’s courtesy. I think he’s too darn Luling the intensity of my interest for their wish for
mad at you to be courteous. Just as she is too darn my conformity. Then 1 can take them as a marriage
mad to be courteous, and you can read the thoughts problem,

[PAGE 060]

112 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


W: This really means that your interest in them is really
more important than whether you agree with them or
not.
E: That's right.
FH: When you are involved this intensely with one of them, CHAPTER 5
doesn't that one begin to feel that the other one is be-
ing left out and try to bring them in?
E: Very, very seldom because 1 don't allow that. Sex, Fun,
H: Of course. (Laughing)
E: I much prefer to have him sit there viewing it objective- and Impotency
ly even though it’s not intentionally objective.


1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.


IT: We were talking previously about something we would
like to get back to. John was talking about an impo-
tency case, and I have a premature ejaculation case.
They are similar sorts of problems in that in both the
emphasis is upon a crusade to give the wife some sat-
isfaction. And you suggested that in these cases you
tell them there will come a time when they will get an
erection when it is inconvenient to the wife.
fc: Yes.
II: Where do you go from there?
I‘: You see, what happens to their claim for impotence
when they get an erection every time it’s inconvenient
for their wives?
II: Oh, it isn’t that it is a single time, it’s every time?
lv: Over and over again. Not just one time. What has hap-
pened to their claim of impotence? This man with that
phobia. What happened to his claim of a phobia for
kissing his wife? When he kissed her when she was
in the middle of washing her face at night, prepara-
Lory to going to bed. When he kissed her when she
wus in Lhe middle of greasing her face. When he kissed


pia

[PAGE 061]

114 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Sex, Fun, and Impotency 115


her when she was going to take a shower preparatory H: 1f he does ask, you say that?
to her dressing to go downtown for some function. E: “It might be, you know.” I’m not going to answer that
When he insisted on kissing her when she was cutting impossible question. I give a new interpretation. I can
her toenails, and things like that. think of a recent premature ejaculation case. He said,
W: Well, would you repeat then just how you - you spoke “Heck, I went to bed with a girl. Of course I had my
earlier about how you had to phrase it to this man. premature ejaculation. But I thought over what you
Pd like to hear that again. said about only a partial ejaculation. I realized, of
E: You want to know something about the thinking pat- course. I thought over what you said about how what
tern of the person. Something about their speech pat- I was missing by not having adequate foreplay, and
tern. I really explored that girl.” Then he said, “Of course,
H: Okay. But to get back now. You have this man getting just as you said, I had another erection and I really
an erection at inconvenient times so he can no longer enjoyed it.”
say the problem is impotency. H: 1 see, it’s the one-fourth, and then the foreplay, and then
E: That’s right. And we can both rejoice that we are nearer the erection again.
to the question, “And what is this very, very difficult FE: That's right.
problem that you had to conceal under the mistaken IT: The foreplay comes after the fourth.
idea that you were impotent?” So you maximate the E: That one experience literally cost me a patient.
problem. You accept the erection. He's got to accept IT: How is that?
the erection in order to maximate the problem. He’s E: He isn't going to come back. He hasn't got any worries
again left the problem in your hands to be directed. about premature ejaculation.
FH: Do you do this with premature ejaculation too? That IT: That's nice. TU try that.
he would be able to maintain an erection when it was it: Oh, yes, then there's another approach. One of these
inconvenient for his wife? When she was too tired, or long, long enduring cases of premature ejaculation,
whatever? and that frantic, impotent attitude they take. I give
E: 1 have another technique with the premature ejacula-
a little song and dance in my most learned, erudite
tions. I point out to the man, “You know, it’s really
fashion, to the effect that there's always an unfortu-
rather nice to have a premature ejaculation, because
nate outcome with premature ejaculations. There is
you see what you can do about it is just unload about unexpectedly, one never knows when, usually after
a quarter of your supply of sperm. That can cut down — because my patient's told me it's been years
years
your sensitivity, so that you're not overexcitable, and he's been having premature ejaculations —usually
it will teach you the tremendously important thing
after years, there will be a sudden reversal. And for
of enjoying foreplay.” the life of him, no matter how long he has intercourse,
H: How does he unload a quarter?
he can't have an ejaculation except upon a specific
E: I never explain any such impossible things. (Laughter)
Lime realization.
H And he doesn’t ask you?
11: What’s a specific time realization?
E: Oh no. “Well, it might be a third, you know.”
I’: That he starts having intercourse, and he expects to

[PAGE 062]

Sex, Fun, and Impotency 117
116 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


H: How do you do this, when he's awake or when he's in
have premature, but he doesn’t, and that puzzles him
trance?
and bewilders him. He inserts his penis, he really ex-
E: Pretty much in a trance state. Maybe it's a light, maybe
pects to have an immediate ejaculation, and he
it's a medium, as well as a deep.
doesn’t. That bewilders him and puzzles him and con-
H: Now to get back to this question, what do you do after
fuses him. He engages in active coital movements,
you make it so that it isn't a problem of impotency?
momentarily expecting an immediate ejaculation, be-
W: No, I want to go back one step before that. I got that,
cause it is so exciting and so thrilling and so satisfy-
or at least I got part of that, but I don't quite get how
ing. He keeps looking and looking and looking and
you would get this across by, in effect, saying, “What
looking and looking for an ejaculation that does not
you can expect is what you were concerned about be-
happen. After 15 minutes or 20 minutes or 25 minutes
fore.” That is, you say to the patient, “Yes, it's just
it suddenly begins to dawn on him that perhaps he
sort of too bad that when you do begin to have an
has lost his capacity to have an ejaculation. Then he
erection again it’s going to cover all these inconven-
really begins to get scared because of the exciting-
ient times, and that’s going to be too bad. And your
ness of the experience, and the enjoyableness of it.
wife isn’t really going to be ready for it, and therefore
He’s dead certain that all of that intense enjoyment
you are just going to have to expect that she is real-
ought to— and then he suddenly realizes, yes, he did
ly not going to be satisfied, and this is too bad, but
wear his wristwatch, and that it was 9:00 o’clock when
really that's the way it is.”
he went to bed with her, and that there is no possibili-
lv: Yes.
ty of his having an ejaculation, absolutely none of
W: And having been told that, he begins to have an erec-
having one before 47 minutes past 9 o'clock, or till 7
tion again and at an inconvenient time, and this leads
minutes to 10, whatever time you want to set. You
into — well, this isn't really the problem.
see, he’s obsessed by the idea of premature ejacula-
i: That's right. But he’s proved conclusively that he's com-
tion. All right, you let him get obsessed by the idea
petent to have an erection.
that he can’t possibly have an ejaculation, until 47
W: You've done it, really, by guaranteeing him that it is
minutes after the hour, or 7 minutes of 10. I don’t care
going to be inconvenient for his wife.
what hour you pick out. When the patient is having
17: Yes, but you see he's making his recovery and he is get-
active intercourse, he insisted on having on his arm
ting closer to it. Now what happens when a man gets
so he can see it, see his watch. (Laughter) Then he tells
an erection?
you all about it. You tell him that after a while —you
W: I don’t understand in what sense you are asking.
don’t know how long it will take him to learn—he'll
lv: Doesn't he experience a few desires himself?
learn to recognize time automatically, unconscious-
W: Yes.
ly, and he won't have to depend upon his watch.
I: That's been overlooked, you see. Nothing has been said
W: You mean, he’s being told, “Well, you can know when
about it. He’s being frustrated too, you know.
it’s time.”
W: Yes.
E: That's all. Then you demonstrate how these people go
I; He still is during his erections. He's being frustrated.
to bed and they’ve got to catch a train at 6 o'clock.
He can compromise and do it when it is convenient
They wake up in full time for that.

[PAGE 063]

118 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Sex, Fun, and Impotency 119

for his wife too. You're building up his desire. You're And I said the same thing to him. How he had com-
also giving him permission to inconvenience his wife. plimented his wife. They almost stopped the car on
But you're building up his desires. You're making him the way back to Detroit to have intercourse. A rather
aware of the fact that it isn’t an inability to secure an simple way of handling it, wasn’t it?
erection. It’s his attitude toward sexual relations in H: Remarkably simple. Why do you think it worked?
some way, but he’s building up desire. E: Because on her wedding night every woman wants to
be wanted, the one, the only, the absolute. Because
* * *
it is a completely momentous occasion, representing
her transformation from a girl into a woman. Now I
1955. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.
built up the momentousness of that in the most pleas-
ing way imaginable. It was an overwhelming situaE: A couple with a traumatic experience can reach an im- tion, and she had proof that it was overwhelming. He
passe. Let me give you an example. One of my medical had proof because he had a lot of guilt for sleeping
students married a very beautiful girl. On their wed- with every chippy in Detroit. Here was proof to him
ding night he could not produce an erection in spite that he had found the one, the only, the overwhelm-
of the fact that he had slept with every chippy in De- ing one. You see, that became an irreversible thing.
troit. For two weeks he tried to get an erection, and IT: It’s just a different approach from what I am familiar
nothing could produce one. He couldn’t even get one with. I mean, the typical idea is that it’s a problem
by masturbation. After two weeks of a honeymoon of of the good and bad girl, and it’s not uncommon that
that sort, they came back and his wife consulted a as soon as you marry her you can't screw her because
lawyer about an annulment. He came out to weep on she’s the good girl.
my shoulder. I told him to call up a few of his friends lv: Y know, but she wants to be.
who knew his bride and to get them to go and see her II: It’s a different way of handling it altogether.
to persuade her to come out to see me. She came out I; What's the quarrel one of my patients has with her hus-
just as bitter as could be. So horribly bitter. I let her band? It’s so utterly bitter. “We can get along all right
tell me the whole thing. Then 1 asked her if she had all evening; we've been married a year. But when we
thought about the compliment her husband gave her. decide to go to bed, Joe gets an erection the second
She wanted to know what I meant. She had been com- we start for the bedroom. I can undress slowly, or rap-
pletely in the nude, I pointed out, and said, “Well, evi- idly, he gets into bed with an erection. He has it every
dently he thought your body was so beautiful that he night. He wakes up in the morning and there it is
was overwhelmed by it. Completely overwhelmed. standing up. It makes me so mad, and I’m getting
And you misunderstood that and felt he was incompe- madder and madder at him.” I said, “What do you
tent. He was incompetent because he realized how lit- want?” She said, “If just once, just once, just once,
tle capacity he had to appreciate the beauty of your he’d get into bed and not be able to have an erection
body. You go into the next office and think that over.” no matter how much he looked at me and admired me.
I called him in. I let him tell me the whole sad story. If just once he could let me feel my female power.” Be-

[PAGE 064]

a


120 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Sex, Fun, and Impotency 121
¡iaa


ample, there's the new Walt Disney film. Well, I am
cause every woman has the right to produce an
erec-
tion and to reduce it.
very interested in his natural history movies, very
H. That's a different view.
E: And she doesn't want the man just to produce it;
much so. And my sons are, and Betty is. I want to
she go and I want to enjoy that show, and I’m going to
wants to produce it in him.
HH: She's just “woman in general” if it's produced when
enjoy it with absolute intensity. But MI swear at any-
he body who says, “Isn't that good? Isn't that good? Do
comes into the room, not her specific self.
E: She would like just once to feel her female power. So
you want me satisifed? Let me alone. Let me enjoy
I swore her husband to secrecy, and I pointed out the
it to the utmost. How are they going to enjoy the
show if they see me enjoying it to the utmost? You
tremendous importance of this. He masturbated three
go into a hotel, or a restaurant, you're not very hun-
times that night. He really had a flaccid penis. She
gry, and here is some uninhibited character really
had a perfectly wonderful time wriggling around and
feeding his face with both hands with the greatest of
squirming and so on, and he was wondering and won-
dering if he could have an erection. He knew what he
gusto, and you say, “Well, I didn’t realize I was that
o
H So if You can get the husband to really enjoy it, the
hungry.”
wanted. After a while he got an erection. The thing
that delighted her was that it was just by wiggling
wife’s problem will take care of itself?
and squirming and never putting her hands on his
penis and not even kissing him. He got his erection —
E: You tell the husband that. And when he makes love
she really had the female power.
with absolute gusto, what happens to his wife? Some
H: 1 suppose they’ve been happy ever since then?
of these frigidity problems, the husband said, “I tried
E: Yes. It’s about time for them to fly over for a social
to do everything in the world I can to make my wife
visit. enjoy it.”
They took me out to dinner last April. Boy she’s got
H: Yes, this is the problem we all see.
female power. I was looking at her at the dinner table,
E: Yes. "
and she’s really got it.

E “Y ou're enjoying it, aren't you?” Noshesheis soisn't, that's
: He’s working at it. o
FH: Talk about unique methods.

right. But when she finds out that complete-
ly, utterly, satisfying to him, that he just cant gol
* * *


1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley,
enough of her (laughing), she has to think, “I must.
and John Weakland.
have something.” 7

FH: What do you do about the guy protesting that his
H: You explain this to him? Because it’s hard to tell how
wife much you explain to him.
is never satisfied? That this is the goal of his life —to
satisfy his wife?
W: How much you give him in analogy and how much you
lay it out for him is not clear. .
E: You want to know... you know my tendency to
use 15: It’s not clear because you can't let your patient — he
analogies, and they work. If you went to a show, and
wouldn’t be your patient if he could handle it directly
it was a show you wanted to see very much. For
ex- --know too much about it, or else he will conscious-

[PAGE 065]

122 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Sex, Fun, and Impotency 123


ly, deliberately improve upon your ideas. Therefore, Now you watch any little child. I watch them in air-
you rely upon his unconscious. ports, maneuvering their parents. Kids in go-carts doW: And you've got to decide this for each patient, really ing a beautiful job. It’s important what a beautiful job
is what you were saying before. they do. You'll see that nice, calculating narrowing of
E: Remember, any six-month-old outsmarts its parents, the eye, as a child thinks this over, “and now let's see,
isn’t that right? the old lady will fall for this.” (Laughter) Then I watch
W: Quite often. mother being led by the nose by some little kid in the
E: Quite often. I can think of the time when Kristina was airport.
three and little Stephani, her niece, my grandaughter, H. A little child shall lead them. (Laughter)
was two. And my daughter. We adults were sitting E: So when you deal with patients, you bear in mind that
on the couch, and little two-year-old Stephani came the unconscious is pretty childlike and pretty direct
in, saw Kristina’s doll, grabbed it, and glared at Kris- and pretty comprehensive in its understandings.
tina as if saying, “I dare you to take this away.” Kris- H: And you typically reach it with analogy?
tina looked stricken. That was her favorite doll. She E: It’s the best way, I think.
didn’t want to have that strange little kid with her fa-
vorite doll. My daughter, Carol, Betty, and I were * * *

watching, wondering how the two little girls would
settle it. Kristina said, “Please,” reached her hand out. E: This college professor in his 30s married a girl in her
She turned away. Kristina thoughtfully scanned Steph- 30s. They met at a faculty meeting. He took one look
ani and turned and went into the bedroom and came at the girl and he knew that was the girl he wanted
out with a couple of tin cups with a saucer. Of course, to marry, and how could he meet her? She took one
Stephy watched Kristy, who sat down with her back look at him and knew that was the man she wanted
toward Stephani and started rattling the cups and to marry, and how could she meet him? So there was
saucers. Stephani looked, Kristy switched around, a desperate campaign on the part of both of them until
Kristy just obstructed Stephani. Stephani threw the they could really get introduced. They had a very
doll away on the couch and proceeded to show Kris- warm courtship. They both asked during the court-
ty that she could take those cups and saucers away. ship one specific thing: Did the other want children?
So Kristy put up a mild, weak little struggle, and she And each did, tremendously so. They agreed that they
kept reaching as Stephani backed away. As soon as would make a baby on their wedding night. They were
Stephani was far enough away, Kristina picked up the rather prim and rigid and they used professional lan-
doll, slipped it in her dress and walked blandly into guage. She wanted to know if he was phylopro-genital.
the bedroom. She hid her doll and went back, and she He inquired about her maternal instincts.
weakly tried to take the cup again. Stephy shoved her They agreed that their wedding night should be for
away. Then Kristy went about her play. So I turned purposes of procreation. They agreed that it should
to my daughter, Carol, and I said, “When are you go- be a very, very complete physical union, because there
ing to pay your fee on child guidance to Kristy?” Yes. is something in psychosomatic medicine. There should

[PAGE 066]

124 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Sex, Fun, and Impotency 125

be full participation emotionally, intellectually, and
said, “Well, you're a psychiatrist. Maybe you can help
physically. On their wedding night they had inter-
us.” I said, “Well, if you want therapy 1 can help you.
course and she had an orgasm, and so did he. Of course,
But it won't be very pleasant, because you need shock
one physical union does not necessarily result in im-
treatment. Shock treatment that will really knock you
pregnation. I’m just conveying their terminology.
into another kind of understanding. Not electric
Therefore, there should be persistence, repetition.
shock, not insulin shock, not metrazol shock, but an
Since the time of ovulation is not necessarily known,
emotional shock. You're both very religious, you're
they’d better have physical unions daily. Since the
both very conscientious, you're both very circum-
sperm cell lives not over 72 hours, probably less than
spect. You're both very refined. If you want therapy
48 hours, it was only reasonable to have physical
that will help you, Pl give it to you, but it will be a
union daily. On the weekends to rest in bed, to caress
shock treatment. Do you want it? Think it over, wait
one another, and to bring about psychosomatic re-
awhile.” They sat there and looked at each other, and
sponses and to culminate in complete physical union.
turned to me.
Sundays and holidays twice a day. Weekdays, once
1 said, “Well, you've been having a physical union
daily. They were going to procreate. Oh yes, menstru-
regularly every day for three years. Twice on Sundays
ation was not a barrier, neither was pneumonia, a
and holidays. Whether sick or well, throughout the
broken leg, or anything. They never missed a day for
menstrual period. But why in hell don't you fuck for
three years. They both had orgasms.
fun!” You should have seen them stiffen rigidly,
At the end of three years they came to me rather
holding their breaths. It was a shock. For me to say
desperate. They came with this pitiful story. They
“hell” and me to say “fuck.” Finally they took a breath.
said, “The unfortunate thing is that in the desperate-
I said, “I mean that: Why don’t you fuck for fun?
ness of our desire to procreate we have become emo-
Think of it. Why don’t you fuck for fun?” I called the
tionally intolerant of each other. Our bodies function
wife by her first name and said, “She has a pretty
normally, but we're losing all of the tender emotions,
body, she’s got nice hips, and she’s got a nice breast,
and we look upon the physical union as just a hopeful
in fact she’s got two, she’s got twins. She’s got nice
labor and nothing else. Of course, we make it com-
legs, she’s kissable and you know it. And as for you—
plete, we both have orgasms, maybe that’s a super-
and I called him by name - you know that you've got
stitious idea about impregnation, but we feel it should
the thing that she can reduce in size. So why don’t you
be complete. But it's only a hopeful labor, and we're
fuck for fun? And for the next few months you'd bet-
awfully intolerant of each other so far as tender emo-
ter fuck for fun, and pray to God and hell that she
tions are concerned, We've both been examined. There's
doesn’t get pregnant and interrupt your fun. Now get
no reason why we should not become parents. But
the hell out of here. Come back in a week or a month,
we've reached an emotional impasse, and we wonder
and tell me how you're getting along. And remember
if we'll be suitable parents for the child.” Such rigidi-
that I meant everything I said.”
ty, it was horrible.
I saw them about a month later. They didn’t come
I asked them what they wanted me to do. They
Lo see me; I drove to their home. I walked in and told

[PAGE 067]

126 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson ES Sex, Fun, and Impotency 127

them 1 wanted a drink. So they fixed me a scotch and nal home. She could go back there on weekends. I

soda. The embarrassment on their faces. 1 walked made her move. A Spanish family. The grandmother

around the house, took a quick look in the bedroom, really laid down the law to her, but I had laid down

grinned and said, “This is a delightful drink.” I said I the law first. And somehow or another I was more ef-

was driving by and thought I'd drop in. I was thirsty. fective than grandmother. Then this question of trav-

Better sit around here an hour and let the drink wear eling. I told her to shut her eyes and back into the bus.

off. How are things going in the department? So we (Laughs) She did. I don’t know what the other passen-

discussed his teaching. I waited an hour for the drink gers thought of that rather pretty girl, Spanish girl,

to wear off. I think that was about a month after- with her eyes shut and backing into a bus. But she

wards. Then about three months later they came in was so distressed about that that she didn’t seem to

to tell me she was pregnant. How does the body do realize that the bus was a means of transportation
from Yuma to Phoenix. I later had her board a train
a thing like that?
backward. The conductor’s cussing her out didn’t seem
* * * to faze her one bit because the train was so horrible.
Then I got her to ride in the back seat, looking out

I can think of —let’s call her Ann - she got engaged of the back window, from Yuma to Tucson to Phoenix

to a boy in the Air Force. She was going to marry him to Yuma.
Then it was apparent — everytime the subject of sex
next December. In December she was going to marry
him next June. In June she was going to marry him was raised she developed deafness. She just turned

in December. In December she was going to marry blank. Apparently couldn't see you or hear you. So I

him in June. In the meantime, she developed horri- told her the next time she came I wanted her to bring

ble phobias. She couldn't ride in a bus. She didn’t want in, in her handbag, the shortest pair of short shorts
Tapa


TFET


to go past a railroad station because of the trains imaginable and show them to me. Take them out of “SFT


there. She couldn't even go near an airport. She hated the bag and show them to me. She did. Then I gave
to get into a car. It was very troublesome. her her choice in her next interview with me—she

But by aid of her mother coming with her, and her either walked in here wearing them or she put them

aunt coming with her, she came from Yuma, by car, on in here. (Laughter)
PTY


all the way up here to see me. She told me she was W: That's quite a choice.

in love with that boy up in North Dakota. She wanted 17: She walked in with them. Then I told her, “Now you're
PREP


to marry him. She showed me his letters. She was going to listen to me whenI discuss sex, or Tll have Rae


PoP


afraid, afraid, afraid, afraid, afraid. I had the boy write you take those off and put them on in my presence.” She


me a letter to find out what his views were on it. He She listened to me on the subject of sex. Then 1 told

was stupid enough to want to marry her. I thought her, “Now this is the first of July; you've got until the

she’d turn out all right if her horrible phobias were cor- seventeenth of this month to marry that guy. You’re

rected, but I knew that would take quite some time. coming in tomorrow. I’m going to get you all ready

The first thing I did was move her out of her mater- Lo marry the guy. You've got to go on up to North Da-

[PAGE 068]

128 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Sex, Fun, and Impotency 129


kota and see him. Take a train. You've got to go up sent to have an amputation of the breast for cancer,
and meet his folks. You've got until the seventeenth the only way you can get her to agree to it, is by strip-
of July. Come in tomorrow.” ping her to the nude and doing a very careful medical
So I called Betty. I said, “Now you need to know examination of her with your eyes. You ask her to
how to undress and go to bed in the presence of a man. walk, and then you tell her, “I’m very, very positive
So start undressing.” Slowly, in an almost automatic you need the amputation of that breast. I’m awfully
fashion, she undressed. 1 had her show me her right sorry.” And you are speaking against the total back-
breast, her left breast, her right nipple, her left nip- ground of her nudity, her entirety. You can get some
ple. Her belly button. Her genital area. Her knees. Her women, who would otherwise rather go to the grave,
gluteal regions. I asked her to point where she would to enter the operating room gladly, hopefully.
like to have her husband kiss her. 1 had her turn This poor Spanish girl, you know how modest they
around. I had her dress slowly. She dressed. I dis- are. Then I told her I thought it was necessary. Well,
missed her. She went and boughta railroad ticket and I did. Now with that four years of postponement of
went to North Dakota. Made all the arrangements the marriage, those increasing phobias. The doctor in
with him to come down and marry her in Yuma. She Yuma referred her to me and said, “You probably will
sent me the wedding announcement. | could’ve been have to put her in the state hospital.” So I asked her
best man if I wanted to be. She broke the news to me to send him announcements of her marriage and her
so happily when she was first pregnant. Sent me an children. She’s been back to Yuma with her family and
announcement of the birth of the first child, and an visited the referring doctor.
announcement of the birth of the second child. She’s W: How would you explain the working of that — what you
written me letters. After the birth of the second child did there?
she wrote me one of the nicest letters telling me how E: That is something that you would never, never do for
grateful she was that I had utterly disregarded social any, any man. Just never. Yet you’ve done it. Then
amenities and helped her. anything else you do is necessarily much less; it’s a
And Betty sat here frozen-faced. But why did the minor thing. They’ve discovered that they can sur-
girl do it? I expected her to do it. I thought it was ut- vive. You teach one of these extremely inhibited, com-
terly absolutely imperative; and if she didn’t, she never pletely fearful women who can't even say “darn,” how
could get to North Dakota. She never could marry the to use the language of a longshoreman. And really use
man. She could never get into bed with him. She says it. Then they can tell you, with utter simplicity, a lot
married life is wonderful, I’m very happy, and she of their fears and anxieties and conflicts that other-
married quite a wealthy young farmer. But you ex- wise were too terrible ever to say. It may take a while
pect the patient to do it. Your patient is very certain —a whole hour to get them to say a few simple little
that you know it’s necessary. four-letter words, but after that they can say almost
Professor Arnt, Colorado School of Medicine, when anything. Their innermost secrets.
I was an intern, was most emphatic in stating that I can think of one patient who came to me and said,
sometimes the only way you can get a woman to con- “You know, I wish I could tell you a few things.” That

[PAGE 069]

130 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Sex, Fun, and Impotency 131

was the burden of communication the first hour. The W: Leaving their resistance behind.
burden of communication of the second hour, “I real- H: Yes.
ly wish I could tell you some things.” So for the third E: Well, what does a good prizefighter do? He always gets
hour I said, “Do you mind if J take over now? I would the other fellow to think, “He’s going to sock me on
like to have you spend,” and I turned the clock so she the nose.” And he gets a body blow. Then he gets the
could see, “the next 20 minutes silently, mentally, other fellow to start defending his body, and he gets
puzzling over the worst possible thing that you could clipped in the eye. Well, that’s right. In therapy your
say to me. The worst. I don’t want you to say it. But patient is going to offer you resistances of all kinds.
you think over the worst possible thing that you could Well, you ask them to put that resistance in a certain
possibly say. You have 20 minutes to do it. You need place. Where it’s handy, where it’s ready, where it’s
never tell me what it is.” I watched her face, and at useful. He sort of keeps his eye on it right there where
the end of 20 minutes I said, “Now, you've thought it he can use it. And you walk around. But he did come
over. What is the worst possible thing that your hus- to you for help, and you keep stepping under his guard
band has ever said about you, that you just wouldn't by that shift of context. I never try to take a nice, sys-
want to tell me?” She told me. She said, “We were out tematic history. I always take a fragmentary history.
in a restaurant, you know the other couple,” and she You get much, much more information. The patient
named them. “My husband was talking to her hus- comes in prepared to tell you because they’ve seen
band, and it was a crowded restaurant. There were other doctors take a nice orderly history. They also
people there who knew us. My husband always talks come in prepared to omit certain things, and that’s
in a loud tone of voice, and he told her husband, “All on their mind. So you jump to something else.
my wife is is a cold-assed broad.’ And then her hus- W: They’ve got it organized so that if they give it their
band said, ‘So is my wife a cold-assed broad.” Now, way, the omissions won't show too much.
that was the worst possible thing her husband could E: Yes. And you jump to something else. The first thing
say. I’ve had no further difficulty; she can say any- you know, there's a great big hole, obviously. Another
thing and everything to me. It was probably some- great big hole. So you go down the list. I can think
thing very mild. (Laughter) But you see, you set it up of one patient. 1 said, “You lived in New York all your
that way, and then you shift the entire setting — the life. You had a boyfriend in 1919, and the next in 1923,
worst possible thing you’d say, the worst possible and your next boyfriend was 1929, and apparently
thing the husband ever said about you. She resents you didn't have any jobs in between 1923 and 1929,
being described in those terms. Her husband needs and apparently you weren’t living in New York in that
an awful lot of therapy. Both of those husbands do. length of time. Because I did ask you for the periods
Because I know them both. of time which you lived in New York and when you
H: You do a lot of shifting context. You get a context clear- lived elsewhere. You've given me your history, but
ly defined, and then you take them clear outside of there's this great big period of time, six years.” She
that. said, “That was what 1 wasn't going to tell you.” I said,
E: Oh yes. “All right, think it over carefully. Now what part of

[PAGE 070]

132 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Sex, Fun, and Impotency * 133


that six years don’t you want to tell me?” I gave her
I told him what he ought to do is to say nothing
a chance to hold out. She held out 1927, told me all
to his wife at all, but every day, or every other day,
the rest. Then she said, “You know, I might as well
he should reserve an hour for himself, go into the bath-
tell you 1927 anyway.” room, and masturbate. In the process of masturbaH: One question here that we haven’t touched at all: Is
tion, identify all the parts of his penis. From the base
there any sort of a psychiatric problem that you don’t
to the glands, identify all the sensations. That he
think could be resolved without involving the spouse?
should try not to pee semen as long as possible to see
E: Without involving the spouse?
how excited he could make himself while masturbatE: There are a lot of problems where you are going to have
ing himself. What little touches, thrills that he could
to deal with the patient where the spouse won't come
add to the masturbation. And do it every day. The
in.
things of concern would be the sensation of warmth
H: But is there a problem that couldn't be resolved without
and friction, the tension, but not the peeing of semen,
bringing the spouse in, that you can think of?
hold off on that, because once you've lost the semen,
E: Well, you hear about personal problems, purely per-
there will be a loss, physiologically, of the capacity
sonal, that interfere with the adjustment to the spouse.
to continue masturbating. Spend an hour doing it.
I can give you an example. This college professor
Well, he thought that was awfully childish, awfully
came in to see me. In essence, he had never had an foolish, and so on, but he did it regularly for about a
orgasm. He had never had an ejaculation. He had
month. Then one night at 11 o'clock he called me up
looked up the word “ejaculation” in every dictionary.
and said, “I did it.” I said, “What do you mean?” He
He had quizzed a lot of people about it. But he came
said, “Well, instead of masturbating today 1 went to
to me to find out why the word “ejaculate” was used
bed tonight with my wife and 1 got sexually excited
in relationship to male sexual behavior. So 1 asked
and I ejaculated.” He said, “I thought you'd be glad
him immediately, “How long did you wet the bed?” He
to have me call you and tell you about it.” I said, “Pm
said, “Until I was 11 or 12 years old. I got over it then,
very happy that you had an ejaculation.” At 1 o’clock
and what's troubling me is my sexual problem.” I said,
he called me again. (Laughter) He'd had another. Now,
“Well, you say you don't know what the word “ejacu-
there was therapy without the spouse being involved,
late' means. You've had intercourse with your wife.
and yet the spouse was, in a way, involved. His wife
You've got two children. Your wife is happily married,
demanded to know why he called me up to tell me he
you say. What do you do instead of ejaculate?” He
had intercourse with her. So he brought her over and
said, “Well, you have intercourse, you enjoy it, and
asked me if he should tell her. 1 told him it was none
after a while, just as if you were urinating, the semen
of her gol-danged business. But I'd like to ask his wife
flows out of your penis.” That's right. I said, “Well,
a few questions. So I asked her, “Have you enjoyed
you learned in your childhood that all your penis was
your marriage with your husband?” Yes she had.
good for is peeing. You've resented it. You've been
“Your sexual life has been good?” She said, “Yes.”
ashamed of it. So in the use of your penis maritally,
Sometime later she came to see me and said, “You
you used it to pee the semen into your wife's vagina.”
questioned me about my sexual life, and I told you
He said, “Doesn't every male?”
it, was good. Ever since my husband called you up at

[PAGE 071]

134 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Sex, Fun, and Impotency 135


midnight to tell you he was making love to me, my I think there are lots and lots of secrets. Secrets are
sex life with him has been better, but I don’t know essential for the integrity of one's own living. We even
why.” keep secrets from ourselves. Which is your right thumb
and which is your left thumb? Are you right or left
thumbed? How many men actually know which trouser
leg they put on first? How many women know that
certain blouses they button here down, and other
1961. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland. blouses they button this way? They don't know it. But
that different approach is vital to their appreciation.
H: Do you give explicit instructions to the husband on how You see, this idea of having a full and comfortable
to handle his wife? I can think of a husband, for ex- knowledge of everything means that you may have
ample, who complains that his wife would answer the a full knowledge but you can't have a comfortable
phone, and if it was for him, she would ask who it was. knowledge.
If the person wouldn't say, she'd hang up. He treats The illustration I’ve given to various medical soci-
this like this is just a way of life. eties is this: You see a very, very lovely girl, an exE: 1 don't think Pd give the husband instructions. I think tremely kissable girl, and you'd really like to kiss her,
I'd give the wife instructions. and you'd really like to hug her. But then you notice
FH: What sort in that sort of a situation? her eyes are just a little bit close together, and her
E: It would be a roundabout way of pointing out to her the ears really do stick out just a trifle. That nose is a mil-
essential integrity of the self. There are certain things limeter or so too long, and the upper lip is a bit thin
that the individual must keep a secret from other peo- and a bit short. The chin is slightly heavy. The first
ple. There is no reason why a wife would announce to thing you know the girl isn’t kissable. You reverse
her husband that her first menstrual day has begun. that.
It's of importance to him, but still that's a private per- I was sitting in the airport and I saw the homeliest
sonal thing. That the contacts that one makes — there girl I ever saw in my life. It was just incredible what
are so many contacts that one should keep a secret. her face looked like. So I thought, well, I’ve picked
Why should husband keep his contacts secret? I don't pretty girls’ faces apart, now let’s see what happens
think any woman should train her husband never to here. She had a very lovely widow’s peak. That hair-
keep from her the secret of his Christmas present to line was worth seeing. She had beautifully shaped eye-
her. The secret of his birthday present. The secret that brows. The look, the expression in the eyes, was such
he is having his sister-in-law quietly buying a desired an awfully nice, soft and gentle expression. Her ears
Christmas present or birthday present. That the neigh- were remarkably well-shaped. A very lovely lobe, and
bor's wife has called him up because the neighbor’s nice contours of the ear. Her nose, when you just looked
wife is chairman of the committee instructed to be at the nose separately, was really a nicely, well-chiseled
sure that his wife is present at a certain church meet- nose. That upper lip had a beautiful cupid’s bow. She
ing so that she can be elected president of the group. was definitely kissable.

[PAGE 072]

136 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Sex, Fun, and Impotency 137


You give that illustration to people to enable them E: Yes. Another example is when the alcoholic quits his
to recognize what they can do by over-analysis. You drinking, and the wife no longer has a chance to nag
say to a woman, “Now your husband represents an- him. Well, when he first comes to you, and his wife
other sex. Another biological structure. Another bio- comes to you in the initial meeting, that’s one of the
logical significance. Another type of biological learn- questions you're going to put to them right away.
ing. Since your child has to live in a world of men and W: What form are you going to put that question in?
women, be sure you get the benefits of that, but don't E: 1 let the husband define the situation. “I don’t think Pd
try to pick that husband apart into component items, be an alcoholic if she didn’t nag me all the time.” My
fragments.” This makes it her responsibility, in her question would be to the wife, “I doubt if you really
dominance, to provide everything, includinga signifi- nag him, I expect you express your legitimate regret
cant husband. You get her to be aware of the folly of that he drinks excessively, and that has used a lot of
picking things apart. You see, once you can get a your energy in the past. As he improves, just what
cancer patient to start picking his pain apart, you are you going to use that energy for?” I have her won-
have done a great deal toward relieving that sense of dering about it. But he has got an opportunity of sug-
pain. It’s a most effective measure. gesting to her, and watching and seeing to it, she uses
W: You get them to sort of dissect it for you? her energy on those other areas. He has to stop drinkE: Yes. You dissect the pain, the locality, and is it hot, cold, ing in order that she'll have that energy to use in other
cutting, biting, burning, lacerating, stabbing, grab- areas. You see, you always tie the two in together. But
bing, nagging pain? (Laughs) As soon as he starts in you never tell them that. Very rarely do they see
on each of those adjectives, he’s beginning to look at through it. But when you commit her to using her
the different things. You see, a pain experience de- time and energy elsewhere, you're committing him to
pends upon the stimulation of, I don’t know how many, giving her the opportunity.
nerve fibers, each of which presumably carries a slight- W: Putting it in terms of energy makes it positive and car-
ly different sensation, and the pain is the composite ries a suggestion something good can be done with
experience. You get a great deal of attention on the this.
hot, burning pain, and the cold, hard, drops out. Every E: Yes. You point out, “Each morning you wake up with
patient who tries to describe pain to you, if you give a certain allotment of energy. During the day you'll
them an opportunity, they'll throw in plenty of adjec- use it up. By bedtime you'll be tired. You want to go
tives. I use that understanding in knowing that a to bed and replenish your supply of energy. How are
woman should look at her husband and not pick him you going to spend that energy during the day?”
apart, but she better recognize his biological entirety. W: Well, when you see a patient with a reasonably severe
W: When the individual patient is relieved of a problem symptom, do you assume that if he improves, there’s
and improves, do you think the spouse tends to devel- going to be a reaction in the family that you have to
op some difficulties? And how is this dealt with? I take into account?
have the feeling, from what you've been saying, that 15: Usually there is a reaction. The alcoholic—I asked his

you start to deal with it in the beginning, but let’s go wife, T asked his daughter or son, “When father ceases
on anyway. to be an alcoholic, just how are you going to spend

[PAGE 073]

138 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Sex, Fun, and Impotency 139


that time that you spent in the past devoting your en- her suicidal inclinations. It’s almost a picture of her
ergy to wishing he wouldn't, or avoiding him, or ham- getting depressed and him not knowing what's going
mering away at him that he better mend his ways? on with her. He starts to protest that his heart feels
How are you going to spend that energy?” I’ve had so bad. She then gets angry and starts to talk, and
school children say, “Well, I can put it in on my ge- he gets a better idea of what state of mind she's in,
ometry.” I’ve had a wife say, “Now I'll have a chance even though he gets her furious. Then he feels a lit-
to do some committee work at the church.” tle better later and they get together again. It’s hard
H: Sometimes you see this sort of a problem, that a very to tell what starts the heart business, but it's a kind
severe symptom can appear to be quite protective of a system that the more he has the heart business,
with the spouse. For example, if you get somebody the more depressed she gets. The more depressed she
who is afraid he’s going to die of a heart attack, he’s gets, the more worried he gets and needs the heart
likely to have a depressed wife. The more he identifies business in order to find out what's on her mind.
himself as the patient, the more her problems don't E: My tendency would be to introduc
— what
e would you
come into the picture. As soon as he begins to im- call it? — vengeful anger.
prove, then she tends to get more depressed. H: How do you mean?
E: Now who has the bad heart? E: I can think of that man who dominated his wife with
H: The husband. his threats of heart attack and dying, and his moanE: The more he improves, the more depressed she gets. Be- ing and groaning, and so on, regularly. In spite of the
cause she's lost her usefulness in this time of crisis. doctors' all saying there's nothing wrong with his
W: I’m not sure you made it clear that this heart attack heart. It’s such a useful way of making life miserable
isn't a heart attack. for his wife. 1 told her to get advertising material from
H: That's right. It isn’t a real heart attack. I’m talking every mortician in town. And say, “Oh, your heart is
about hysterical ... bad.” She got advertisements and scattered them all
W: This guy has a heart attack two or three times a week, around the house. Every time he mentioned his heart
doesn't he? attack, she would say, “Now I must pick up those
H: Well, the particular one I’m thinking of, and I think it's from that table and arrange them neatly.” She was
common with a lot of other symptoms, is a man who looking at this collection of ads from morticians. He
fears he's going to die of a heart attack. He has had would irately throw them away, but she had others.
15 doctors tell him he's not going to die of a heart at- He didn’t dare to mention it. But you see, that's venge-
tack, nothing is wrong with his heart. So in the morn- ful behavior. “You're hurting me, you're annoying me,
ing he says to his wife, “I think P'd better stay home you're doing it deliberately. What's sauce for the goose
today. If I go to work, Tll have a heart attack.” She is sauce for the gander.” She varied it by adding up
gets mad immediately. Or he takes his pulse, and this his insurance policies. She got advertisements for per-
makes her furious. As I look into it, his wife is a very petual care and everything else. She would say, “Well,
depressed looking woman. About the second session you need a good ride out in the fresh air; let’s go see
or so, when he began to improve, what came up was such and such a cemetery.” She really had a very

[PAGE 074]

Sex, Fun, and Impotency 141
140 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


vengeful time, and he quit it. The wife would walk around the old car, washing the engine, shifting the
over to the telephone, dial the building contractor in tires, cleaning off the greasepan, fixing up the spark
her husband's presence, and say, “I hate to bother you plugs. He enjoyed that every weekend. His wife ob-
again, but do you think you can get the house finished jected to spending time that way. You could see his
before my husband dies?” He got so that he grabbed wife sitting there getting madder and madder, until
that receiver out of her hand and would tell the con- I asked the appropriate question. I said, “The fixing

tractor, “This is a wrong number.” He was furious at of the old car, that means then you've got two cars.
me for telling his wife what to do. He said he didn't Because you differentiated them. One is the ‘old’ car.”
like that. Nevertheless, he sent me other patients. Oh, I said, “How old is the ‘old’ car?” This was in 1960. He

about a year and a half later he called me up to ask said, “Well, I bought it in 1948.” I said, “All right, and
me how long he ought to spend in Florida away from you spend weekends working on it, fixing it up. How

his work. I pointed out to him that he was a grown many weekends have you driven it?” He said, “I haven't
man, his wife was a grown woman, and their son was got it all put together yet.” Twelve years. I said,
a grown man. That he had enough money so he didn't “About how much did you spend in the way of replace-
need to work anymore. He should stay in Florida un- ments and new things?” He said, “Not over $3,000.”
til the pleasures and satisfactions palled. Then I asked him what he thought his wife crabbed

W: That's how to give him advice. He asks you, but you about. “Because I havea little recreation, she crabs.”
put it back to him anyway at the same time. And what does she want for recreation? “She'd like to
E: All at the same time. And you define the situation. The go for a drive in the car.” Twelve years fixing up that
man was decidedly wealthy. one car,

W: Keeping her dangling on the string for the ride forever.
* * * E: Yes. I asked him if that wasn’t a bit too long to spend
on a car? He said, “No.” I saw his wife later and she

E: 1 can think of the husband and wife. The husband said said, “Well, my husband is a good provider. He does
his wife was way out in left field. She said maybe she waste a lot of money on that car, but he doesn’t chase
was, but there were a number of things that made her out with other women. He doesn’t get drunk. He
think she wasn’t, that it was her husband who was out works steadily. He doesn’t give me much pleasure in
in left field. So I asked her which one should begin first. life, but I do have a good home, plenty to eat, plenty
She said, quite sharply, “I think my husband is way to wear. I think I'll quit fighting with him about the
out in left field, he thinks I am; therefore, I’m going to car, and let that little boy keep right on. I’m going to
let him talk first, and he'll say a lot of foolish things look after my own personal pleasures, just as he’s
that he would be too wise to say if I spoke first.” looking after his own.” There's really no sense in talking
So her husband did speak first. He pointed out that to the man; 12 years to fix up the second car, spend-
his wife was so unreasonable, so psychotically appre- ing $3,000 on it. He had an altimeter on it. (Laughter)
hensive and fearful of poverty that she objected to his Not on the family car though. But for 12 years he’s
having any recreation. His recreation was puttering been building and rebuilding.

[PAGE 075]

142 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


W: You wouldn’t think he’d need any gauges at all for a
car that never got out of the garage. Let alone an al-
timeter.
E: His wife abided by the fact that she would never get
CHAPTER 6
a ride in that car.
H: Do you know if he ever finished the car?
E: A year later —let's see, it was last January, I checked
with her — he was ordering a new set of a different kind
Metaphors,
of fenders.
Shocking Experiences


1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.


H: One of the things we touched on the other day is how
you manage to start a fight between a couple who isn’t
fighting and who ought to have a fight. You men-
tioned a couple ways to do it; we just wondered if
there are other ways.
E: Except to ask them directly.
H: Well, usually they’re unable to if you do that. You get
a couple who say, “We've never had a fight. Married
23 years and never had a quarrel.” They look upon
fighting as something that isn’t the sort of thing that
ought to be done.
E: Yes.
H: Therefore, anything they object to about each other,
they never say what it is. They go through life side
by side without really contacting each other because
they don’t have a fight, really.
E: They tend to be a pretty colorless couple. What can you
do with them? Their kids are going to be pretty color-
less too. Unless, in some way, one of the kids blows
up and then he becomes delinquent. I’ve sometimes
made the approach, “If you were a less tolerant woman,


143

[PAGE 076]

144 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Metaphors, Shocking Experiences 145


if you were a less tolerant man, what do you suppose and brought me the bottle. I dumped some French
would be the things you’d disagree with about your dressing in the ice water and said, “Take it out.” He
spouse?” I don’t know of anything else to add to that said, “Yes sir.” (Laughter) I got nothing but English
point. the rest of the time. But you see, that is fight pickH: With the husband who followed his wife around while ing, only I had all of the advantage.
she did the housework, you suggested that one way H: One of the problems we run across, since we noticed
to start a fight is to do something absolutely absurd. that there’s a reaction in the spouse if the patient imE: Yes. proves, is how to get the spouse to cooperate in doH: Such as spreading the dirt around for him. I thought ing something that will bring about some improve-
that maybe there were other tactics that you assumed ment. You seem to be able to get the wives and the
were ways to start a fight. husbands to do what you want them to do. For exE: The introduction of anything that is incomprehensible — ample, I remember once when we were here, you had
anything that’s incomprehensible. If you want to pick an alcoholic whose wife took away all his clothes be-
a quarrel with your associates, with your kids, with cause he took a drink. We were wondering how you
your wife, use that technique of doing something ut- manage to get the spouses to do this sort of thing with
terly incomprehensible. Ask the child to polish your such full cooperation.
shoes, the child gets all through, you deliberately slop W: They don’t always seem to us to be the most coopera-
water on them, and foolishly say, “It spots them, tive people.
doesn’t it?” That total feeling of being at a loss is a E: I don’t know. You ask the people to do it, and you ask
very disagreeable feeling. “Will you sew this button it of them in such an utterly simple, expecting way
on for me?” Reluctantly done. So after it’s done, you that they have no way...
say, “It really was tight, wasn’t it?” and tear it off. H: It’s related to the similar problem of getting any paH: Well, that’s both undoing what was done and being in- tient to do anything, isn’t it?
comprehensible. E: You simply assume. You know they’re going to do it.
E: Yes. You see, it’s a destructive thing. Like, perhaps this They have the feeling that you know they’re going to
will illustrate a point, I went into a hotel dining room. do it, and what can they do about it?
The menu was in French. The waiter showed off his W: You expect them to do it, but you don’t expect that
knowledge of French to me. I said rather simply, “I they’re going to want to do it?
don’t understand French. I don’t speak French and I E: Oh no.
don’t read French. What is this item?” He poured out W: You just expect that it will be performed.
a string of French to me. I repeated, and asked him E: It’s going to be done. I can think of this patient in partic-
again, and he poured out French to me. My feeling ular. I told her that since she was raising a row about
was, “Brother, this is your misfortune.” I said, “Will her cardiac condition, I’d have Mrs. Erickson come in
you get me a glass of ice water please?” “Oui, oui.” and sit down and chaperone while I examined her
Then I told him that I would like a bottle, about this heart. That I would ask Mrs. Erickson to be very cour-
high, of French dressing. He looked puzzled, “Oui, oui,” teous, not to smile or be amused, because of her reluc-

[PAGE 077]

146 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Metaphors, Shocking Experiences 147

tance about taking off her blouse. And especially
W: I begin to get the impression you're working on some
about her reluctance about taking off her bra, and es-
things here.
pecially her argument that she didn’t need to take
E: Yes. You see, she felt relieved that I didn’t ask her to
both sides of the bra off. You see the progression
do that this time. She felt relieved about my listen-
there? Because she was looking forward to the argu-
ing to her heart. She also resolved I wouldn’t have to
ment that it wasn’t really necessary to take off the
listen to it again and so improved. You always give
right side of the bra. Because the row about the blouse
your relief when you order a patient to do something
was only a preliminary to the bra. The bra is only a
that they don’t want to do.
preliminary to this part. In order to get to this part
she had to dispose of those preliminaries.
* * *
W: Well, you cut the ground out from under a whole lot
of this in the beginning by saying you'll instruct your
W: One of the things we are concerned about is how you
wife not to laugh at this.
choose when you will see only one person and work
E: That's right.
on a situation, and how you decide when it is more imW: This labels it as pretty fantastic in a way she can't ob-
portant to see more than one member involved in
ject to, since you're protecting her.
something.
E: Yes. I’m protecting her. So Betty came in and sat down E: Well, in private practice you have to do it the way the
with a deadpan expression. The patient said, “Mrs.
patient is willing to have you do it. You always try
Erickson, you aren't going to let him make me take
for what you think is the most comprehensive and the
off my blouse?” AndI said, “She's here as a chaperone,
best, recognizing that maybe you’re not going to get
not as a source of information or comment.” Well,
any cooperation. You always try to find out from your
that’s true. “You can listen through my blouse.” “But
patient just how the other person at home reacts. The
I don’t want to.” I said, “Take it off, and take off your
other person will try to probe and find out what hap-
bra.” She got her blouse off, and she held her bra and
pens in the therapy. Sometimes you feed the other
unfastened the back of it, and she insisted, “But I
person’s curiosity. You say to a woman, here and
don’t have to take that off.” I said, “I told you take
there, that you don’t know just how her husband would
off your bra so I could listen to your heart.” She said,
feel about such and such. It is something she can men-
“Yes, allright.” I said, “That’s as much as I asked you
tion to her husband. Her husband has got to formu-
to do, isn’t it?” I wasn’t arguing about holding this
late what he is told. He’s got to decide how to think
here (in front of her). She had taken off her bra so I
about it. The next time she'll tell you how he respond-
could listen to her heart. How much off would it have
ed, and you can reconstrue his utterance. The first
to be? So she won a certain point, but I won my en-
thing he knows, he’s beginning to recognize that he
tire point.
has got to come in and straighten you out on a numW: Oh I see.
ber of things. (Laughter) So he insists that his wife
E: Then I told her, “Now the next time I will probably want.
make an appointment for him.
you to do calisthentics with your arms while | am lis-
IT: You make it clear to the wife that this is all right with
tening to your heart.” (Laughter)
you —if this should come up in the future?

[PAGE 078]

Metaphors, Shocking Experiences 149
148 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


E: 1 make it very clear at the beginning. “I think I can do a houseful of Mormon children. Before he married her
therapy with you satisfactorily if your husband does he wanted her to understand that he didn’t want to
not come to see me. But I'd like to have it clear that father any child that lived as hard a kind of life as he
I'll be delighted to see your husband any time he had lived in his parental home. Therefore, as a prelim-
wants to see me.” That's already set up and may be inary to marriage he was getting a vasectomy. She
repeated again. A wife had been in therapy for five married him, knowing he had a vasectomy. He was
years with an analyst. Three hours a week. The hus- almost immediately called into service overseas. Well,
band brought his wife to me saying, “I’m sick and with a vasectomy you run no risk. He wrote home to
tired of paying fees three times a week for five years. his parents that he wanted his wife to move in with

My wife is worse off now than she was when we them, and that they were to keep watch over her. She
started. There's nothing wrong with me. Everything spent a miserable three years living with his parents.

belongs to my wife; she is the patient. So I’m not go- She couldn’t go down to the corner grocery in broad

ing to see you again, and I want that clearly under- daylight without being chaperoned. His parents didn’t
stood.” He was most emphatic. like her for marrying their boy. She stayed with them
I saw his wife — what was it — about seven hours, I for three long years. He came back and accused her
think. Each time I fed her a statement, on some minor of every indiscretion imaginable. He said, “A woman
point, which would be at variance with his attitudes. is to be used by a man, that’s all.”
“I don't know how your husband would feel about this For 17 years they’ve been like that. They’ve built
particular subject, what his beliefs and understand- up a half a million dollar business together. They’ve
ings are.” He always pumped her about every inter- got ability. They have worked from 6 in the morning
view, and she always told him that. to 10 at night, hard. All they’ve got is that half a mil-

After about seven hours he gave her orders to make lion dollars worth of business. That daily, bitter quar-
an appointment for him. He came in and said, “I want reling, the nasty things he says about her. She gets
you to shut up. I’m going to tell you the therapy that even with him. Every Sunday he drives her to the
should be done with my wife.” I said, “You're going Mormon church. He hates the Mormons. He sits in
to tell me the therapy.” He said, “Yes, and shut up.” the car outside the Mormon church waiting for her to
I said, “Well, let me say a few things more. You're go- get through. For five years they talked to that analyst
ing to tell me the therapy, and I’m very glad you are. about — he used to go regularly to the analyst also—
Will it be all right if I keep the notes 1 have on the about separation, voluntary, legal, or divorce.
case, which also outline the therapy that should be So I had a joint interview with them. I told him,
done?” He said, “Of course, you can keep your notes.” “You sit there and you keep your mouth shut.” To the
He outlined exactly the things J was going to recom- wife, I said, “and you sit there and you keep your
mend. mouth shut. I’m going to summarize this entire thing.”
Now this is a marriage—17 years ago this very nice, I did it essentially the way I have with you except
sweet, gentle, maternal Mormon girl married this with much more detail. I said, “Now, you’ve come to
charming, attractive Irish lad. Her ambition -- to have me for therapy, for advice and consultation. It doesn’t

[PAGE 079]

150 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Metaphors, Shocking Experiences 151


make a bit of difference to me whether you keep on the man should stay in the living quarters in the bus-
fighting the rest of your lives or not. It won’t make iness. I thought she ought to go elsewhere and have
any personal difference to me if you have a voluntary an apartment. As long as the business was furnishing
separation or a legal separation or a divorce. You don't his living quarters, the business ought to furnish hers.
have to get any one of them, but if you want any ther- Whenever he needed therapy, he ought to come to me.
apy from me, you're going to do one of those three Whenever she needed therapy, she ought to come to
things: voluntary separation, legal separation, or di- me. Let the business pay for that. And even-steven
vorce.” They both said, “This is what we should have each take a modest salary from the business.
been told five years ago.” I said, “I'll give you an ap- H: Well, is your goal to get them to separate?
pointment in a week’s time. At that time you'll tell me E: Yes.
what you're going to do. Then I'll know when I’m go- H: And then to go back on better terms, or a real separa-
ing to see you again.” I asked him what he thought tion?
of himself, marrying a Mormon girl who had wanted E: Y told them I thought they ought to separate in an abso-
children and, as an engagement present, giving her lutely genuine fashion for six months at least. Maybe
a vasectomy. I asked her what she thought of herself, they would discover a craving for each other, or they
giving him as a wedding present a frustrated wife. might discover an honestly-based hatred. I didn’t care
W: I think this covers the point I was about to raise be- which, as long as they really discovered their true feel-
cause in this case it certainly would seem that, while ings. I pointed out to them a voluntary separation is
in some overt respects he was a difficult character, cancelable at any time. A legal separation is cancel-
she certainly was going along with it. able at any time. As for a divorce, you can always reE: She matched him kind for kind. He gave her an engage- marry. No trouble at all—a two-dollar license fee.
ment present of a vasectomy; she countered with that I’ve urged a couple to go down and get divorced,
wedding gift, a completely frustrated wife. And 17 being perfectly willing to bet that they would remar-
years of hammering it home to each other. I’m going ry, but on a different basis. They didn’t know that
to be interested in what they say next Tuesday. when they got the divorce. But unless they take some
H: What decision they'll make? What do you predict? kind of action, they won't discover.
E: I ran through the essential details. There are living I told a patient, “You and your lawyer are going to
quarters at their place of business. Now they own a insist on a court trial for that divorce, and you're go-
residence right alongside of it. I pointed out that if ing to fight it to the bitter end. Your husband's go-
they had a separation or a divorce, it would have to ing to fight it to the bitter end. The amount of bit-
be genuine. One of them should live at least two miles terness in your husband is just unbelievable. And he's
away from the business. One of them should live in the completely unscrupulous. He’s so very unscrupulous
living quarters of the business, as a watchman. A care- that he won't give a darn about the judge. I would ad-
taker during the night. I pointed out to them some- vise you to tell your lawyer to settle it out of court,
thing they already knew — their business is frequent- because I don’t see how any judge is going to permit
ly broken into. They already know that. I thought it to be settled in court.” So yesterday —the case began

[PAGE 080]

152 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Metaphors, Shocking Experiences 153


on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday — on Thursday after- ing my good friend to get a divorce from her husband,
noon the judge said, “I’m interrupting the procedure. who is also my good friend?” I said, “Start thinking
Speaking from the bench, this case is to be settled out like an attorney. Look over the past years, think of
of the court. It’s going to be settled out of court, or all the things that you, as an attorney, would employ
I am going to render a decision that will be unpopular to further a divorce suit. Keep telling them to me.” It
with both parties.” The man overplayed his hand, as took him only 40 minutes to turn to my patient and
I knew he would. I’ve had him in this office. I think say, “You come to my office on Monday and sign the
I know what the judge is going to say. “There’s a mil- papers.”
lion dollars at stake here. Your wife wants half of it. When he left, I turned to my patient and said,
She wants part of your estate tied up for the benefit “Keep that appointment. He'll draw up the papers for
of your son. I think the right thing to do is to put your you to sign. Then ask him this one question, and you
estate in trust for your son.” will know what to say when he answers.” She did that,
W: Take it out of both their hands. asking him, “When are you going to file these papers?”
E: Because the father was insisting that he loved his son, He said, “In a couple of days, a week or so.” She said,
the mother was insisting she loved her son. I think “Today.” So he did.
the judge saw a wide, wide opening. But I knew that She brought him in later, he didn’t know why. I said,
father. Good heavens, having him here in this office “You've drawn up the papers and filed them. What ar-
and letting him rant and rave. He’s one of these adver- rangements have you made for the community prop-
tising dentists who’s absolutely unscrupulous. With erty? I think you better investigate, as an attorney.
a tremendous drive. He’s working in a dental office, My patient says that her husband owes $200,000 in
promising new patients everything imaginable. Ad- spite of the fact that the famous restaurant he man-
vertising, and he’s working in his office 20 hours a ages made large profits the last four years. He pays
day. Now he’s got a staff of I don’t know how many himself a handsome salary. My patient inherited some
dentists. He’s been keen on his investments. You should money from her father. There’s a mortgage on the
be willing to tell a patient certain things, whether they home. She used her money to build the home. There’s
like them or not, to get them to understand that it is a big mortgage on the summer cabin, which she bought
a matter of medical judgment. I despise those physi- with her money. But it is community property. She
cians who tell a patient with cancer of the breast that and her husband and another drunk own the islands.
it’s a tumor, probably benign. My vague knowledge of the law tells me that any one
partner is responsible for all the debts of the partner-
* * * ship. You better investigate it and draw up a reason-
able property agreement. If you don’t, I'll tell my paE: A patient of mine decided to divorce her husband. She tient to offer the firm that holds the note for $200,000
brought in a lawyer friend who was also a friend of to sell her share of the business for one dollar. They'll
her husband. She said, “He has something to say to grab it and put in their own manager. They'll fore-
you.” The lawyer said, “For what reason are you urg- close.” T also told the wife she would have to earn the

[PAGE 081]

154 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Metaphors, Shocking Experiences 15b


respect of her children after putting up with that hus- E: Yes. I may prolong the interview to 15, 20 minutes, but
band for so long. She would also have to sell the house, almost always I abide by the three or four minutes.
since her husband would buy one in that neighbor- Because that is the better thing to do. Then I can send
hood. He did. them out and again make the choice at the end of
three or four minutes. You sce, by saying three or four
* * * minutes, or “I’ll see one of you for two or three min-
utes,” you see, you always limit it. And you give yourH: We started on the issue of when you choose to see two self the opportunity of constituling the procedure.
people at once rather than one. Is there anything that H: Well, do you think there's any sort of a problem where
you would have to see two people at once for? you would have to have both husband and wile in at
E: 1 usually meet the couple out in the other room. I almost the same time to solve?
invariably ask them, “Well, which one of you wants E: Now and then where there are two strongly paranoid
to see me first, or do you want to see me together?” reactions, one against the other, you want Lo start
Then I watch their facial and head behavior. When your interview with the two, and then you define im-
I see them looking at each other as if to say, “Won't mediately your role.
you please come in with me,” then I invite both of H: How do you do that?
them in. If the husband looks at me in shocked hor- E: It’s very simple. Let’s say for an hour the husband says
ror and points to his wife with a gesture or a man- a lot of paranoid stuff, maybe very subtle. You turn
nerism that she’s the one that should come in, then to the wife and you say, “He actually believes that,
I look over at her to see if she is pointing at him as and he’s sincere in his statements, isn’t he?” Having
the one who should come in. If so, I invite both of said that, she thinks, “He’s on my side.” The husband
them in. If he points at her and she looks expectant, thinks, “He’s on her side.” So then I turn around and
I take her first. Sometimes it’s the husband first. Now I say, “Now for courtesy’s sake, let’s hear a few com-
and then the husband says, “Before you see my wife ments from the wife.” She will then retaliate with sub-
I want to see you.” Sometimes the wife says, “Before tle paranoia, because she’s been put on the defensive.
you see my husband I want to have a talk with you.” And I turn to the husband and I make exactly the
Now, not always do I abide by that, because some- same remark. (Laughter) The wife suddenly thinks,
times I tell them, “Allright, but suppose for my bet- “He’s on my side, and he’s on my husband’s side.” The
ter understanding I see both of you together for five, husband reacts that way. I give them just time enough,
six minutes and then I'll see one of you.” The reason and I say, “Now, you've come to me for help. You cer-
for that is if they’re too dictatorial about who I am tainly want me to view sympathetically both sides of
to see first, or they’re trying to take charge, I take this so that we can reach the actual truth. I’m certain
charge. I say five or six minutes, or sometimes three that both of you are unafraid of the actual truth.” You
or four minutes. see, I define the actual truth as my view of it. I’ve got
H: Then do you stick to that? them both on my side, or both think that I’m on their

[PAGE 082]

Conversations with Milton H. Erickson


side. Then all of a sudden they realize that I’m on the
side of the actual truth with their whole-hearted coop-
eration.
H: In general, you feel that working with them you should
manage to form a coalition with the both of them, or CHAPTER 7
be on both of their sides.
E: Usually. Now and then you take an entirely different
attitude. As the complaint starts from the most vocif- Changing Views
erous one, and you see how utterly unreasonable that
person is going to be, you turn to the other, and you and Interview Technique
state, “He really sincerely believes all of that; he’s con-
vinced of it. You know that a great deal of it, possibly
all of it, probably just a great deal of it, is not sound-
ly based. And you want him to know fully everything 1959. Present were Milton H. Erickson, Jay Haley, and John Weakland.
that is soundly based. You want him to discard every-
thing that isn’t, just as he wants to discard everything E: Many people, when they try to solve a problem, stay
that really doesn’t fit.” So you’ve justified the vocif- within the confines of the situation. If you can get
erous one, you've asked for an absolutely objective at- them to step outside, you are showing them, “you can
titude by the other, but you've also told the vociferous step beyond the immediate confines of that emotional
one that you're going to reject all that isn't so, and problem.” All of a sudden they realize there are other
he's got to agree with you all the way along. Now this views, other possibilities, other understandings. You're
sounds as if I am deliberately directing and controll- merely telling them, or forcing them, to step beyond
ing. All I’m really doing is making it possible for the the immediate confines of that emotional configura-
other person to order his own thinking and his own
tion. There's nothing wrong about that. You can pro-
views. I’m merely pointing out to him, “Here are a few long therapy until accidentally they step beyond the
dozen other roads to travel that you didn't notice on configuration.
the way.” I’m making him become aware of the fact H: Can you give an example of that?
that there are other possible understandings. I think E: Yes. Harold told me all the afternoon, in a repetitious
the best way of illustrating this is various reasoning
way, about what a nice, sweet wife he had. He just
puzzles. couldn't understand her. He didn't know what their
trouble was. He told me that every time he had to go
out of town on a trip, his wife got lonesome and some
of his friends dropped in. He enjoyed having his friends
over, he enjoyed having his wife not lonesome. He
mentioned the fact that a friend left his tube of tooth-
paste on the bathroom sink, left a discarded razor


ib/

[PAGE 083]

158 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Changing Views and Interview Techniques 159


blade there, a different razor than he had. He kept on tion, about 6 o'clock, “If my wife were any other wom-
telling me that story of his adjustments with his wife, an.” “In what way does she differ from other women?”
their constant quarreling and friction, and of the fact Which is stepping way out of the configuration, and
that his wife had pubic lice because of her social serv- he took a view. And he’s a Ph.D. in psychology.
ice work in a poor section of town. H: How do you see that statement, “In what way does she
Finally, after he told me that story about half a differ from other women?” as taking him outside of
dozen times, he said, “You know, if my wife were any the context?
other woman, Td say that she was having affairs.” I E: We weren't discussing his problem. This is a general
said, “In what way does your wife differ from other philosophical question, “How does his wife differ from
women?” He said, “My God, my wife is any other other women?” That’s all. He first started on a pure-
woman!” Then he told me precisely the same story, ly objective, philosophical basis, when he suddenly re-
with a recognition of what that tube of toothpaste in alized, “My God, sheis other women!” All that after-
the bathroom meant. What that razor blade discard- noon I had been hoping that he would say something
ed there, and detail after detail. I had already known wherein I could ask that kind of a question. That’s
about the affairs; she had been privately my patient. why I let him repeat his story over and over again.
She wanted him to become aware of it so they could Always hopefully listening for some little remark
either break up or reestablish their marriage on a where I could yank him outside of that constricted sit-
sound basis. Their marriage worked out very happi- uation. Always in therapy whenever you get a chance
ly. They have children grown now. He's been contin- to pull a patient away from a situation so they can
uously employed, for heaven’s sakes, at least 25 years, take an objective view, then there’s nothing they can
in the same place. That realization, that beautiful reci- do about those new understandings they developed.
tation, item after item. W: What do you mean there’s nothing they can do about
H: You were giving that as an example of prolonging an them?
interview until he accidentally discovered it. E: Well, once he recognized that his wife was “other womE: I prolonged it. I made him tell me that story beginning en,” he went through that entire story, every detail,
about 1 o'clock in the afternoon. He gave all the de- and identified it correctly. I made an appointment for
tails without recognizing their significance. About him and his wife the next day. I told his wife, “Now
how Joe, Ray or John would come over and visit his you keep very quiet. Your husband has got something
wife on the weekends. The way he told the story im- to say.” He went through the entire story, detail by
plied that Joe had left at dinner time, come back on detail, coldly, deliberately, identifying the toothpaste
Sunday morning, left at dinner time. That they had tube, the razor blades, the breakfast dishes, the dif-
listened to records, and so on. One detail after an- ferent kind of breakfast foods that he had never eat-
other. But always inclusive. Of both doing the break- en. He enumerated some grocery bills where she had
fast dishes. I wonder if she ate two breakfasts? That charged for something for a breakfast so that she
strange and different kind of toothpaste, with no rec- could cook a special breakfast for one of her boyfriends.
ognition. That went on until he made that observa- Another time another of her boyfriends. He had recog-

[PAGE 084]

160 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Changing Views and Interview Techniques 161


nized all of that unconsciously, had repressed it com- her about the appointment in a week’s time. The next
pletely, but he had kept it in catalog fashion. week when I saw them I beat Joe to the punch, beH: You wanted his confrontation of her to occur in your cause he didn’t know he was going to need to do it.
presence then? When the wife came in, the same hour he did, and sat
E: Oh yes. He went right straight through the whole ar- down, I said, “Before we begin the interview that’s to
ray of instances. determine your future, there’s one question I want to
W: You had heard a good bit by that time; this was about ask: When you were living at the hotel this past week,
the third telling. has your bed been occupied only by you?” He said,
E: 1 had also heard from her. (Laughter) “I knew there was some question I would have to ask
H: Well now, did you instruct him not to talk about this her, but try as hard as 1 could I couldn't figure it out.”
with his wife when he went home? But to come in the She said, “I was tempted several times, but I figured
next day and talk about it with her here? that, well, Joe might want me back. I knew I wanted
E: Yes. I had told her that I was seeing her husband on to come back. I didn’t want to gamble for a few min-
that particular Saturday afternoon, and that I thought utes’ pleasure.”
she had better be out of town that Saturday after- H: Presumably that put them back together?
noon. Stay out of town until Sunday morning. Sun- E: Yes. Very little discussion about the affairs. I had to
day morning come in and telephone. So I gave her an ask essentially all of the personal questions. Some I
appointment for Sunday morning and him an appoint- asked of him, some I asked of her. I said, “Joe, your
ment for Sunday morning, for confrontation. He went good friend Jack...” He said, “He used to be a good
through the entire thing while she sat there mute, ob- friend. He will get the go-by next time I see him. Tl
viously horribly distressed, amazed at the acuity of tell him very simply, ‘Keep out of my sight.’ If he asks
his unconscious knowledge. me why, Til tell him that ‘I think you are a cowardly
When he finished, I told her, “You can go out in the son of a bitch,’ or something like that.” I asked the
other room, and I'll ask your husband what should be wife, “What about Bill?” See, there were half a dozen
done next.” See, the confrontation, she had wanted that. college men she was having affairs with. I had a good
Then after he had confronted her and gone through description of all of them from her. I had known which
it, and got that tacit acknowledgment, her silence, ones Joe would emphasize. So I asked Joe about those
sending her out. Then Joe said, “What should I do?” he emphasized, then I asked her about the others —
“You have a lot of thinking to do. Do you want to con- just so they were disposed of.
tinue your marriage, do you want a divorce, do you H: That was the only discussion of the past affairs?
want a separation?” He said, “I love her very much. E: A year later when I saw them I asked them separately
I'd like to put all of this in the past.” I said, “That's if the matter had come up again. Joe said, “No, it’s
an impulsive utterance. Suppose you come back here crossed my mind several times, but Ann and I have
a week from now. In the meantime, don’t see her. Do been planning our family. Going into the matter of our
all of your own thinking all by yourself.” living expenses, our economics, the amount of money
So he went home. His wife went to a hotel. 1 told we would save, what special pleasures we can have

[PAGE 085]

162 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Changing Views and Interview Techniques 163


that will permit us to save money.” I really ought to H: Well now, what you did was see them separately, and
write and find out if they added any children besides then bring them together for the confrontation, and
those two daughters. immediately separate them again. After he confronted
H: Well now, you wouldn't assume that it was necessary her with all this, you didn't want arguing between the
at all for them to express their feelings about this? two of them.
E: He said, “My God, she isn't any different from any other E: 1 didn't want an argument because then they go back
woman!” and he retold that story. All afternoon he to previous patterns of thinking. If there's an argu-
had been sitting there placidly narrating. With that ment, he will think, “Well now, if I had said this.” She
sudden eruption of insight he was yelling, waving his will think, “If 1 could have answered this.” Then it's
hands, jumping up and down. It was a very violent a reaffirmation of past patterns. If you bring about
catharsis. When I had him confront his wife—that set the confrontation and then the separation, there's no
jaw, that utterly intense voice, as he enumerated item possibility then of an argument, except after every-
by item. She sat there obediently — “Just sit down and thing's cooled down. That's a totally different thing
be quiet,” and I meant be quiet. Because Joe made than the red-hot situation.
some little errors in his stories, and she had to take W: You said you gave each of them an appointment for
those errors. (Laughter) that same time. Did they know that the other was goH: You didn’t want her defending herself. ing to be here until they got here?
E: No, you see, if you allow her to defend herself, then she’s E: No.
going to transform the situation. Now Joe's errors she W: So they also couldn't get primed for that.
had to accept and be culpable of those items too. Now E: It was none of their business what J was doing. They
how would it work when she had to passively admit each had a major task to perform all by themselves.
her culpability for those things if she wanted to fight? They each came in expecting just to see me. Absolute-
When she won't defend herself, let her emotion be, “I ly unprepared. Then, of course, in that situation with
might as well take that discredit.” In other words, it me, it wasn’t too difficult to do—to keep them from
was self-punishment, cudgeling herself with the weap- going back to past, because I wanted to know about
on, the cudgel, her husband had offered. So it was an the future, not the past.
emotional catharsis for her. W: So you set up the situation that you wanted and pre-
For a number of years I met them regularly at pro- vented them both from getting set for it beforehand
fessional meetings. A goodly number of years later or rehashing it afterward.
I was talking to Joe, and we reminisced about various E: Yes. Because I see no sense in a rehash. They had all
things, which included things relating to just preced- the facts, so did I. The only question was, “Is this the
ing and just following. Joe recognized, “Yes, that was termination of your relationship, or is it the beginning
the time that I discovered my wife was just another of a new one?” If it’s termination, period. If it’s the
woman.” She, of course, has told me they had been beginning of the new, what do you want in this new
very happy in their marriage. Those two little girls relationship? In other words, are you moving out of
obviously came from a happy home. that old house into a new one? If you're moving out,

[PAGE 086]

164 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Changing Views and Interview Techniques 165


all right, let’s not talk about scrubbing the kitchen, H: When you have two people in theroom, and you want
the basement, and so on. What do you want in the to engineer the conversation either to encourage one
new house? Now that’s a figure of speech, or an anal- of them to do more talking, or to encourage one of
ogy, I use quite often. “So you're going to move out them to shut up so the other one can, what procedure
of the old house, and leave all of the old furniture do you use to do that?
there. What kind of view do you want from the new E: You mean when you can’t tell them directly?
one? It ought to be in a different part of town, with H: Yes. When you tell the wife you want to get the hus-
a different view, a different house entirely, with dif- band’s point of view, and the wife goes on rattling.
ferent furniture, different arrangements. Now what Then you ask her to be quiet because you’d like to
do you want in the new house?” have the husband’s point of view, and she goes right
H: You wouldn't assume in that situation that she would on. What do you do then?
need to, oh, defend herself by pointing out how her E: 1 tell them, “You know, I still want your husband's point
husband had not provided what she needed, or some- of view, and you keep right on talking. I know it’s be-
thing like that, so that she had to have affairs. cause of your eagerness to enable me to understand.
E: One of the questions 1 put to her was, “What kind of But do you happen to have a lipstick? Will you take
lovemaking do you want in the future from Joe? The it out of your purse? Now this will sound ridiculous
frequency, the duration?” These were the simple ques- to you, but suppose you hold that lipstick like this.
tions she had to answer. Just keep it right there (against the lips) and I’m goH: Well, did you presume that when she laid out what she ing to ask your husband some questions; notice how
wanted, he would then deliver that? your lips want to move. I think you'll find it very inE: No. I pointed out to her, “Now you've stated what you teresting.” I know one woman got so fascinated watch-
want. What does Joe want?” You know I always use ing the quivering of her lips on that lipstick. (Laugh-
analogies. 1 don't know which particular one, but one ter)
that comes to my mind is, “Suppose Joe invites you H: She wouldn’t dare move them.
to have dinner in a restaurant. You know what you E: But you've given her a legitimate use for her lips. They
want when you pick up the menu. Joe knows what he don’t quite understand. It’s amusing.
wants. There's one thing that's going to decide it — H: You mentioned that one of the ways you get — usually
the money in the wallet. A reality situation. So you the man--to say what's on his mind when he's not say-
both accommodate your wishes to the reality possibil- ing anything is to mention his courage. Do you have
ities. Joe has so much capacity to love in the way that other ways to bring them into it? If you've got a cou-
you want; you have so much capacity to love in the ple and one of them isn't talking and obviously should
way that he wants. An intelligent attitude in a res- be included.
taurant in which you can get a meal.” (Laugnter) E: “1 don't know how many things you noted that should
be restated.” Then you turn to the other one, let the
* * * other one talk, and again there are some more things

[PAGE 087]

166 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Changing Views and Interview Techniques 167


that really need restating. Third time around, “Have of something new, and the only thing new is what
you decided exactly what way to restate some of that you're presenting. “Now this is your first interview
first thing?” You frustrate them by turning to the with me. You tell me that you want to relate some
talker. You know that frustration of people in this very painful things. In other words, 1 judge you mean
matter of speech. I can think of one of my patients some things that you'd rather not tell me. I think you
with an aphasia: “What is your name? How old are ought not to tell me those things you just can't en-
you? Where do you live? What town did you come dure telling me. Tell me the things that you can, with
from? Which baseball team do you want to support?” the least possible amount of pain, and be sure you
Each time the patient would try to answer the ques- hold back the things you can't bear to tell me.” They
tion, but before the mouth movements could get un- start in relating and at the end of the hour say, “But
der way, the next question was asked. Next question. I’ve told you all the things I can't bear to tell you.”
A very, very effective way of breaking it down. The What do they do? It was always a question, “Can 1
patient is going to be mute, you ask a question, just bear to tell this or not? I’m free to withhold it. But,
start to pause, don’t give them a chance to answer, oh, I guess I could tell this one.” They always vote in
ask the next question. Give them a chance, but don’t favor of telling.
wait long enough to permit them to answer. Hit them One woman told me, “I’ve been to several other psy-
with the next question. You're so earnest, and it frus- chiatrists. It takes me at least 10 to 20 hours before
trates them until finally they say, “Will you shut up. I can unburden myself. I usually spend 10 to 20 hours
The answer is...” wasting my time talking about things that are nonH: It’s the same with suggesting to one to restate it and sensical.” So I told her, “All right, let’s make sure of
then shifting away before they have a chance to make this. I want you to withhold the thing you can’t en-
a comment. dure telling me.” At the end of the hour, she said, “You
E: Yes. In teaching medical students, I use that sort of know, I’ve told you more than I’ve told anybody else
technique on the hesitant ones. ever.” Each time you see them vote, “Oh, I'll withhold
H: You mean you ask them a question and then don’t give the rest, not this, I don't need to withhold this, Tl
them a chance to answer? withhold that.” So it is a constant narration, always
E: That's right. postponing the withholding.
H: Well, there's another point of view on that; somebody FH: I imagine you could handle a couple that way. By say-
hesitating to answer you is a way of handling you, ing to them, “I want you not to say here what would
which they can't very well do if you're going right to be painful to the other person.”
the next question. You force them to handle you dif- E: Oh yes. “Now I want to hear both of your stories, but
ferently when you do that. there certainly are things that you are going to withE: They"ve got to handle you differently. The only oppor- hold. You're going to withhold it because you'd rather
tunity that's being given them is on your terms. They've let your wife tell me than tell me yourself.”
got to let loose of their way. They’ve got to grab hold H: That's a slippery one.

[PAGE 088]

168 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Changing Views and Interview Techniques 169


E: I know. Is it unfair to ask them to make up their mind? She said “No.” I said, “Well, that’s your answer, stick
Will you, or will you not — or do you want someone else to it.”
to tell it? It’s a facing of reality. H: You wouldn’t encourage her to do it?
H: Yes. Well, it’s assuming it will be told and putting the E: Do you think she took orders from men? (Laughs)
question on who's going to tell it, not on whether it H: So did she tell him?
will be told or not. E: She told him.
E: Yes. Well, what did they come here for anyway? One H: This was partly because you told her to stick to her an-
of my patients has been married 14 times; she came swer?
in and told me, “I need your help. There are some E: Yes. She showed me. I had interviewed her husband be-
things I’m going to hold out on you. It’s got nothing fore. When she told him, he said, “So you've been mar-
to do with the situation. I’m going to hold it out, and ried a total of 14 times. With how many of them did
I don’t want you to pry.” I said, “All right, I won't, you commit forgery?” She told him. “With how many.
but if you tell me spontaneously, don't accuse me of of them did you run out with other men?” She told
prying.” (Laughter) During that same hour she said, him. He said, “All right. I married you, and I’m in love
“T had no intention of telling you about my two first with you even if you are a louse. Any more forgery,
marriages. But somehow or other when you told me any more running out, and I’m going to get a divorce
that 1 didn't have to tell you anything that 1 didn't on the basis you withheld vital information from me.”
really want to, and then you told me that I couldn't She straightened out, she’s afraid of losing that fif-
hold you responsible for any of my spontaneous tell- teenth husband. I liked the guy. He was a nice, strong
ing, it had the effect of making me feel I could tell you character. He felt his strength, and he didn’t want to
anything.” Her husband doesn't know that she's been exercise it on his nice, sweet, mistaken, neurotic wife
married 14 times previously. who couldn’t be blamed because she had had two unH: You do get them. (Laughs) happy marriages.
E: He thinks she's been married twice before. W: But with 14 the picture looked a little different.
W: Well, she certainly has. E: The picture looked different. He took a totally different
E: Yes. She made me promise not to tell her husband. She attitude. All I did was stick to her assertion. It was
wasn't going to tell me, but somehow it leaked out her weakness that broke her down, not my advice.
during the interview. Then I pointed out to her that W: Let’s talk more about a couple giving each other a hard
her husband was being awfully patient and kind with time.
her, that he had allowed her to forge checks and he'd E: And each striving not to give the other a hard time?
made good on it. She lost her temper and wrecked his W: Well, sure. I assume at some level they’re always try-
car, and he was a hardworking man, and she chased ing that too.
out with other men repeatedly. Her husband was hav- E: Yes, at some level. I’ve told people to come in the of-
ing a hard time trying to make up his mind whether fice and really give each other a hard time. Really,
or not he wanted to stay with her. Didn’t she think honest-to-goodness, give the other a hard time. The
she ought to tell him about the other 12 marriages? other sits there and takes it. It’s one of the nicest ways

[PAGE 089]

170 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson
Changing Views and Interview Techniques 171

of getting a husband over on his wife’s side of the out where she put it, and he was always so angry that
fence, and getting the wife over on her husband’s side he never did find it. She always raged because he
of the fence. hunted for it. So it became this game of skill. But
H: Well, you touched upon getting two people involved in again, there is that symptomatic approach — her hid-
a self-punishment deal. Can you give any other ex- ing.
amples of where you get two of them involved in some- H: That was a situation where you brought the couple to-
thing like that? gether and gave them the set of instructions?
E: Yes. A woman was an alcoholic, a pretty bad alcoholic. E: Yes. And her facial expressions when I suggested a care-
A concealed drinker. She hid all of her drinks. Her ful hiding, by her, of the whiskey bottle. And the re-
husband worked in the office every day. And that ward: It was his if he found it, it was hers if he did
nightly battle because she was drunk and he was in-
not. But, you see, they had been doing that for quite
furiated. His idea of a good weekend was leaning back a number of years anyway —12 years.
in an easy chair and reading Business Week, or some
H: Something seems to happen when it is done at some-
such journal as that, The Wall Street Journal, the one’s direction.
Sunday New York Times from cover to cover. That E: Yes. Then I had him buy a trailer and go up to Canyon
was his idea of weekend enjoyment. Her idea of a Lake with her, and go fishing — without whiskey. He
weekend enjoyment was to go out in the yard, work hates fishing, and she hates fishing. I stated that be-
with the flowers, and when nobody was looking, slip ing out on the water there alone, in a small boat, no
that bottle of whiskey hidden in the ground up to her whiskey, keeping her sober, would be good for her
mouth. She really enjoyed gardening. She also en- health. It would be good for her husband to be out in
joyed the whiskey.
the open and get some fresh air, instead of sticking
So I got the two of them here in the office, and I his nose in the newspaper in sluggishness and inertia.
pointed out that he came home every evening and
They are now using their trailer, not to go fishing in
laboriously tried to figure out where she had hidden a boat; they go camping on weekends, and they both
her bottle of whiskey. She took a gleeful delight in enjoy it. But getting her to hide her whiskey, which
hiding it. My statement was, if he couldn't find it, she she had been doing right along, purposefully. Then be-
was entitled to empty it the next day. I let them play ing approved in her drinking that bottle the next day
that game for a little while. It isn’t a good game. But if her husband could not find it.
he didn’t like that hunting; she got too much joy out W: How did you pick the boating idea?
of it, penalizing him. But you know it robbed her of H: You see, they originally lived in the midwest. I always
the privilege of hiding secretly. This was purposeful ask a lot of random questions, and I found out that
hiding. Not that guilty, shameful, sneaking hiding. So
there was a lake region where she lived, and she hated
it took some of the joy out of hiding her liquor.
lakes. I asked her about fishing; she hated it. I asked
H: Was he hunting for it when he came home, before your her husband; he hated it. Well, then that’s all that was
directive? necessary.
E: Oh, he used to rage around the house trying to figure FT: You assumed that if they had to go through an ordeal,

[PAGE 090]

172 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Changing Views and Interview Techniques 173


they would pull a switch and make it a pleasant trip It was an unlovely situation for everybody, but it sal-
instead? vaged the marriage. Husband and wife got together
E: 1 justified it. It was out in the open, a little exercise, and decided to ship that nasty maid to another state,
freedom from musty old books and musty old news- where she had some relatives. I also arranged that the
papers, and freedom from whiskey. Open air, sun- wife force the maid to pack the husband’s clothes and
shine, exercise. So now it’s camping. I haven’t seen carry them out to the front yard so he could go off and
her for a couple of months, but she writes to me. They live by himself. She threw him out of the house with
have that trailer fixed up and they camp in all the the maid carrying the suitcases out. Then she had the
available areas in Arizona. maid bring them back in, unpack them, and then re-
pack them and carry them out again.
* * * In this way I arranged that the wife express pleasure
in her power and also arranged that the husband could
H: At what other times do you consider it necessary to see come back at her bidding. With this arrangement, he
a couple together? could return when she let him, and she decided to let
E: A young husband, while his wife was visiting in another him come back. She told me to notify her husband
city, seduced their very homely maid, who was of poor that he could return. Instead of doing so, I said, “Yes,
intelligence and had a history of promiscuity. He did I can tell him to come back, any third party can tell
it in his wife’s bed, and when his wife returned she him to do that, the mailman can tell him.” She was
found out about it and came in to see me, weeping. tremendously relieved. She wrote the letter to her hus-
She could never permit her husband in the house again. band, and the third party, the mailman, delivered it.
She was also in a rage toward the maid. I saw each I didn’t wish to be the third party, but I knew there
of them separately in interviews, and the husband was should be one. A third party that was an extension
full of contrition. The maid was equally sorry and also of her.
frightened. Then I brought the three of them together H: You assume that if they got back together without this
in an interview. I maneuvered the conversation so there would be a sore spot that could be brought up
that each had something to say to the other two. The again and again.
husband had plenty to say to his wife and the maid, E: It was brought up a couple of years later. The maid
because they were both against him. The wife had her came back and applied for her job. (Laughter) There
objections to make to the husband and the maid. The were two allies who came barging into this office.
maid could object to the way husband and wife had “What are we going to do with that stupid idiot?”
treated her. It was a rather dramatic situation, and “We.” There was a we-ness.
with all of them there they could really take their feel-
ings out on each other. I demanded that the husband
respect his wife’s resentment and grief, and I also de-
manded that she consider how pitifully put upon he
must feel. And I let the husband turn on the maid and
blame her and let the maid blame him.

[PAGE 091]

INDEX


Affairs, 72, 73, 89, 91, 157, 169, The doctor who had 5 cars
172 and hated his mother-in-law,
Alcohol, 170, and sexual inhibi- 24-25
tions, 97 The rigid psychologists who
Alliance, patient and therapist, could not stand a mess, 26
36 The man who compulsively
Analogies, 120, 123, 164 avoided his wife's breasts,
Anesthesia, and hypnosis, 100 28-32
Anger, therapist use of, 24 The meticulous man and the
Anxiety attacks, 49, 83 wife switching menus, 33--
Aphasia, 55, 166 35
Awareness, and psychiatry, 10 The dominating wife and the
restaurant, 44-48
The husband who followed his
wife when she cleaned, 49Cases: 52
The couple who shared every- The man whose neighbors
thing, 3-4 watched him mow his lawn,
The couple who learned to 52-54
battle less, 5-6 The aphasic woman and the
The man in therapy for 28 tropical fish, 55-56
years, 9 The husband willing to share
The man who postponed mar- his debts, 62
riage, 9-10 The honeymoon couple who
Patient afraid of three story stayed in their room, 64
houses, 12 The wife who became preg-
The doctor who didn't marry nant after husband's vasec-
the girl he loved, 12-14 tomy, 70
The wife who invited her best The couple who quarreled
friend on the honeymoon, 15 about going to the movies,
The man who delayed his wed- 77
ding to say goodbye to the The couple who postponed
boys, 16-17 their quarrel about mother,
The promiscuous girl who fell 78
in love, 17 The wife who set out to waste
The prostitute who married, her husband's money, 81
18 The husband who became


Vio

[PAGE 092]

176 Conversations with Milton H. Erickson Inden EN


Cases (continued) Catharsis, 162 Masturbation, 118, 120, 1:1 aepariad eons arubalirorco, cer cher
live, 150 ir“
anxious when his wife left Change, 10, 67
Ordeal, 171 Heo Absitinenee, 0b, bupadal
y,
the house, 82 Communication, language in
The frigid wife married to a therapy, 130 Orgasms, 96, 124, 1% 390, 121, erection, 113, DIA,

Don Juan, 88 Compulsion: neurotic avoidance, 117, 118, 149, ejaculabion,
The woman whose anesthesia 31, use of by therapist, 48 Pain, 136 absence of, 132, impolenee,

disappeared in the operat- Confidentiality, 19-22, 69 Paranoid suspicion, 60, 106, 10%, 112, F147, masturbation, 118,
Confrontation, 160 155 120, 133, orgasm, 96, 124,
ing room, 99
A case of premature ejacula- Conscious and unconscious, 122, Phobia, therapeutic use of, a2, 1432, rigidity, 26, 39, 79, 123,
tion, 115 113, 126 problems, 42, satisfaction,
160
The impotent student over- Premature ejaculation, 12, 113 120

whelmed by wife’s beauty, Depression, 138 116 Sharing, pathological, 4
118 Domination, 33, 43-46, 46-49 Suicide, 139
The woman who wanted to Sullivan, 92
Quarrels, 77, 78, 79, 80, 119 Symptoms: causes, 11, in family
arouse an erection, 119 Ejaculation, 132, premature,
The rigid couple who should 113, 115, 116 system, 108, reaction to im-
do it for fun, 123 Enuresis, and sexual problem, 132 Relapse, therapist encouraged, provement, 136
The phobic girl who had to Erection, problems, 113, 117, 85
back into a train, 126 118, 119 Resistance, 131 Therapy: definition of, 8, and
The woman whose husband Exploitation, 15 Resentment, 42 understanding, 10, how
said terrible things about Rigidity, 26-32, 39, 79, 123 many people to involve, 62-
her, 129 Fighting, in marriage, 50-51, Rituals, 37 68, 147, 154, 172, taking
A college professor who tactics, 109, directive to charge, 154
learned to ejaculate, 132 quarrel, 143 Transference, 68
The cardiac patient with a de- Foreplay, 114, 115 Secrets, between therapist and
pressed wife, 138 Frigidity, 90, 121 clients, 19-22, 69, 74, 129, Vasectomy, 70, 73, 75, 149
A wife deals with a husband’s 134
heart phobia, 139 Geometrical progression, 76 Self defeat, 14 Withholding, 167
The husband who spent 12
years fixing up his car, 140 Heart attack, hysterical, 138
The patient reluctant to take Hypnosis, 97, and anesthesia,
off her blouse, 145 100, 117
The vasectomy for a wedding
present, 148 Impotence, 113, 117
The woman advised to di- Inhibitions, 129, and modesty, 145
vorce, 152 Insight and understanding, 10,
The man who discovered how 11, 38, 87, 121
his wife was different from
other women, 157 Jealousy, 67
The wife who had been mar- Joint interviews, 62, 65, 66, 64,
ried 14 times, 168 147, 154, 172
The husband who had to find
his wife’s whiskey bottles, Love, types of, 1
170
The wife, the husband, and Marriage, definition of good, 1,
the maid, 172 4, 6, multiple, 168
