[PAGE 001]

PATTERNS OF THE
HYPNOTIC TECHNIQUES OF
MILTON H, ERICKSON, M.D.
VOLUME II


JOHN GRINDER, JUDITH DELOZIER, & RICHARD BANDLER

[PAGE 002]

$18.95 PSYCHOLOGY /HYPNOTHERAPY


Drs. Bandler and Grinder, pioneers in NLP, used highly refined patterning
and modeling techniques to identify the elements of genius in legendary
professionals such as Gregory Bateson, Fritz Perls, Virginia Satir, and Milton
Erickson. These two volumes are the result of their work with Milton H.
Erickson, M.D. They demonstrate Bandler and Grinders enthusiasm,
affection, and appreciation for Erickson and his revolutionary techniques.


“Patterns of the Hypnotic Techniques of Milton H. Erickson
by Richard Bandler and John Grinder is a delightful
simplification of the infinite complexities of the language
I use with patients. In reading this book, I learned
a great deal about the things that I've done
without knowing about them."

Milton H. Erickson, M.D.


John Grinder,

& John Grinder Volume 11
Richard Bandler
Volume I judith DeLozier,
& Richard Bandler


Bandler and Grinder make Erickson’s Grinder, DeLozier, and Bandler
skills available to the reader, extend their modeling skills from
explaining in a step by step manner verbal patterning to nonverbal
an explicit model of Erickson's communication, and examine the
methods in his own words. skilis with which Erickson engaged in
multi-level communication with
patients.


ISBN 1-55552-053-?
90000


€A GRINDER & ASSOCIATES
Cover Design by Lori Stephens 9 "781555"520533

[PAGE 003]

Patterns of the
Hypnotic Techniques
of Milton H.
Erickson, M.D.

Vol. II


John Grinder, Judith DeLozier,
and Richard Bandler


Grinder & Associates

[PAGE 004]

PART I

[PAGE 005]

Published by
Grinder & Associates
PO Box 67295
Scotts Valley, CA 95067

A Master Distributor
Meramorphous Advanced Product Services
PO Box 10616
Portland, OR 97296-0616

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by
any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the authors.


Copyright O 1977 by Meta Publications
Editorial and Art Direction by Lori Stephens
Cover illustration by Robert B. Dilts
Printed in the United States of America

Bandler, Richard.
Patterns of the hypnotic techniques of Milton H. Erickson, M.D. /
by Richard Bandler and John Grinder.
p. cm.

Originally published: Cupertino, Calif. : Meta Publications, 1975.
Includes bibliographical references (p. ).
ISBN 1-55552-053-7
1. Hypnotism—Therapeutic use. 2. Erickson, Milton H.
I. Grinder, John. II. Title.
RC495.B32 1996
615.8'512—dc20 96-25682


Acknowledgment is gratefully made to Milton H. Erickson and Herbert S. Lustig for
permission to reprint a photograph and the transcripts from The Artistry of Milton
H. Erickson, M.D., copyright 1975 by Milton H. Erickson, M.D., and Herbert S.
Lustig, M.D., Ltd.

[PAGE 006]

We dedicate this book

with the deepest


respect


to


Ghost Roger Drassett,

a purple rose,

the Palo Verde tree

and

a different perspective.

[PAGE 008]

Introduction


Each of us as a human being is constantly subjected to
enormous amounts of information. A portion of this stimulation is
the result of the contact we have with the parts of the world which
we are able to sense with our sensory channels. The amount of
information available from our ongoing experience greatly
exceeds our ability to sense our experience consciously . In fact
much of the process of learning and growing is our ability to sense
regularity or pattern in our experience and to develop programs
within ourselves to cope effectively with the world at the
unconscious level of behavior. For example, your ability to read
and understand this very sentence is a program which at one point
in your life you were unable to perform. You went through the
task of learning to recognize first the letters, then the words and
finally the phrases and sentences of English. Associated with each
of these steps were the specific eye scanning patterns which were
appropriate. Learning to associate a certain visual input with a set
of meanings which they represent was a relatively long and
arduous task. Your skill in reading rapidly and meaningfully
depends in large part on your ability to operate those lower level
patterns of eye scanning and letter recognition unconsciously. The
vast bulk of our everyday lives is occupied with the execution of
tremendously complex patterns of unconscious behavior. The
ability we have to enjoy our experience and engage in the activities
which each of us find interesting and pleasing would in large part
be lost if we did not have the ability to program ourselves to carry

[PAGE 009]

Table of Contents


PARTI
Introduction ........ 0. cece cece cece ee en e rennen nn nenne 3

The Model — Primary Experience ...........o.ooooooooo.o.o.. 11

Language — Secondary Experience .......0ooococoooomoc.oo.. 17

Representational System — The R-Operator
on the 4-Tuple ........ 2. cece rr 21

General Discussion of the Use of the R-Operator
and 4-Tuple in Hypnotic Inductions........................ 25

Lead System — The L-Operator
onthe 4-Tuple .... 2... eee eee ee ees 39

Accessing Techniques..........
00... cece cee eee e cence 53


Transderivational Search — Generalized
Referential Index ............
0. cee cee cee eee cence ences 59


The C-Operator ...........
cece cee cee cent eens 73


Patterns of Meaningful Communication in
Hypnosis with Congruent Clients ..................oo..o.... 81


Tracking Modell ................ooooooonooomorcccnncono 89

Tracking Model II for Sequencing j
of4-Tuples.........222e@ceeeeeeeeereeeennen
nennen ern 91

Tracking Model III — Construction
Of 4-Tuples.... 0.0... ccc
cee eee tenn nenne 97

Meaningful Communication in Hypnosis with
Incongruent Clients ......... 0.0.0. cece cence ee eee eens 103

[PAGE 010]

4 / INTRODUCTION


out certain complex patterns of behavior for execution at the
unconscious level of behavior. Imagine how cluttered our
experience would be, for example, if it were necessary for us to
consciously maintain the rate and depth of our breathing, the
tonus of our muscles, the level of our blood sugar.. .
The process of creating programs which are useful to us — the
learning process — is an ongoing process of change. We refer to
this process as modeling.Modeling occurs both at the conscious
and unconscious levels of behavior. The process of learning to
understand and speak our native language is an example of the
process of unconscious modeling. The process of learning to read
and to spell is, for most people, an example of conscious
modeling, much of what is learned is the sequencing and
organization of lower level patterns of behavior already available
at the unconscious level of behavior. For example, children
learning to spell are not explicitly taught to form mental images of
the words they are learning — that is, to employ their
visualization strategies — yet, children who succeed in becoming
excellent spellers employ this skill unconsciously. A young athlete
learning to run the 100 meter dash is learning how to sequence and
utilize patterns of muscle movements already available at the
unconscious level of behavior. His ability to run the 100 meter
dash is learning how to sequence and utilize patterns of muscle
movements already available at the unconscious level of behavior.
His ability to run the 100 meter dash at maximum speed will
depend in large part on his ability to make unconscious the
patterns of sequencing of those patterns of unconscious behavior
already available.
The outcome of modeling is the creation of a series of models
which are largely unconscious which each of us use to organize
our experience and cope effectively with the worlds of our
experience. As we have demonstrated in other work (see Structure
of Magic, volumes I and II, Patterns of the Hypnotic Techniques
of Milton H. Erickson, M.D. by the authors), the resulting models
which we use for our behavior will necessarily differ from the
world of experience which they are models of. Thus, for us the
relevant characteristic which a model will have is usefulness —
that is, is the model effective for the purpose it is designed to be
used for. Therefore, questions of truth, accuracy and fit with
reality with respect to models of experience miss the point of
modeling altogether.

[PAGE 011]

Summary Lc occ 109


FoOtnotes ..........oooooococccronocrcrr rr 113


PART Ill
Transcript] 2.0... 0... ec cece eee ee tee eens 119

Transcript Il... 0... ee
cet nena 173


PART III
Summary ......... 00: cc cee ene ee eee nennen 237


BIBLIOGRAPHY .............
0. cece cece eee eee eee 243

[PAGE 012]

INTRODUCTION / 5


Our purpose is to present a model which will be useful for the
purposes of effective hypnotic communication. As with any
model, the one we develop in the succeeding pages will be
incomplete — specifically, there are powerful patterns of
hypnotic communication in the work of Milton H. Erickson as
well as in our work which we choose not to represent in the model.
We have selected the patterns to be represented in our model based
on our understanding of the modeling principle called elegance.
Elegance is a modeling principle which states that the most highly
valued model for a specific task is the one which requires the
minimum number of patterns or distinctions and is still adequate
for the purposes for which it is designed. Thus, in the model which
follows we present the minimum number of patterns necessary for
a hypnotist to communicate effectively in the context of hypnotic
communication. As hypnotists, many of you will recognize many
of the patterns and distinctions in this model in your own
behavior. The model can be used by you to make explicit these
patterns, thereby organizing your experience in a more systematic
way. Patterns in your behavior which are not represented
explicitly in the model can be easily integrated and essentially
constitute your personal style or art. As with any learning task,
you will go through a period of consciously learning to identify in
your own behavior and in the behavior of your clients the patterns
we present here. This is a natural stage in the process of change
and learning — soon the patterns will drop out of your
consciousness, achieving the status of systematic unconscious
patterns of behavior, thereby leaving you free to detect still
further patterns which you may find useful to incorporate into
your work.ı
Our decision to present the most elegant model — the
minimal model — is also based on several other understandings -
which we have concerning the process of human modeling. First,
what each of us as human beings detects with our sensory channels
is difference. One easy demonstration of this pattern is that until
you finish reading this sentence you will not be conscious of the
location of your left ear. The fact that you were not conscious of
the location of your left ear until it was mentioned in the preceding
sentence is perfectly consistent with the known patterns of human
modeling. First, a conscious awareness of the location of your left
ear during the task of reading this book would be an example of
the lack of elegance in your program for reading. Secondly, the

[PAGE 013]

6 / INTRODUCTION


location of your left ear with respect to the remainder of your
body has probably changed very little in the last few years. Thus,
consistent with the principles of human modeling of ongoing
experience, since thereis no differencein the location of your left
ear with respect to the remainder of your body, there is no
difference to detect and thus no need to consciously represent this
fact — the process of failing to represent the portions of our
ongoing experience which are constant — as habituation. Habituation, then, can be understood as the process of sensing and
responding unconsciously to the portion of our ongoing
experience which is constant, and it applies with equal generality
to the portions of our ongoing experience which are constant
independently of whether those portions of our experience
originate with people, are we conscious of the process of opening a
door. Typically, it is only when the unconscious pattern in our
behavior — that of extending our hand, grasping the door handle,
and turning it — fails to yield the unconsciously anticipated result
of opening the door that we become aware of any portion of our
unconscious behavioral patterns of opening doors. We will refer in
what follows to short sequences of behavior which are typically
executed at the unconscious level of behavior as TOTEs (see Plans
and the Structure of Behavior by G.A. Miller et al.). An example
of the utilization of a TOTE in the context of hypnosis is the
interruption of the standard handshake as the first step in a
kinesthetically based trance induction.
For the individual described in the excerpt as well as for the reader,
the standard handshake is a complex pattern of behavior which is
normally carried out at the unconscious level of behavior. In other
words, the handshake has the status of a single TOTE.Since the
handshake is a single unit of behavior, the interruption of this
single unit leaves the person interrupted momentarily without a
conscious next step in behavior. Since the person whose TOTE has
been interrupted is momentarily without a program, the hypnotist
may suggest a next step, thereby utilizing the interruption
effectively as a trance induction. In our experience, the trance state
which results from the interruption of a TOTE is typically profound,
and deep trance phenomena are comfortably elicited. Further if care
is taken to re-orient the client to the exact position at which the
interruption occurred and the remainder of the TOTE is executed,
the client will have no conscious representation that anything unusual
has occurred. In other words, consistent with the interrupted pattern

[PAGE 014]

INTRODUCTION / 7


having attained the status of a single unit of behavior at the
unconscious level of behavior, any experiences which occur in the
interruption can have no conscious representation unless deliberate
instructions are given the client to consciously recall those experiences upon awakening.

All of the foregoing indicates that the Confusion
Technique is a prolonged, highly complicated and complex
procedure. Working one out and explaining the rationale of the
procedure is indeed a long hard task, but once one has done that
more than once, and has learned to recognize the fundamental
processes involved, there can then be a very easy comfortable
and rapid trance induction under some most unfavorable
conditions. To illustrate this, both a spontaneous experimental
instance and a clinical case will be reported. The first of these
occurred at a lecture before a medical society. One of the
physicians present was most interested in learning hypnosis,
listened attentively during the lecture, but in the social hour
preceding the lecture, he had repeatedly manifested hostile
aggressive behavior toward most of his colleagues. When
introduced to the author, he shook hands with a bone-crushing
grip, almost jerked the author off his balance (the man was at
least 6 inches taller than the author and about 65 Ibs. heavier) aft
aggressively declared without any preamble that he would like to
“see any damn fool try to hypnotize me.”
When volunteers for a demonstration were requested, he
came striding up and in a booming voice announced, “Well, I’m
going to show everybody that you can’t hypnotize me.” As the
man stepped up on the platform, the author slowly arose from his
chair as if to greet him with a handshake. As the volunteer
Stretched forth his hand prepared to give the author another
bone-crushing handshake, the author bent over and tied his own
shoe strings slowly, elaborately and left the man standing
helplessly with his arm outstretched. Bewildered, confused,
completely taken aback at the author’s nonpertinent behavior, at
a total loss for something to do, the man was completely
vulnerable to the first comprehensible communication fitting to
the situation that was offered to him. As the second shoe string
was being tied, the author said, “Just take a deep breath, sit
down in that chair, close your eyes, and go deeply into a trance.”
After a brief casual startled reaction, my subject said, “Well I’ll be

[PAGE 015]

8 / INTRODUCTION


damned! But how? Now do it again so | can know how you are
doing it.”
He was offered a choice of several traditional techniques. He
chose the hand-levitation method as seeming the more
interesting, and this technique was employed slowly both for his
benefit and that of the audience, with another somnambulistic
trance resulting.
As an experimental subject in that situation, he presented in
an excellent manner the problem of adequately meeting his
behavioral patterns and eliciting responsive behavior of interest
primarily to the audience although he too was interested
secondarily but his primary interest as a person was one
diametrically opposed. He wished to elicit responses of futility
from the author, but even this was a tacit acknowledgement of
hypnosis as a valid phenomenon.
The explanation of what happened is rather simple. The man
came up to the podium with an intense determination to do
something. The author’s rising as if to greet him with a
handshake and then bending over to tie his shoe strings left the
man standing with an outstretched hand, unable to do anything,
interrupted so suddenly in the initiation of what he was going to
do, too astonished by the authors completely nonpertinent
behavior, utterly at a loss for something to do, and hence,
completely susceptible to any clearly comprehensible suggestion
of what to do fitting to the total situation that he responded
relievedly to the simple quiet instruction the author offered. And
of course, the man’s underlying attitude toward hypnosis became
manifest in his prompt request made upon his discovery of what
had happened.
Milton H. Erickson, “The Confusion
Technique,” in Hypnosis, Haley (ed.),
1967, pp. 153-154.


The third pattern in our understanding of the process of
human modeling which we base our decision to present the
minimal model on is the fact that consciousness is a limited
phenomenon. Specifically, as humans we are limited to representing to ourselves in consciousness a small finite number of
chunks of information. In his now classic paper called The Magic
Number 7+2, George A. Miller (1956) carefully presents the
outline of the limits of consciousness. Essentially, his research

[PAGE 016]

INTRODUCTION / 9


leads him to the conclusion that we are capable of entertaining in
consciousness 7 plus or minus 2 chunks of information. One of the
most interesting implications of Miller's paper is that the size of the
chunk is variable. In other words, the limitation of 7+ 2 applies not
to the number of bits of information; but rather to the number of
chunks. Thus, by carefully selecting the code by which we
organize our conscious experience, we have a great deal of latitude
in increasing the amounts of bits of information we can represent
to ourselves consciously. Miller is artfully vague in his discussion
of what a chunk is. If we identify the term chunk with the notion
of a pattern of behavior which has not yet achieved the status of
an unconscious TOTE, then the interaction between the function
of consciousness in the learning process and chunking becomes
useful. As we learn to identify and respond systematically to
patterning in our experience, we are able to make unconscious
portions of our experience which we previously had to cope with
at the level of consciousness. A chunk in consciousness is a
patterning or regularity in our experience which we have not yet
succeeded in making unconscious. Thus, at the beginning of the
learning of a particular task, the size of the chunk will be rather
small—encompassinga relatively short patterning or regularity in
our experience. As this size chunk achieves the status of a TOTE
— thus becoming unconscious—our consciousness is free to attend
to larger level patterns which are composed of the sequencing and
organizing of the TOTE's which they are composed of, or to
attend to patterning in other representational systems or areas of
experience.
Consider an example from your own experience. For those of
you who at one time learned to ride a bicycle, remember how
complex it was at first. Your first time up was overwhelming. You
had to think about balancing, pushing pedals up and down,
steering and watching where to steer. This was certainly more
than you could handle, so perhaps your father or a friend held the
rear of the bicycle so you only had to worry consciously about
steering and pedaling. And if you were one of the fortunate ones
who already had an unconscious program for pedaling from riding
a tricycle, then the task was reduced to learning to coordinate
steering and pedaling. Once these skills had been drilled into your
behavior, they happened automatically, then perhaps when you
weren't even looking your father let go and just ran behind and off
you were, learning to coordinate the pedaling and steering with

[PAGE 017]

10 / INTRODUCTION


balancing. After a time you had so programmed yourself to
operate the bicycle that all aspects of the task dropped outside of
consciousness, leaving you free to enjoy the scenery or talk with a
riding companion. No matter how long it has been since you have
ridden a bike, the program will be there and if you climb on a
bicycle the program will activate and you will be able to ride once
again without ever thinking even for a moment about all the steps
in this complex process. They are all chunked and sequenced at the
unconscious level leaving you free to enjoy your ride. If they were
conscious you would have to think about pedaling, steering,
balancing every movement and your consciousness would be so
cluttered you would either fall or run into something. The learning
of patterns of behavior such as bicycle riding as unconscious
programs is both useful and necessary to allow us as humans to do
the varied and complex things we do every day. We would suggest
that you even make this explicit as part of your learning program.
For example, at the present time you are.reading a book from
which you can learn certain patterns of communication. If you
wish to learn them thoroughly, we suggest that you take two of
the patterns we will present you each day, and spend that day
identifying and using that pattern all day — until it is so
thoroughly practiced that you can let it drop out of consciousness
and still use it systematically, thereby leaving your conscious
mind free to move on to learn more patterns. You will have in
essence created a TOTE for each pattern in this book. In that way
you will have re-coded your experience of both hypnosis and communication. This will allow you to operate as a communicator/
hypnotist as easily as you once learned to ride a bicycle.
This understanding of the notion of the relationship between
chunk and TOTE allows us to apply some of the principles of
modeling to the presentation of our model. For example, for
effective learning to take place, the chunks or conscious patterns
which we present must be of the same size in order for the
re-coding process of creating TOTEs — that is, of making the
patterns of effective hypnotic communication unconscious — to
occur successfully. Further, in our model, we attempt to present
no more than the magic number of ‘patterns at any one level of
chunking.

[PAGE 018]

The Model — Primary Experience
The first notion which we introduce in the model is that of the
4-tuple. The 4-tuple is a visual representation of experience which
looks like <V,K, Ap, O>;

where V = visual
K = kinesthetic
Ay = auditory tonal
O = olfactory
i == the referential index of the experiencer
the general form of the 4-tuple
<V, K, Ap, O>

The 4-tuple is a way of visually representing a person's experience
at any point in time. The 4-tuple claims that for the purposes of a
model of effective hypnotic communication, a person's primary
experience at a moment in time can be represented adequately by
a description of their visual, kinesthetic, auditory tonal and
olfactory experience. A specific example may assist the reader in
understanding comfortably. Assuming that you are a reader who
at this point in time is sitting comfortably in a quiet place and that
you are reading alone, the 4-tuple can be used to represent your
present experience of the world as follows:
the specific 4-tuple which represents the reader's experience
the printed wordsof, thefeling , $ , thesmellof
the book, the of the chair, the the room, the
lighting pattern of temperature of freshness of the
the room... the room... air...
i

where is the referential index of the reader and the blank space $ indicates
no experience in that mode.

In words, the reader's present experience of the world is
represented by a description of the visual input from the words,
his present kinesthetic sensations, and the olfactory sensation
available. Since, by our assumption, the reader is in a place where
he is presently receiving no auditory input from the external
world, the value of the variable At (the auditory tonal portion of
his experience) is ¢. The values of the V, K and O
variables are
specified by a description of the input from the world that is

[PAGE 019]

12/ THE MODEL


impinging on the reader at this point in time. Notice that in
specifying the 4-tuple for the reader’s present experience, we
restricted ourselves to representing experience originating in the
world external to the reader. The 4-tuple can also be used to
represent the reader's total experience — that is, his present
ongoing experience independently of whether it originates in the
world external to the reader or not. We have found it useful in our
work to identify the origin of the portion of the experience
described in the 4-tuple — that is to distinguish between which
portion of the experience represented by the 4-tuple originates in
the world external to the person whose experience is represented
by the 4-tuple and which portion is generated by the person's own
internal processes. One easy way of representing this distinction is
by simply attaching a superscript to each component of the 4-tuple
—either an i (internally generated) or an e (externally generated).
Thus assuming that the reader is reading with internal dialogue at
this point in time and using the superscripts which distinguish the
internally generated from externally originated components of the
4-tuple, the reader's 4-tuple would look like:

e printed wordsf the feeling of ®, the tempo and tonal i the smell of ©,
of the book, the chair, the qualities of the room, the
the lighting pattern temperature of the auditory freshness of
in the room... theroom... internal dialogue... theair... i


As with all the distinctions in the model, this superscript
distinction between internally and externally generated experience
will be employed only when it is useful for the task for which it is *
to be used.
The reader will notice that the superscript distinction allows
the 4-tuple to be used as a way of distinguishing hallucinated or
projected experience from experience originating in the external
world. Erickson often discusses the difference between ordinary
waking state and trance states (especially deep trance states) using
the phrase limited foci of attention.

. Too much emphasis is placed upon external factors and
the subject’s responses to them. Primarily, emphasis should be
placed on the intrapsychic behavior of the subject rather than
upon the relationship to externalities. At best, apparatus is only
an incidental aid, to be discarded at the earliest possible moment

[PAGE 020]

THE MODEL / 13


in favor of the utilization of the subject’s behavior which may be
initiated but not developed by the apparatus. . . The utilization of
imagery rather than actual apparatus permits the subject to
utilize his actual capabilities without being hampered by an
adjustment to non essential externalities.
..the subject in a deep trance functions in accord with the
unconscious understandings independently of the forces to
which his conscious mind ordinarily responds; he behaves in ac
-cordance with the reality which exists in the given hypnotic
situation for his unconscious mind. Conceptions, memories, and
ideas constitute his reality world; he is in a deep trance. The
actual external environment reality with which he is surrounded
is relevant only insofar as it is utilized in the hypnotic situation.
Milton H. Erickson, Deep Trance and Its
Induction, Haley (ed.), 1967, p. 11.


In the ordinarywaking state, most people are continually being
distracted byexperience generated either by external stimuli or by
experience generated by internal stimuli. Their focus of attention
is constantly shifting. Thus, one way of understanding the process
of going into a deep trance is the constant focusing and riveting of
consciousness on a limited number of stimuli (a general
description of establishing a biofeedback loop). Since internally
generated stimuli are typically more under the control of the
subject (with the hypnotist’s help), one powerful way to assist the
client in going into a deep trance is to have them attend more and
more exclusively to internal stimuli. The superscripts e and i can
be used to represent the general shift of attention experienced by
the client in a typical trance induction from externally originating
experience to internally generated experiences, for example:


SEVERAS O% ai > o ki a® o$ sev Ki Alo i>
t t t


where the intermediate 4-tuple is the partial trance state where the
client is attending to internally produced visual images and
internally generated kinesthetic sensations to the exclusions of
externally generated ones, while continuing to attend to auditory
tonal (e.g. the tonal and tempo qualities of the hypnotist’s voice)
and olfactory experiences which originate externally.
The diligent student of hypnosis who has trained himself to

[PAGE 021]

14 / THEMODEL

make fine sensory distinctions as he moves about in the world will
recognize many responses which he sees, hears and feels in his
everyday contact with people as unconscious responses and
communications typical of official hypnotic trance states. Each of
us uses our past experience as the basis for understanding our
present experience of meeting someone new. Becoming aware that
the tonal qualities of their voice, their body posture, their
gestures, the melodic patterns as they speak remind us of someone
else, we may find ourselves responding to them in ways which are
perhaps more appropriate for the other person they remind us of.
In such cases, our 4-tuple with respect to that person is a mixture
of internally and externally generated experience. Such experiences indicate the power of the normally unconscious meaning
making processes of communication.
In most people such unconscious mixture of internally and
externally generated experience accounts for much of the
difficultly they experience with people. The business man who
explodes when the sales clerk at the clothing store who walks very
much like his boss fails to pay attention to him and the woman
who feels so small and helpless around a man whose voice tones
sound so much like her father's are simply slightly exaggerated
examples of the process of mixing internally and externally
generated experience without making the distinction. As an
effective communicator/hypnotist it will be important to
understand that as each of us is responding in any communication
situation, portions of our responses are to the ongoing
communication and portions of our responses will be TOTEs that
are more closely connected with some other time/space '
coordinates. For example, as children, many of us learned to
detect that our parents were angry at us even before they would
express it verbally by a certain look, a certain raising of an
eyebrow or a certain hand gesture. We as children created
responses to these signals which as a child were useful mechanisms
of coping. However, later on in life, these programs, just like the
programs for riding a bicycle were still active and activatable. As
hypnotist/communicators, we must be sensitive. to these
unconscious TOTEs: if utilized in a directed fashion, they become
assets; if they are not, they can become the foundation of solid
resistance. We need as communicators/hypnotists to be aware of
which responses of creative responses and which are TOTES
executed unconsciously and which are more appropriate for some

[PAGE 022]

THE MODEL / 15


other time/space. For example, we had a young woman who came
to us for assistance. We noticed immediately that if either of us
would raise an eyebrow, this woman would suddenly start
apologizing and stating that she had failed to follow our
instruction and that she probably wasn't smart enough to go into a
trance. We noticed also that a proud smile elicited confidence and
a willingness to cooperate. In the first case the 23 year old woman *
would speak of failure with the tonality of a teenager. In the
second case she sounded more like a 5 year old. Since induction
into trance is a shift from the external to the internal experience
with a limited focus of attention, we both wore proud smiles and
spoke to her in a childish tonality and when one of the authors
began to call her princess, we had a completely age-regressedclient.
And five year olds are very easy to hypnotize.
The astute practitioner of hypnosis can come to appreciate
the fascinating mixture of conscious and unconscious communication responses among people based on the mixture of internally
and externally generated experience.
This leads naturally to the next distinction we introduce for
the 4-tuple — that of time/space coordinates. Whenever a person
generates experience, internally, that experience will be basedon
some set of previous 4-tuples, each of which has a time/space '
coordinate different from the present time/space coordinate. For
example, when you as a hypnotist ask your client to remember a
pleasant childhood experience, you are instructing the client as to
what general time/space coordinate you want on the internally
generated experience you are requesting. This distinction can be
represented in the 4-tuples as:
i 1 1 el

Ad<Ky jp Ve jp At t /p Ob jp?
where t /p subscriptis the time/place coordinator of the experience the person is
using as the reference structure from which he is generating his experience
internally.


The internally /externally generated experience and the time/space
coordinate distinctions, are particularly useful in the context of
psychotherapeutic techniques of change where the therapist
wishes to assist the client in recovering the original experiences
from the past which are preventing him from having the choices he
desires in the present.

[PAGE 023]

16 / THE MODEL


One of the most powerful learnings which we have been able
to offer the people we have had the opportunity and privilege of
teaching our models for communication to flow naturally from the
internally/externally generated experience and the time/space
coordinate distinctions we have been discussing. As communicators each of us understands the power and value of detecting,
accepting and responding creatively to non-verbal or analogue
messages offered to us by the people we have contact with. In the
context of the work we do with our clients, the value of nonverbal
communication cannot be over-emphasized. Typically our clients
offer us non-verbal messages which form the basis for
communication which leads to pervasive graceful change. In order
to increase our skill in detecting, accepting and responding
creatively to such messages, we have developed a specific
communication strategy which we refer to as the up-time strategy.
Each of us has a limited amount of consciousness (Miller's 7+2
chunks). When communicating with another human being, if we
choose to bring into consciousness some portion of our past —
some internally generated portion of experience from another
time/space coordinate — we consequently lose some portion of
our sensory contact with that person. When we lose some portion
of our sensory contact during communication with a client, we
will fail to detect nonverbal messages which are constantly being
offered (typically at the unconscious level of communication)
from that person. Our experience is that such messages are the
very basis for assisting that person in rapid and profound change.
The up-time strategy is simply the process of organizing our
communicatiorrin such a way that we use all of our consciousness
on sensory experience. In other words, a communicator using an
up-time strategy has an ongoing 4-tuple in which all of the
superscripts are e.;

[PAGE 024]

Language — Secondary Experience
The next distinction which we introduce into the model is that
of language. Specifically, we represent the relationship between a
language representation and the experience it represents as:
Ag ( V,K, Ap, O)

where Ag = auditory digital (language)

This relationship we refer to as a Complex Equivalence. In other
words, a Complex Equivalence is the relationship between a
language representation and the 4-tuple or set of 4-tuples which
the language represents — the relationship between a word and
the set of experiences it represents. For example, in doing
experimental work in hypnosis, greater depth with greater speed
in our experience results when the hypnotist gets a Complex
Equivalence for the nominalization “deep trance” or even for that
matter “trance”. A 4-tuple description of what the client expects
his experience to be in trance will aid the hypnotist in knowing
what kind of suggestions to give and also in clearing up
misunderstandings about the word trance.Some clients answer the
question, “How would you know if you were in a trance? with the
response that they would have no internal dialogue. Others claim
they would see no internal visual images, and still others say they
would just feel totally relaxed. The process of getting a full.
complex equivalence (all variables of the 4-tuple considered) will
aid the hypnotist greatly in knowing how to create an experience
which will count as an experience of trance, thereby aiding the
client in having confidence that he or she is a competent hypnotic
subject.
As a specific example, consider the 4-tuple(s) accessed by the
word “fire”.
fire
/ü
the sight of , the feeling of , the sounds of , the smell of
flickering flames, heat, the choking crackling flames the smoke and
\ of smoke, ... sensation of smoke and burning material, . . .burning materials,
in lungs, ...

[PAGE 025]

18 / LANGUAGE


The particular value of the variables of the 4-tuple(s) which
correspond to the language representation “fire” are fairly
consistent from person to person in this culture. Thus, we find a
great deal of agreement about the Complex Equivalence of which
4-tuple(s) correspond to the word “fire”. Such wide-spread and
consistent correspondences make language effective as a
communication device. The 4-tuple(s) which each of us access for
certain other words and phrases are, however, much less
consistent. Imagine, for example, the variation in the values of the
variables of the 4-tuples which each of us would assign to words
such as love, justice, equality. These words — all nominalizations
— are so variable in the 4-tuples which they access that miscommunication is the rule rather than the exception.
A major portion of the task of language learning which each
of us experienced as children was the assignment of phonological
sequences (the sounds in the language we learned) to the 4-tuples
of our experience. This assignment of sound to 4-tuple is one of the
most pervasive ways in which a language system influences (at the
most unconscious level of behavior) our experiences of the world.
By selecting specific 4-tuples and sets of 4-tuples out of all the
4-tuples which we experience and assigning them a name, the
language both assists us in identifying the patterns which the users
of the language have found important in organizing their
experience and simultaneously draws our attention away from the
other 4-tuples and sets of 4-tuples which have not yet been coded
into a language representation.*
We have chosen to visually represent the language portion of
experience as an operator on the 4-tuple distinct from the basic
variables of experience. Our choice here is based on several lines
of evidence. First, language is of a different logical level of
experience — any portion of the 4-tuple may be translated into a
language representation but not vice versa. Specifically, the
language system, a digital system, includes the possiblity of
expressing negation and tense while analogue system of
communication do not have these possibilities. (see Bateson, 1972
for discussion) This is the map-territory distinction. Secondly, the
language system is acquired by us at a later time than our ability to
experience the world visually, kinesthetically, auditory tonally,
and by the sense of smell. The usefulness of this distinction in the
organizing your experience in hypnosis must, of course, be the
justification for its representation in the model.

[PAGE 026]

LANGUAGE / 19


One minimal use of this distinction lies in the fact that most of
the clients who come to us as therapists are there because they
have, in the first place, mistaken the map (language) for the
territory (experience). They ask the hypnotist for what they want
in language. Typically the language description is so far removed
from the experience they want, that they have no idea whether or
not they have the resources available to get what it is they desire.
Several clients will come in and state that they desire a greater
sense of confidence. Confidence is a language representation of
some experience the client desires. Just what exactly that
experience is the therapist has no way of knowing until he
reconnects the language description with experience. Confidence
for the one client will be a specific set of body sensations; for
another, it will be a certain image (internal) of himself and for still
others, it will be different yet.'”

[PAGE 027]

Representational System — The
R-Operator on the 4-Tuple


The research done by George A. Miller applies with equal
force to the hypnotist in the context of the hypnotic encounter and
to each of us in our everyday experience of the world — in other
words, there is much which we sense, much that we receive as
input from the external world which we do not represent to
ourselves in consciousness. For example, until the reader read the
above description of the specified 4-tuples, it is likely that he was
unaware of the feeling of the chair, the temperature of the
room...The point we are making here is that the process of
consciously attending to sensations— what we call consciousness
in our experience— is only a small portion of the sensations
available to us. The distinction between what we represent
consciously and what we are sensing as a total organism can
usefully be represented by defining an operator on the 4-tuple as
follows:


R (v,K, Ay, O) -—————-> (V,0,0,0)
In words, then, the application of the operator to the 4-tuple
which represents the organism's total experience yields the portion
of the experience available in the organism's consciousness. The
reader will recognize that the result of the application of R to the
4-tuple yields what we refer to in Patterns I as the client's most.
highly valued representational system. The above example, then,
represents a person who is attending solely to the visual
component of the total experience — the person who typically
attends primarily to what they see. Thus for a person whose most
highly valued representational system is kinesthetic, the
application of the operator R would yield a different outcome,
namely:

R (v,K, At, O) ———=> (0,K, 0, 0)

[PAGE 028]

22 / REPRESENTATIONAL SYSTEM


This operator creates an explicit representation for the notion of
most highly valued representational system — specifically, the
person's most highly valued representational system is the variable
in the 4-tuple which has a non-null value after the R operator has
been applied to the 4-tuple which represents the person’s total
experience. Notice that this is independent of whether the value of
that variable originates in the world external to the person or is the
result of some internal process. In general, the person’s most
highly valued representational system will coincide with portions
of the external world which they are aware of — knowing this is of
great importance in understanding how to communicate
effectively with a client in the hypnotic encounter.
In addition to the use of the R operator on the 4-tuple, we
shall also use the R operator on the A „(the language representation) plus the associated 4-tuple(s). For example, the application of
the
R operator to the following expression is possible.

R (fire

the sight of, the feeling , thesoundsof , the smell of
flickering flames, of heat, the choking the crackling of smoke and burning
of smoke, ... sensations of smoke flames and materials, ...
in lungs, . . . material, ...

This allows us to represent the situation in which the person whose
conscious experience is being represented is aware of the sound of
someone shouting the word “fire” for example. Thus the R
operator can be applied either directly to the 4-tuple or to the
representation of the pattern called Complex Equivalence — that
is, the language representation plus the associated 4-tuples(s).?
Let us review the 4-tuple model presented thus far. Its main
purpose is to give the hypnotist a tool to organize both his
experience and his techniques in a way that will give him greater
fluidity and proficiency in the hypnotic encounter. The 4-tuple
basically has the following dimensions. Experience at any point in
time will have (though not in consciousness) at least some visual
(internal or external) some kinesthetic (internal or external) some
auditory tonal (internal or external) and some olfactory (internal
or external) dimension which originates at some time/space
coordinates. Each of these combined at any point in time into a
4-tuple can be assigned an auditory digital (language) representation.

[PAGE 029]

REPRESENTATIONAL SYSTEM / 23


The Ay is an operator which is the name of any specific 4-tuple. An
R operator can also be applied and represents those portions of the
4-tuple the client is aware of. The R operator, in essence,
describes, what consciousness is at any time for any specific client.
Now is the time to take the model and make it a practical tool for
hypnosis.

[PAGE 030]

General Discussion of the Use of the
R-Operator and 4-Tuple in Hypnotic
Inductions


In Volume I of the Patterns series, the process of hypnotic
induction was described in terms of pacing and leading. The
advanced student of hypnosis and communication will find it
useful to understand these processes in terms of the R operator
over the 4-tuple. Let us begin with the notion of pacing.
Essentially, pacing is the process by which the hypnotist makes
contact with the client, or in terms of Patterns I, the hypnotist
meets the client at the client’s model of the world. Overt pacing
usually involves the hynotist's offering verbalizations which
match some portion of the client's ongoing experience. Covert
pacing, a very powerful induction technique will be considered
later in the section on meaningful communication with an
incongruent client — the so-called “resistant client”.

In traditional ritualistic verbal hypnotic inductions, the
hypnotist offers a series of suggestions verbally which represent to
the client in language some portion of their ongoing experience.
As the client hears the hypnotist's verbalizations, he checks. his
experience to determine whether or not the verbalizations by the .
hypnotist are, in fact, an accurate representation of his ongoing ©
experience. Once this verified biofeedback loop has been
accomplished, the hypnotist may come to link the pacing
verbalizations with leading verbalizations to lead the client into an
altered state for the purposes of the hypnotic encounter (see
Patterns, volume I, pages 15-20, 137-152, 209-215 for details of the
linking techniques). Much of the more graceful aspects of the
traditional ritualistic verbal hypnotic induction can be understood
in terms of the R-operator on the 4-tuple. If the hypnotist has the
ability to detect what specific portion of experience the client has
access to, then he knows precisely which set of pacing statements
will be an immediate effective pace for the client at that point in
time. Thus, for example, if a client offers a series of statements
which include phrases such as:

[PAGE 031]

26 / GENERAL DISCUSSION


I feel 1 would benefit greatly...
I want to get in touch with some. .
You are a warm person...
So many people are insensitive and callous...


the hypnotist detects that the client is attending primarily in
consciousness to the kinesthetic portions of his experience. Thus,
when beginning his induction the hypnotist will offer a series of
suggestions which presupposes a kinesthetic representational
system. Since the client has access to those portions ofexperience,
he will immediately be able to verify that the hypnotist's
verbalizations are accurate for his ongoing experience. In terms of
the R operator on the 4-tuple, the hypnotist understands that the
client's experience can be represented as follows:

R (Ag<K, V, Ap O>)—>K _

Consequently, the hypnotist, in order to establish an effective
pace with this client, will select verbalizations which use
kinesthetic predicates. A hypnotist who fails to make the
representational system distinction and who offers suggestions to
assist the client in developing internal visual images will frequently
find himself with a confused and possibly a resistant client. Once
the representational system distinction is made by the hypnotist,
such mis-communication is easily and comfortably avoided.
This initial movement, common in our experience to all
successful communication whether for the purposes of hypnosis or
not — the meeting of the client at the client's model of the world —
insures that the hypnotist has tuned him or herself to the client
adequately. Once this initial biofeedback loop is established, the
hypnotist can display some of his or her creativity. As we have
mentioned, even within the representational system which each of
us selects at a moment in time as primary, there are an infinite
number of experiences available which lie outside the bounds of
our rather limited consciousness. By offering a series of pacing
verbalizations within the representational system of the client but

[PAGE 032]

GENERAL DISCUSSION / 27


outside their usual awareness, the hypnotist can gracefully lead
the client to new experiences. Erickson presents several excellent
examples of the employment of pacing verbalizations based on the
representational system distinction in his superb article Further
Techniques of Hypnosis — Utilization Techniques. Note as you
read through these that Erickson seizes upon the information
offered by the client as to which portion of the world of ongoing
experience is available to them and utilizes the representational
system information by directing their attention to experiences
within that representational system but outside of the client's
present awareness. In both of the cases cited, Erickson notes that
the visual dimension of ongoing experience is the relevant
representational system to establish contact in, and he
immediately utilizes by offering pacing verbalizations in that
system.


There are patients who prove unresponsive and resistant to
the usual induction techniques, who are actually readily
amenable to hypnosis. They are encountered more frequently in
the psychotherapeutic practice but are also seen in general
medical and dental practice and judged to often be unsuited to
the use of hypnosis. These patients are those who are unwilling
to accept any suggested behavior until after their own resistant,
contradictory or opposing behavior has first been met by the
operator. By reason of their physical condition, anxiety, intense
interest, concern or absorption in their own behavior, they are
unable to cooperate actively or passively to permit an effective
alteration of it. For these patients, what may be termed
Techniques of Utilization
frequently serve to meet most
adequately their special needs. These same techniques serve to -
facilitate in both rapidity and ease the process of trance
induction in the average patient. They are, in essence, no more
than a simple reversal of the usual procedure of inducting
hypnosis. Ordinarily, trance induction is based upon securing
from the patient some form of initial acceptance and cooperation
with the operator. In Techniques of Utilization, the usual
procedure is reversed: There is an initial acceptance of, and a
ready cooperation with, the patient's presenting behavior by the
operator, however seemingly adverse it may appear to be in the
clinical situation.

[PAGE 033]

28 / GENERAL DISCUSSION


These various Techniques of Utilization will be clarified and
ittustrated by the following clinical examples:
Example 1: This patient entered the office in a most
energetic fashion and deciared at once that he did not know if he
was hypnotizable. He was willing to go into a trance if it were at
all possible, provided the writer would approach the entire matter
in an intellectual fashion rather than in a mystical, ritualistic
manner. He declared that he needed psychotherapy for a variety
of reasons and that he had tried various schools of
psychotherapy extensively without benefit. Hypnosis had been
attempted on various occasions and had failed miserably
because of “mysticism” and “a jack of appreciation for the
intellectual approach.” .
Inquiry elicited that he felt an “intelligent” approach
signified, not a suggestion of ideas, but questioning him
concerning his own thinking and feeling In relation to reality. The
writer, he declared, should recognize that he was sitting in a
chair, that the chair was in front of a desk, and that these
constituted absolute facts of reality. As such, they could not be
overlooked, forgotten, denied or ignored. in further illustration,
he pointed out that he was obviously tense, anxious and
concerned about the tension tremors of his hands which were
resting on the arms of the chair, and that he was also highly
distractable, noticing everything about him.
The writer immediately seized upon this last comment as the
basis for the initial cooperation with him. He was told, “Please
proceed with an account of your ideas and understanding,
permitting me only enough interruptions to ensure that I
understand fully and that | foliow along with you. For example,
you mentioned the chair but obviously you have seen my desk
and have been distracted by the objects on it. Please explain
fully. -
“He responded verbosely with a wealth of more or less
connected comments about everything in sight. At every slight
pause, the writer interjected a word or phrase to direct his
attention anew. These interruptions, made with increasing
frequency, were as follows: “And that paperweight; the filing
cabinet; the pictures on the wall; the changing focus of your eyes
as you glance about; the interest of the book titles; the tension in
your shoulders; the feeling of the chair; the disturbing noises and
thoughts; weight of hands and feet; weight of problems, weight

[PAGE 034]

GENERAL DISCUSSION / 29


of desk; the stationery stand; the records of many patients; the
phenomena of life, of illness, of emotion, of physical and mental
behavior; the restfulness of relaxation; the need to attend to
one’s needs; the need to attend to one’s tension while looking at
the desk or the paperweight or the filing cabinet; the comfort of
withdrawal from the environment; fatigue and its development;
the unchanging character of the desk; the monotony of the filing
cabinet; the need to take a rest; the comfort of closing one’s
eyes; the relaxing sensation of a deep breath; the delight of
learning passively; the capacity for intellectual learning by the
unconscious.” Various other similar brief interjections were
offered, slowly at first and then with increasing frequency.
Initially, these interjections were merely supplementary to
the patient’s own train of thought and utterances. At first, the
effect was simply to stimulate him to further effort. As this
response was made, it became possible to utilize his acceptance
of stimulation of his behavior by a procedure of pausing and
hesitating in the completion of an interjection. This served to
effect in him an expectant dependency upon the writer for further
and more complete stimulation.
As this procedure was continued, gradually and unnoticed
by the patient, his attention was progressively directed in inner
subjective experiential matters. It then became"possible to use
almost directly a simple, progressive relaxation technique of
trance induction and to secure a light medium trance.
Throughout therapy, further trance inductions were basically
comparable, although the procedure became progressively
abbreviated.
Example 2. Comparable to the first patient was the woman
who presented a somewhat similar problem. She stated that, in
all previous attempts to secure therapy, she had been defeated in
her efforts by a compulsive attentiveness to the minutiae of the
immediate environment. She invariably had difficulty in
completing her history and in attending to what was said to her
because of an overpowering need to attend and to comment
upon what she saw about her. (Even this small amount of history
was interrupted by her inquiries about or simple mention of
various objects in the office.) A psychiatrist and a family friend
had suggested that hypnosis might enable her to cooperate
in therapy and had referred her to the writer.
Since she had impressed the writer as a possible candidate

[PAGE 035]

30 / GENERAL DISCUSSION


for hypnotherapy and because little progress was being made In
the interview, hypnosis was attempted by utilizing her own
behavior in the following fashion:
As she inquired about a paperweight on the desk, reply was
quickly made, “It is on the corner of the desk just behind the
clock.” As she flicked her gaze to the clock and asked urgently,
“What time is it?” she was answered with, “The minute hand
indicates the same numeral as does the desk calendar.”
There followed a whole series of comments and inquiries by
her without pause for any replies and with a rapid shifting from
one object or subject to another. Her behavior was similar to that
of an unhappy small child, warding off questioning by directing
the interrogation into irrelevant, distracting avenues.
It was not possible to Interrupt her verbal flow except with
difficulty, and then fruitlessly. However, the measure of
extending a paper knife compelled her to make mention of it. As
she responded and then continued in her monologue, the writer
polished his glasses, again forcing her to make a Comment in accord with her pattern of behavior. Next she was interrupted by a
placing of the glasses in their case; then the desk blotter was
shifted, a glance was directed at the bookcase, and the schedule
book opened and closed.
Each of these acts was fitted by her into her compulsive
stream of utterances. At first, these various acts were performed
by the writer at intervals and rather quickly. As she developed an
attitude of expectation for the writer's silent interruptions, his
movements were deliberately slowed and made with slight
hesitant pauses. This compeiled her to slow her own behavior
and to await the writer's utilization of her conduct. Then the
writer added to his silent indication of objects an identifying
word or phrase of comment.
This continued procedure had a progressively profound
inhibitory effect upon her, so that she began to depend more and
more exclusively upon the writer to indicate either verbally or by
gesture the next object she was to comment upon or to name.
After about 40 minutes of this, it became possible to instruct her
to close her eyes and to name from memory everything that she
had seen and to do this until she developed a deep hypnotic
sleep. As she obeyed, she was prornpted, “And now,
‘paperweight’ and deeper asleep; and now ‘clock,’ go even deeper
into the trance.” etc., until in another 10 minutes, a profound

[PAGE 036]

GENERAL DISCUSSION / 31


somnambulistic trance state was secured.
Thereafter, through this measure of utilizing as an induction
technique her own pattern of resistant behavior, ready
cooperation in therapy marked the clinical course of this
previously “impossible” patient. Initially, each therapeutic
session began her compulsive behavior which was immediately
utilized for the induction of another therapeutic trance. Later, a
simple gesture indicating the chair in which she was to sit
sufficed to elicit a trance state.
Milton H. Erickson, Further Techniques of
Hypnosis—Utilization Techniques, Haley
(ed.), 1967, pp. 32-34.


In the visual representation — the 4-tuple and the R operator —
we are developing here, Erickson understands that for both of
these clients


R (Ag<K, V, O, At>) >v*


Thus, his effective and graceful induction begins with a series of
pacing verbalizations directing the client to more and more
experiences within the representational system available to them.
There are two additional comments of use derived from these
examples. Note first that the suggestions Erickson offers lead
systematically from experiences with an e superscript (experiences
externally generated) to experiences with an i superscript
(experiences internally generated). Secondly, both these examples
demonstrate a second major way in shich the R-operator is useful
in the hypnotist's organizing his behavior in the context of
hypnotic inductions.
As Erickson establishes an effective pace within the clients’
own representational system, he begins to shift from their
representational system to another variable in the 4-tuple. He does
this specifically by what we refer to as the principle of |
representational system overlap. (See The Structure of Magic,
volume II, page 24 for more discussion.) More specifically, this
principle states that once an effective pace is established within the
client’s own representational system, the hypnotist may begin to

[PAGE 037]

32 / GENERAL DISCUSSION


lead the client to an altered state of consciousness by finding the
point of overlap between some experience in that representational
system and that same experience in one of the associated
representational system not normally a part of the client'songoing
experience. For example, when working with a client who is
capable of detailed internal visual imagery and with whom an
adequate pace has been established, we created a vivid, rich,
detailed image of a forest of trees. Once this visual image is
focused, we call the client's attention to the fact that
he can see the
trees swaying, their branches moving gracefully, and then to the
fact that,


‘,..as you watch those trees swaying in the wind,
enjoy the sound of the wind rushing through the
trees...”


Once we receive verification from the client that he is hearing the
sound of the wind rushing through the trees (typically by the
unconscious head movements or one of the accessing cues typical
of an auditory internal experience), we may choose to extend the
experience into another of the variables of the 4-tuple,


‘...now the sound of the wind rushing through those
trees as you watch them sway is quite pleasant, ...as pleasant for
many people as the refreshing feeling of coolness as the wind
blows on your face,... and through your hair...”


. breezes which carry the warm pungent odors of
fresh-cut grass on a warm summer afternoon...”


This powerful maneuver can be easily represented in terms of the
4-tuple and the R-operator as :

[PAGE 038]

GENERAL DISCUSSION / 33


Reime _ (Ag <V, K, Ap O>)-—>Aj & V
(seeing the trees)


Rtime _ (Ag <V,K Ap O>)—>Aj € Vie Al
(hearing the wind)


Rtime, (Ad <V. K, Ar, O>)—>Aj e Vig Al & K
(feeling the air)


>) ------> Ag & vi g Al & ka ol
Rtime , (Ad < V. K, AOp
(smelling the oc


Notice that the client's 4-tuple after this maneuver is one which is
composed entirely of variables with i superscript; the only e
superscript belonging to the A Y variable — in this case the
hypnotist's words.


AS <Vi ki al ols


A close examination of the Erickson examples will reveal precisely
the same principle. For example, in the first case cited, Erickson
begins by directing the client's attention to various objects in his
visual field such as ...the desk. ..the objects on the desk...the
paperweight...the filing cabinet...Next Erickson directs the
client's attention to a special class of objects in the client's visual
field — specifically, parts of the client's body which he can see:
your foot on the rug...your right hand on the arm of the
chair. . .Next Erickson overlaps representational systems from V
into K:...the changing focus of your eyes as you glance
about...the tension in your shoulders...the feeling of the
chair...
The two principles concerning the utilization of the
R-operator in hypnotic inductions we have been discussing
presuppose the hypnotist's ability to detect what the client's

[PAGE 039]

34 / GENERAL DISCUSSION


representational system is. We present specific ways in which you
can train yourself to detect your client's representational system so
as to respond creatively by utilizing that information.

When each of us selects the words we use to communicate to
one another verbally, we typically select those words at the
unconscious level of functioning. These words, then, indicate
which portions of the world of internally and externally available
experience we have access to at that moment in time. More
specifically, the set of words known as predicates (verbs,
adjectives and adverbs) are particularly indicative. Secondly, each
of us has developed particular body movements which indicate to
the astute observer which representational system we are using.
Especially rich in significance are the eye scanning patterns which
we have developed. Thus, for the student of hypnosis, predicates _
in the verbal system and eye scanning patterns in the nonverbal
system offer quick and powerful ways of determining which of the
potential meaning making resources — the representational systems
— the client is using at a moment in time, and therefore how to
respond creatively to the client. Consider, for example, how many
times you have asked someone a question and they have paused,
said:"Hmmmmm,, let's see” and accompanying this verbalization,
they move their eyes up and to the left. Movement of the eyes up
and to the left stimulates (in right handed people) eidetic images _
located in the non dominant hemisphere. The neurological
pathways that come from the left side of both eyes (left visual
fields) are represented in the right cerebral hemisphere (non
dominant). The eye scanning movement up and to the left is a
common way people use to stimulate that hemisphere as a method
for accessing visual memory. Eye movements up and to the right
conversely stimulate the left cerebral hemisphere and constructed
images — that'is, visual representations of things that the person
has never seen before (see Patterns, volume I, page 182).
Developing your skill in detecting the client's most highly-valued
representational system will give you access to an extremely
powerful utilization tool for effective hypnotic communication.
There are two principal ways which we have found effective in
teaching people in our training seminars to refine their ability to
detect representational systems.
(1) attending to accessing clues which may be detected
visually. Specifically (for the right handed person):

[PAGE 040]

GENERAL DISCUSSION / 35


accessing cue representational system indicated

eyes up and to the left... eidetic imagery (V)
eyes up and to the right... constructedimagery (V)
eyes defocused in position... imagery (V)
eyes down and to the left... auditory internal (A)
telephone postures. .. auditory internal (A)
eyes left or right, same
level of gaze... auditory internal (A)
eyes down and to the right... kinesthetics (K)


(2) attending to the choice of predicates selected (typically,
unconsciously) by the client to describe his experience (see
Patterns, volume I, pages 68-76, 82-86, and The Structure of
Magic, volume II, part I). When describing experiences, each of us
selects words to describe the portions of experience we attend most
closely to. Thus, as communicators, when we train ourselves to
detect which representational system is presupposed by the words
selected by our clients to describe their experience, we have
information which we can utilize effectively in our communication
with them.
These are, of course, only two ways of learning to detect
representational systems — there are many others, We have
found, for example, that breathing patterns: are an excellent
indicator of which representational system a person is using at a
point in time to organize and represent their experience to themselves. During visualization, for example, the person's breathing
tends to become shallow and high in the chest. Other equally
useful indicators in our experience are the shifts in the tonal
qualities of the person’s voice, the tempo of speech, the color of
the person’s skin...We have presented two specific ways of
detecting representational systems in sufficient detail to allow the
reader to train him or herself to detect the representational system
being used by a client at a point in time. Once you have
comfortably mastered these two techniques — refined your ability
to make these sensory distinctions — we suggest that you explore
for yourselves other indicators which allow you to gain the same
information. Such exercises in making sensory distinctions will
not only increase your ability to be effective and graceful in your
hypnotic communication but will increase and refine your ability

[PAGE 041]

36 / GENERAL DISCUSSION


to have the sensory experience which is, in our experience, the
very foundation of effective communication and hypnosis.
With this in mind, we offer the following exercise: select a
specific set of clients and spend the first 5 to 10 minutes in the
session with them asking questions which will, by presupposition,
direct their attention to the various representational sytems. For
example, if I were to ask you how many words there are in the title
of this book, there are a number of ways you could access and
represent to yourself that information. You might visualize (Vi)
the cover of the book and literally count the words; you might say
the title of the book to yourself and keep count of the number of
the words with finger movements (K). If, however, I were to ask
you whether the color of the letters in the title of the book were the
same colors as the letters in the authors’ names, I have
presupposed by use of the predicated color in my request that you
will access and represent visually. Thus, by a judicious choice of
predicates, I can direct your attention to one or another of the
representational systems. This is of particular value to the reader
who is interested in having these tools available to him or herself.
By systematically selecting the predicates you use in asking
questions, you can reduce the complexity of the communications
to a point where you can easily learn to detect the accessing cues
being offered to you non-verbally as the client attempts to respond
to your questions. This simple exercise will in a very short period
of time tune you to making the sensory distinctions necessary for
the powerful utilization of representational systems. In addition,
by asking such directed questions at the beginning of a session,
you are systematically accessing the very resources within the
clients which will form the foundation to make the change he or
she desires. Below are listed some sample questions with
associated typical responses you may easily detect — we
recommend that you adjust the content of the questions to
whatever is appropriate to your situation.


Eidetic images:
What color are your mother's eyes?
What color is your car?
Where did you first see me?
People will typically look up and left, some will also use tonal
‚access (tonal distinctions are also mediated by the non-dominate
hemisphere). Some people who are extremely fast at visualizing

[PAGE 042]

GENERAL DISCUSSION / 37


won't look up to the left, they will simply defocus their eyes
slightly in position., make an image and then re-focus. —

Constructed Imagery:
Can you imagine a purple cow?
What color should I paint my House?
Can you see yourself forty pounds lighter?
Typically people will look up and right with slight variation
from person to person.


Kinesthetic:
Have you ever felt really alert?
Does your right hand feel warmer than your left?
Do you feel more comfortable now than when you first
arrived?
Typically people will shift their gaze down and to the right,
and when you ask a question like “how do you feel about feeling
depressed” people will typically touch themselves somewhere
on their body if they’re responsing kinesthetically.

Auditory:
When was the first time you heard me say your name?
Can you say (any sentence) inside your head?
Can you hear music in your head?
How do you know when you have internal dialogue?
The most commonly occurring auditory internal positions:
postures where the persom is making contact with his hand and
the side of his head; usually his temple area— the hand position is
highly variable and can be used effectively to understand
something of the kind of auditory internal which is occurring (e.g.
index finger extended). In terms of eye scanning patterns, the
client who is accessing auditory internal will typically glance
slighly down and to the left, or to either side at the same level of
eye fixation as obtained prior to beginning accessing: all three of
these cases of eye scanning cues, the person's eyes are typically
defocused. Often accompanying these accessing cues, you will
notice a tendency for the person to cock his or her head as though
presenting one or another ear.

[PAGE 043]

Lead System — The L-Operator on the
4-Tuple


It is our understanding that at any moment in time there is an
infinitely rich set of experience available to each of us as humans.
These experiences may derive wholly from external sources (the e
superscript on the 4-tuple) or wholly from internally generated
experience (the i superscript on the 4-tuple), or may be some
interesting mixture of the two. As we discussed previously, out of
this constantly fluctuating world of experience, we select (usually
unconsciously) some portion which we become aware of — the R
operator on the 4-tuple. Our experience leads us to believe that
although only a small portion of our ongoing experience is
available to us at a moment in time, the information coming in
through our sensory channels is being processed and represented
at the unconscious level of functioning. Parallelly, our experience
has indicated that, with the possible exception of organic insult to
the nervous system, at any moment in time, each of us is engaging
unconsciously all of the representational systems which we have
presented here. Thus what we have been calling a person's
representational system is simply the portion of the complex and
integrated cognitive processes being used which is accessed into
consciousness.

This way of understanding the complex processes each of us
use to create the maps or models we guide our behavior with,
makes available a distinction which we have found to be
extremely powerful in our therapeutic work. Since consciousness
is a limited phenomenon, the situation could logically arise where
the representational system which a person uses to
access/organize their experience is different than the represen-

[PAGE 044]

40 / LEAD SYSTEM


tational system which they use to bring the information into
consciousness. For example, if I were to ask you which of the
doors in your house sounds the loudest when slammed, you might
respond by first accessing visually (Y) each of the doors in your
house, then perhaps you would make some implicit muscle
movement (K) corresponding to the movement of slamming the
doors, and finally, you would compare the sounds ( A; )of each of
the slammed doors and respond verbally ( Ag). Now, if the initial
systems you used (either the V or K) had occurred without
entering your consciousness, there would have been a difference
between the system you use to access with (your lead system) and
the system you use to bring the information requested into
consciousness. Thus we make a distinction between the system the
client initially uses to access the information requested and the
system he uses to bring. the information into consciousness: the
first, the one used to access, we call the lead system; the second,
the system used to represent the information in consciousness, we
will continue to refer to as the representational system — the
clients R operator. In terms of the exercise we presented
previously (Exercise A), the predicates that a person uses will
identify the representational system (the R operator) while the
accessing cues will identify the lead system (the L operator).
In the visual representation for the 4-tuple we have been
developing, we can easily define a new operator over the 4-tuple
— the L operator which identifies the client’s lead system:

L < Ay, O, V, K> >(V)


It follows then, quite naturally, that the case where there is a split
between a person’s lead and representational system can be
represented visually as the case where the R-operator and the
L-operator across the 4-tuple yield different outcomes:


(X)
R< At, O, V, K > ----—-—>

L < Ay, O, V, K > > (Y)

where X¥ Y

[PAGE 045]

LEAD SYSTEM / 41


Perhaps several examples from the reader's experience will
assist in making the distinction clearer. One of the most frequent
examples of a situation in which many people have a distinction
between their lead system and their representational system is the
experience called jealousy. Typically, when a person is jealous and
cannot “get control over their feelings,” they are making visual
images and/or auditory internal tape loops about what could be
happening between the person they are jealous of and someone
else. They then become aware of feeling angry, sad, uncomfortable or whatever feeling would be appropriate if what
they are imaging and/or hearing internally were occurring right
before them. Thus the visual and/or auditory portions of their
experience generated internally lead their K system or feelings.
When those visual images and/or auditory internal tape loops are
outside of consciousness, they are aware only of the feelings, and
typically have great difficulty coping as they have no idea where
the feelings are coming from or how to response to as to have
some choice in the matter (see fuzzy functions, part III, The
Structure of Magic, volume II for further discussion).
Many therapists and hypnotists we have had the privilege of
training mention early in their contact with us that many of the
distinctions which we offer in our models “make sense” out of
some of the intuitions which they have developed and found
useful in their work. Upon exploring those intuitions with them,
the typical result is that they have learned to detect minimal cues
visually and auditorially (especially, Az — the tonal and tempo
portion of the A system) which they represent as body sensations.
They know by the "feel of things” when a client is ready for some
particular change, or when they are being incongruent or when the
session has reached a natural finishing point or when the client has
some “unfinished business”. This is another example of the
distinction between lead and representational system. These
therapists and hypnotists are leading with their ability to make fine
visual and auditory distinctions unconsciously and are representing the result of making those unconscious sensory
distinctions in their K systems in consciousness.
The situation so frequently encountered in psychotherapeutic
uses of hypnosis or with so-called “impossible” clients who desire
hypnosis in conjunction with dental or medical work but do not
respond appropriately to the more ritualistic approaches to
hypnosis —the situation where there is a difference between lead

[PAGE 046]

42 / LEADSYSTEM


system and representational system — can be usefully understood
as a special case of incongruity. Specifically, it is the failure to
match representational system and lead system. This form of
incongruity is particularly powerful as it is a form incongruity —
as opposed to a content incongruity. The actual patterns of
making meaning are involved in the incongruity. As with all of the
patterns we have presented, there is nothing inherently positive or
negative about organizing your experience with fuzzy functions.
In the context both of the psychotherapeutic applications of
hypnosis and with “impossible” clients in the dental and medical
applications of hypnosis, checking to determine whether there is a
match or mismatch between the client’s lead and representational
system will yield important information as to how to usefully
proceed effectively and creatively with such clients.
In terms of the hypnotist's response to clients who havea split
between their lead system and their representational system,
typically assisting them in having the choice both of bringing any
system they choose into consciousness and using any system as
lead resolves not only the specific “problem” they come to us for
help with, but gives them choices which allows them to make
pervasive change in any content area of their lives they choose.
More limited therapeutic goals involve arranging for. signals from
representational systems outside of consciousness to the client's
representational system (the one in consciousness) so that the
client comes to have some choice regarding the “problem”
involved. When you as a hypnotist encounter the situation where
there is a distinction between the client's lead and representational
system, there are a number of powerful ways to utilize this
situation. One very dramatic choice is to mark analogically
in the
lead system; thereby passing instructions to the lead unconscious
system for the purposes of, say, inducing a profound trance. Since
the messages analogically presented are directed to the lead system
which is outside of consciousness for such clients, their
unconscious response is immediate and profound, and, of course,
they have no consciousness of what has occurred. Such is the
stuff from which what has traditionally been called magic is
created.

We present a transcript of a client seen by the authors which
includes some of the relevant procedures for detecting and
utilizing representational systems and lead systems.

[PAGE 047]

Transcript

Lindsey, a young woman about 26 years of age, enters the *
offices and nervously sits down.
Hypnotist: Are you Lindsey?
Lindsey :(eyes move up and to the left) yes
Hypnotist: What can.I do for you?
Lindsey: (eyes again move up and to the left) umm let's
see...A...l...well...(head nods up and down) I was hoping
that hypnosis could help me to be. . .un (eyes go up and to the left
again) not be depressed all the time, (Lindsey looks quickly at the
hypnotists) Is that stupid?
Hypnotist: (slowly moving his head back and forth no) Yes, in a
way there is no way I can help you not to be depressed but at the
same time hypnosis can help you.
Lindsey: (sighing with relief, looks up and to the left) I just feel
(places her hands on her chest at the midline and looks at the
hypnotist) I just feel down most of the time and I don’t know why.
I went for therapy and it just didn't help I don't...
Hypnotist: How do you know when you're depressed?
Lindsey: (looks up and to the left) I just feel (places her hands on
her chest at the midline...

In just this short excerpt, the hypnotist has enough information to
discern a tremendous amount about Lindsey.


(R <V,K, Ay O> ——-—>(V*)
4R <V, K, At, O > ——>yKi)

Lindsey, in the example, is typically either aware of
kinesthetic internal or visual external. Changing her consciousness
implies shifting her consciousness to experiences normally outside
these realms. We also know that for Lindsey the kinesthetic
internal experiences themselves are derived from visual internal
processes — that she experiences body sensations which are
appropriate for the internally generated visual images. When
asked how does she know she is depressed, she first looks up and
to the left and then says she just feels depressed. The acute

[PAGE 048]

44 / TRANSCRIPT


observer will become aware that this is a common pattern in the
clients who come in for therapy. Such clients are running some
internal process outside of consciousness and also typically out of
control. Lindsey, for example in this case, turns out to be
visualizing herself being alone, bored...She is unaware of this
visualization process — she is only aware of the negative feélings
she described as depression. Thus, Lindsey presents an excellent
examples of the distinction between a person's lead sytem and
their representational system.
The trance work used with Lindsey proceeded in the
following way. First, altering Lindsey’s consciousness would first
mean shifting her from the processing strategies she was operating
out of to some altered state of consciousness which would allow
her to exercise some control over the “problem” she needs
assistance with. Since her difficulty revolves around a fuzzy
function involving her generating internal visual images outside of
consciousness and then experiencing kinesthetically the feelings
which are appropriately associated with those internally generated
visual images, there are two altered states which would be of
immediate obvious assistance in her gaining some control over her
“problem: either,


R <V, K, Ap O> >(K*)
or

R <V, K, Ay, O> > vi)


In words, if Lindsay learns to alter her consciousness in a way
which allows her either to attend in consciousness to kinesthetic
sensations externally generated (KÉ) or to visual images
internally generated (V! ), then she will have effectively broken
the fuzzy function which generates her “problem”. Specifically,
these two choices represent Lindsay gaining control over her own
processes either by attending to her actual kinesthetic contact with
the world (for example, the feeling of the chair, the freshness of
the air on her face, the warmth where her right leg is crossed over
her left...) or by bringing into consciousness the internal
representational system which is her lead system, visual images
internally generated.

[PAGE 049]

TRANSCRIPT / 45


Notice the generalization here is that in the case of a client
who desires psychotherapeutic assistance and who has a mismatch
between her representational system and her lead system, one
particularly powerful choice is to re-align those two systems to
that they coincide. Thus the hypnotist may work to bring the lead
system to consciousness and thereby give the client choices by
giving her conscious access to her lead system, or by making her
representational system the lead system. Whichever choice the
hypnotist makes, the result is that the client’s lead and
representational system coincide—a state of congruity.
We proceeded consistently with principles presented earlier; (1)
induction into trance is enhanced to the degree that the client pays
increasing attention to internally generated stimuli to the exclusion
of externally based experience : the shift from the e superscript to
the ¢ superscript; and (2) induction into trance will involve pacing
the client, meeting her at her model of the world : the client’s R
Operator. Thus, the authors paced Lindsay effectively by
responding with kinesthetic predicates and using the principle of
representational system overlap, we led Lindsey into an altered
state of consciousness: specifically, she became aware of visual
images internally generated. This altered state served as a
reference experience and gives her a choice through which she can
access into consciousness (the altered state) the visual images
which are the sources of the feelings of depression she experiences.
Lindsey proved to be a rather alert and rapid learner and
succeeded in achieving the altered state quickly. Had she
experienced any difficulty in this process, the authors would have,
as we have with other clients, paced her consciousness with
kinesthetic predicates (her R operator is K) while simultaneously
marking out portions of our ongoing communications with visual
markers (her L operator is V); that is, specific body postures,
hand and arm movements, facial expressions,...to covertly
induce an altered state from which we could assist her in creating
the altered states of consciousness she needed to have a choice
about her “problem.”
One additional comment can usefully be made regarding the
Lindsey transcript. We have noticed .a tendency among the
hypnotists who we have had the opportunity to work with to rely
on relatively ritualistic and mechanical induction procedures in
developing altered states of consciousness with their clients. The
result of such activity is the creation with their clients of a

[PAGE 050]

46 / TRANSCRIPT


relatively homogenous altered state of consciousness which is the
hypnotist's Complex Equivalence for trance. Typically, the
hypnotist involved will then carry out the therapeutic, dental or
medical work to be accomplished. In the cases where this
procedure is successful, we applaud. However, these hypnotists
often report to us that they encounter resistant clients and that the
work which they perform in the altered state is not always
successful. In those cases, we strongly recommend that to the
hypnotists involved that they increase their own flexibility in their
induction and utilization procedures and further that they tailor
the altered state of consciousness that they create with their clients
precisely to the needs of the clients. There are as many altered
states as there is creativity on the part of each person who works
as a communicator or explores his own consciousness. The
mixture of the externally generated and internally generated states
are infinite. We would recommend to the reader that he create for
himself as many choices as possible — keeping in mind that the
creation of an altered state or trance is useful for some purpose.
Some altered states will be more useful for certain purposes than
others. Part of the real art of hypnosis, and communication in
general, is the ability of the communicator to assist those he
communicates with to achieve a desirable state for the purposes of
thecommunication. The 4-tuple model with theí¿ } ,t/p Ay ‚R and
L distinctions offered a very specific way of generating altered
states.

We wish to offer a meta-comment at this point regarding
generalizations such as the one regarding visual accessing clues. In
our opinion, there is no substitute for the communicator/
hypnotist developing his or her ability to make finer and finer
sensory distinctions — there is no substitute for the ability to see,
hear, feel and smell. The underlying theme which runs
consistently through our work — the purpose of the various
models which we have created whether in The Structure of Magic
series (with Virginia Satir), the Patterns series or the Changing
with Families — is to develop models which tune people who use
the models to their sensory experience. We offer these models as a
way to create sensory experience for yourselves — essentially a set
of sensory distinctions and patterns of those sensory distinctions.
In our experience, there is a strong tendency for theories or models
(particularly statistic models) to replace or be used in substitution

[PAGE 051]

TRANSCRIPT / 47


for experience. Statistical studies, for example, which state that a
certain percentage of the general population is hypnotizable, or
capable of some set of deep trance phenomena are frequently used
by some practitioners of hypnosis as an explanation when they do
not adequately pace and lead a client into an altered state of
consciousness. We have two comments regarding such studies:
first, we understand such studies to be simply a test of the
effectiveness of a particular set of specified inductions or deep
trance utilization techniques. As such, a set of rigid techniques
constitute a model; and as with all models, such a set needs to be
evaluated by how useful it is for the purposes it is designed. If the
set of techniques yields the result that a high percentage of the
population is hypnotizable or capable of deep trance phenomena,
then the model is useful for those purposes; and we may begin to
explore and develop ways to assist the small percentage of people
who do not respond successfully to that rigid set of techniques to
create those useful experiences. If the set of techniques yields
results that claim a low percentage of the population is
hypnotizable or capable of deep trance phenomena, then
consistent with the scientific principles of model construction,
such models should be junked. The only other justification for
such models which we can conceive of is to convince practitioners
of hypnosis that they should expect to fail with a certain number
of their clients. As hypnotists, each of us is already aware of the
power of such suggestions or self-fulfilling prophecies. Secondly,
statistical studies rarely present in descriptive language distinctions in the sensory experience of either the hypnotist or the
client, and thereby fail to provide the practitioners with a specific
means to train him or herself to detect with sensory experience the
response of the unique person who he or she is communicating
with at that particular moment in time. The emphasis is typically
on the techniques not on the response of the human being who is
attempting to response to the technique. Erickson states the case
quite adequately:


A primary problem in all hypnotic work is the induction of
Satisfactory trance states. Especially is this true in any work
based upon deep hypnosis. Even the problem of inducing light
trance states and maintaining them at a constant level is often a

[PAGE 052]

48 / TRANSCRIPT


difficult task. The securing of comparable degrees of hypnosis in
different subjects and similar trance states in the same subject at
different times frequently constitutes a major problem.
The reasons for these difficulties derive from the fact that
hypnosis depends upon inter- and intrapersonal relationships.
Such relationships are inconstant and alter in accord with
personality reactions to each hypnotic development. Additionally, each individual personality is unique and its patterns of
spontaneous and responsive behavior necessarily vary in relation
to time, situation, purposes served, and the personalities
involved.
Statistically, certain averages may be obtained for hypnotic
behavior but such averages do not represent the performance of
any one subject. Hence, they cannot be used to appraise either
individual performances or specific hypnotic phenomena. To
judge trance depths and hypnotic responses, consideration must
be given not only to average responses but to the various
deviations from the average that may be manifested by the
individual. For example, catalepsy is a fairly standard form of
hypnotic behavior appearing usually in the light trance and
persisting in the deep trance states. However, extensive
experience will disclose that some subjects may never
spontaneously develop catalepsy a single phenomenon either in
the light or deep trance. Others may manifest it only in the lighter
stages of hypnosis, some only in the profound trances, and some
only in the transition from the light to the deeper levels of
hypnosis. Even more confusing are those subjects who manifest
it only in relation to other types of hypnotic behavior, such as
amnesia. However good an indicator of trance states catalepsy
may be on the average, its presence or absence for any one
subject must be Interpreted entirely in terms of that subject's
total hypnotic behavior.
Efforts have been made to solve some of these difficulties by
developing special techniques for the induction and regulation of
hypnotic trances sometimes with little regard for the nature of
hypnotic behavior. One of the most absurd of these endeavors,
illustrative of a frequent tendency to disregard hypnosis as a
phenomenon in favor of an induction technique as a rigidly
controllable process apart from the subjects behavior, was the
making of phonograph records. This was done on the
assumption that identical suggestions would induce identical

[PAGE 053]

TRANSCRIPT / 49


hypnotic responses in different subjects and at different times.
There was a complete oversight of the individuality of subjects,
their varying capacities to learn and to respond, and their
differing attitudes, frames of reference, and purposes for
engaging in hypnotic work. There was oversight of the importance of interpersonal relationships and of the fact that these
are both contingent and dependent upon the intrapsychic or
intrapersonal relationships of the subject.
Even in so established a field as pharmacology, a
standardized dose of a drug is actually an approximation so far as
the individual’s physiological response is concerned. When
thought is given to the difficulty of “standardizing” such
intangibles as inter- and intrapersonal relationships, the futility
of a rigid hypnotic technique to “secure controlled results” is
apparent. An awareness of the variability of human behavior and
the need to meet it should be the basis of all hypnotic
techniques.
Another important general consideration in trance induction
concerns the appreciation of time as a factor in itself.
Traditionally, the mystic force of a simple glance from the eagle
eye is sufficient to induce hypnosis. This misconception has not
really been discredited since statements can be found in current
literature to the effect that 2-5 minutes’ time is sufficient to
induce the profound neuro- and psychophysiological changes of
hypnosis. When administering a powerful drug, these same
writers would wait a reasonable time for its effects. The
expectation of practically instantaneous results from the spoken
word indicates an uncritical approach which militates against
scientifically valid results. Unfortunately, much public work has
been based upon an unrecognized belief in the immediate
omnipotence of hypnotic suggestions and a failure to appreciate
that responsive behavior in the hypnotic subject, as in the
unhypnotized person, depends upon a time factor. The hypnotic
subject is often expected, in a few moments, to reorient himself
completely psychologically and physiologically, and to perform
complex tesks ordinarily impossible in the nonhypnotic state.
Subjects vary in respect to time requirements, and their time
requirements vary greatly from one type of behavior to another,
and also in relation to their immediate frame of reference. Some
subjects who can develop visual hallucinations promptly may
require a relatively prolonged time to develop auditory hallucina-

[PAGE 054]

50 / TRANSCRIPT


tions. The presence of a certain mood may facilitate or hinder
hypnotic responses. Incidental considerations may interfere with
the development of hypnotic phenomena ordinarily possible for
the subject. The fact that the author is a psychiatrist has more
than once militated against a subject’s readily developing
auditory hallucinations.
The oversight and actual neglect of time as an important
factor in hypnosis and the disregard of the individual needs of
subjects account for much contradiction in hypnotic studies.
Published estimates of the hypnotizability of the general
population range from 5-70 percent and even higher. The lower
estimates are often due to a disregard of time as an important
factor in the development of hypnotic behavior. Personal
experience extending over 35 years with well over 3,500 hypnotic
subjects has been the most convincing of the importance of
subject individuality and time values. One of the author’s most
capable subjects required less than 30 seconds to develop his
first profound trance, with subsequently equally rapid and
consistently retiable hypnotic behavior. A second remarkably
competent subject required 300 hours of systematic labor before
a trance was even induced; thereafter, a 20-30 minute period of
trance induction was requisite to secure valid hypnotic behavior.
Now, more specific discussion will be offered concerning
the nature of deep trances and their induction, but not with any
view of trying to describe a specific technical procedure. The
variability of subjects, the individuality of their general and
immediate needs, their differences in time and situation requirements, the uniqueness of their personalities and capabilities,
together with the demands made by the projected work, render
impossible any absolutely rigid procedure. At best, a rigid
procedure can be employed to determine its effectiveness in
securing certain results; as such, it is a measure of itself
primarily and not of the inherent nature of the results obtained.
Milton H. Erickson, Deep Trance and its
Induction, Haley (ed.), 1967, pp. 7-11.

[PAGE 055]

TRANSCRIPT / 51


Thus, when we state in the foregoing section that right handed
people look up and to the left when they are accessing eidetic
images, we wish to call your attention to the fact that you can
come to understand a great deal about another person's experience
by attending to their eye scanning patterns and that further, for a
certain class of people (right-handed people) when they look up
and to the left, they bring into consciousness visual images of
actual experiences from the past. We offer this to you as a way for
you to organize your experience make sensory distinctions which
will enable you to be more effective in your hypnotic
communication. Essentially, we present this to you as one
particular way of seeing and utilizing non-verbal communications.
As with every pattern in the models we have created, this is a
generalization, and as with all generalizations, it will fail to be
useful for some particular client at some particular point
in time.
We caution you then that when the generalizations or patterns we
offer in our models do not match the sensory experience you have
of the client you work with, the generalization is to be adjusted,
not the human being. Further, you are to be complimented; your
ability to detect the lack of match between the patterns we offer
and the sensory experience you have of your client presupposes
both that you have succeeded in internalizing the patterns
presented in a model; a successful learning task accomplished by
you, and more importantly, that you have tuned yourself in to the
infinitely rich world of sensory experience.

[PAGE 056]

Accessing Techniques


One of the principles which Milton H. Erickson, M.D. of
Phoenix, Arizona, has emphasized over and again is that the client
has in his or her history, experiences which, when properly
utilized, can form the basis for the change they desire. If you
accept this principle, then the question becomes how you as a
hypnotist/communicator can access and utilize the client's
experiences which will provide the resources for the changes
desired. We proceed now to a presentation of specific techniques
for accomplishing this.
Internal processing of information can occur in any
representational system. Our understanding is that people make
meaning out of language by accessing pieces of past 4-tuples. For
example, most of you know what the word comfort means; but
how many of you know how you know what the word comfort
means? When the name, the word, is uttered, it serves as an
anchor to retrieve the 4-tuple it is the name of. When I say comfort
some past 4-tuple or set of 4-tuples associated with the name
comfort is accessed internally. Some feeling, some picture, some
sound and some smell are accessed at the unconscious level. Only
a portion of this 4-tuple or set of 4-tuples will be accessed in
consciousness. As the 4-tuple arises into consciousness or a
portion of comes into consciousness, people typically use some
body movement or eye scanning pattern to access the information.
The information accessed is the meaning of the word or words. Let
us return momentarily to one of the most fascinating aspects of
communication — as you read the words on this page, they will
convey meaning to you. Whether or not the exact meaning we
intend is the one you will understand is very questionable, but you
will have some “understanding” of what we are saying. The degree
to which you understand what we intend will be the degree to
which we have communicated. We have stated words can be

[PAGE 057]

54 / ACCESSING TECHNIQUE


understood as labels or anchors which trigger past 4-tuples. If we
say or write the word comfort,how do you understand what its
meaning is? Our understanding is that at some time you or
someone around you was feeling comfort, and they labelled it,
attached, if you will, an anchor to some experience. Perhaps this
happened a number of times. And now when you hear the word it
triggers or accesses at the unconscious level one or more of those
past 4-tuples. At the unconscious level, a 4-tuple for comfort is
accessed. You may be conscious of a portion of this, and feel,
minimally, some comfort or see yourself or someone else being
comfortable. This can be represented by the R operator on the
4-tuple accessed at the unconscious level. Meaning is made in
present experience out of the sum total of past experiences.
we
Frequently, in describing in words some previous experience,
so effectively access the entire set of 4-tuples at the unconscious
level that the unconsciously accessed experience spills over into
our present behavior and we re-live it; the couple, for example,
who describe a previous quarrel so well that they end up fighting
again. Erickson presents a personal example of the phenomenon:


While relating to a friend in great detail the events of a trip made
ten years previously in the Rocky Mountains with a car having a
floor shift the author, who was driving in a steering wheel shift
car which he had driven for more than five years, suddenly saw a
red light and sought frantically with his right hand to find the
floor shift to put the engine into neutral while his friend watched
in amazement. The car was stopped only by the expedient of
jamming the brake and turning off the ignition before the author
realized that the vividness and extensiveness of his memories
about the past trip had extended over into the field of
unrecognized associated motor memories.
Milton H. Erickson, The Confusion Tech-
nique in Hypnosis, Haley (ed.), 1967, page
134. :


Words are useful for communication in that they are anchors
which trigger past 4-tuples. The word “horse” is meaningful if you
have some experience of a horse, seeing it, touching it, hearing it,
smelling it; either directly or through a movie or a picture of it. A
human being who never had any contact with a horse or a

[PAGE 058]

ACCESSING TECHNIQUE / 55


representation of a horse would not have a meaning for the word.
If you were communicating with this person verbally, you would
perhaps describe it as big, with four legs, able to run very
fast... .The listener would access past experiences of big animals
with four legs and experiences of fast animal in order to try to get
an idea of the meaning that you as the speaker were trying to
convey. Unicorns do not exist — yet we can understand the
meaning of the word unicorn by combining an image of a horse
with the tusk or horn of a narwhal. Constructed images of this
nature can then serve as a reference structure for understanding
just as primary experience does. What this means to the
hypnotist/communicator is that any experience, whether internallyor externally generated, can serve as a valid reference
structure for future understanding and behavior. Further, past
4-tuples can be combined to make new 4-tuples. which can serve as
a future basis for understanding, learning and behavior. This is
one of the most important patterns for the agent of change
(psychotherapeutic) practitioner of hypnosis.

The notions of anchoring (both verbally and non-verbally) and
Transderivational Search provide the hypnotist/communicator
with precisely the tools needed to access and anchor or stabilize
the resources from the client’s own personal history which the
client needs to make the changes he or she desires.
Let us digress a moment and review a portion of Patterns I on
the subject of Transderivational Search. First keep in mind the
important fact that all the verbal patterns have their counterparts
in the analogue systems. For example, consider deletion — a.
linguistic phenomenon which has its counterpart in all
representational systems. We delete a natural part of our
unconscious modeling, much of what is available to us. One way
to understand this is to consider the R-operator on the 4-tuple.
Essentially, all the portions of our experience which is rare — not
available in our consciousness. The notion of transderivational
search also has its counterpart in the analogue system. First, let us
review it briefly in the context of language patterns:


In our everyday communications with the people around us,
we employ a set of language processing strategies which allow
us to extract from the speech of others the meaning of the words,

[PAGE 059]

56 / ACCESSING TECHNIQUE


phrases and sentences which they use. These language
processing strategies are the research domain for psycholinguists (see, for example, references for Bever and for Slobin in
the Bibiliography). Erickson has succeeded in utilizing these
language processing mechanisms in a way which allows him to
communicate with both the conscious and the unconscious
portions of the client’s mind. Essentially, he accomplishes this
by presenting the client with a Surface Structure of English which
activates the normally conscious mind-processing mechanisms.
At the same time, he activates additional meaning recovery
processes which develop meanings which are available to the
unconscious portion of the client’s mind but not of the conscious
portion. ..We begin by reviewing the basic linguistic distinctions
necessary for an understanding of these techniques (see Magic
I, Appendix A, for fuller discussion).


Each sentence of every natural language has two distinct
representations: the representation of the way it actually sounds
(or, if.written, the way It actually appears), called the Surface
Structure, and the representation of the meaning which it has,
called the Deep Structure. For example, when a person says the
sentence:


The window was broken.


the Surface Structure Is the representation of the actual sounds
made by the person speaking, or, in the case of a written
representation, the words written out, as above. in addition to
this representation, this sentence is associated with another
representation which is the meaning it has — the Deep Structure.
In this particular case, the Deep Structure can be represented as:


PAST (BREAK [someone, window, with something])


This Deep Structure representation Is designed to capture the
intuition that each of us has as a native speaker of English that,
when we hear the Surface Structure presented above, we
understand the following:

[PAGE 060]

ACCESSING TECHNIQUE / 57


(a) Some event occurred in the PAST;
(b) The event was a complex event having the following
parts:
(1) An action — BREAK — which occurred between:
a. The agent — some person or thing doing the
breaking — here represented by someone;
b. The object — some person or thing being
broken — here represented by the window;
c. The instrument — the thing used to do the
breaking:
— here represented by with some
thing.

Notice that, even though not all of the parts of the Deep Structure
representation appear in the Surface Structure (in this case, the
agent and the instrument are not represented in the Surface
Structure), the native speaker of English has that information
available in his understanding of the sentence. The ways in which
Surface Structures can differ from their associated Deep
Structures in the research domain of tranformational linguists.
They have postulated a series of formal mapping operations
called transformations which specify precisely how Deep and
Surface Structures may differ — the entire process which links a
Deep Structure to its Surface Structure(s) Is called a derivation.


deep structure \


' ~ — — derivation


surface structure /


With these basic linguistic distinctions, we may begin a
presentation of the patterns themselves.

[PAGE 061]

Transderivatonal Search — Generalized
Referential Index


One of Erickson’s favorite devices, employed when the client
is in both trance and “normal” state of awareness, is for him to
tell a story. This story, typically, begins with the phrase: / had a
patient once... Erickson then proceeds to describe some actual
or created-on-the-spot version of an experience which will be
relevant to the person to whom he is presently speaking. The
amount of relevance which the story has depends upon how
direct Erickson wishes to be in his communications; in general,
this will depend upon the depth of the client's trance. Erickson
employs the principle that the client will respond bestif the
relevance of the story is just outside the client's conscious
awareness. This is an example of the transderivational search for
meaning spurred by the use of a generalized referential index. If
Erickson utters the sentence:


You can focus your eyes on the corner of...


the noun you has the referential index of the client — the person
to whom Erickson is talking — and the client is conscious that
Erickson intends the word you to refer to him. However, when
Erickson says:


lhad a patientonce...


the client's normal linguistic processing mechanisms derive from
that Surface Structure a Deep Structure meaning which contains
no noun which refers to the client himself. Similarly, when a
client hears the following phrases :

[PAGE 062]

60 / TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH


People can make the most of learning opportunities...
Aman once Sat in that very chair and felt nervous...
A waitress wanted to have an important thing for self...


he constructs for himself a Deep Structure which includes no
occurrence of a noun which has his own referential index as a
part. Erickson’s behavior and the response which he secures
from his clients, as well as our own experience and the responses
which we consistently secure from our clients, have convinced us
that there is an extra bit of linguistic processing which occurs at
the unconscious level. The most useful model which we have
found to assist us in organizing our own experience, as well as
building a model for Erickson’s work, is that of the
transderivational search. This process operates as follows:


(a) The client hears a well-formed Surface Structure;
(b) The client recovers the associated Deep Structure and is
aware of the meaning of that Deep Structure, one which
has no direct reference to him;
(c) The client activates a transderivational search for at the
unconscious level for an additional Deep Structure which
is more relevant for his ongoing experience.

This last step requires more explanation. Clients do not randomly
generate additional Deep Structures; rather, the Deep Structures
which they generate are systematically related to the originally
recovered Deep Structure. Specifically, they generate Deep
Structures which are identical in form to the recovered Deep
Structure except that they substitute nouns with referential
indices which pick out portions of their ongoing behavior, thus
making them maximally relevant for themselves. We illustrate by
example. The client hears the Surface Structure:


People can make the most of learning opportunities.


The normal linguistic processing mechanisms apply, deriving the
associated Deep Structure:

[PAGE 063]

TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH / 61


POSSIBLE (MAKE MOST [EVERY (people, learning oppor-
tunities)])


So, presenting the entire process to this point in a visual
display, we have:


POSS (MAKE MOST [EVERY (people, learning opportuni-
ties)))


an == — — derivation
1


0


People can make the most ouf of learning opportunities.


Now, by the principle of transderivational search, the client
begins the unconscious process of finding a Deep Structure
which is identical in form to the recovered Deep Structure with
nouns with referential indices relevant to his ongoing experience,
substituted into the positions of the nouns which are in the
recovered Deep Structure but which have no referential index
relevant to the client's ongoing experience. Therefore, the newly
generated Deep Structures will be identical to the recovered one
with new nouns substituted in those positions. The client will
generate, among others, the following Deep Structure:


POSSIBLE(MAKE MOST [I, this specific learning opportunity] )


in other words, among the Deep Structures identical with the one
originally recovered is the one above — one which has the
associated Surface Structure:


(the client) can make the most out of this learning opportunity

[PAGE 064]

62 / TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH


Thus, by the process of transderivational search, the client
generates the meaning which is maximally relevant for his
ongoing experience. By this technique, Erickson successfully
paces the client’s ongoing experience, allows the client maximal
freedom to create meaning for himself and, thereby, participate
actively in the process of communication, and avoids instructing
the client in a way of which he is conscious (no “resistance”
could possibly arise as no direction to resist has been given by
Erickson)....
In other words, the client recovers the Deep Structure which
corresponds to the Surface Structure Erickson utters, then he
generates a series of Deep Structures identical up to the
referential indices. From this set, the client then selects the Deep
Structure which is most relevant for his ongoing experience.

Patterns of the Hypnotic Techniques of
Milton H. Erickson, M.D., Volume I, p.
217-222.


We now extend this notion explicitly to the analogue systems
and say that the listener in this situation not only generates a set of
well formed deep structures, but also the corresponding sets of
4-tuples from which the deep structures themselves were derived.
Thus, words are anchors for past 4-tuples—phrases are sequences
of 4-tuples which combine into meaningful patterns of conscious
and unconscious understanding.* When we’ask a question, it is in
essence a request for the person responding to bring into
consciousness the result of a transderivational search. 1 might, for
example, as you, when was the first time you met Milton H.
Erickson, M.D.? If you are a person with a highly visual
representational system, you might first picture Milton and then
flip through a series of backgrounds till you saw the right one. If
you are a person with a highly developed kinesthetic
representational system, you might have a certain feeling which
triggers the body sensations associated with a certain place and
time which identify your experience of Erickson. If you are a
person with a highly auditory representational system you might
hear the sound of Milton’s voice, and listen attentively to the
surrounding noises to recover the time and place. All these
example of transderivational search in analogue sytems. Words

[PAGE 065]

TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH / 63


serve to access understandings working as anchors for past
4-tuples, combining them at the conscious as well as at the
unconscious level to make “new meaning” or just triggering past
memories (4-tuples) intact.
Words, however, are not the only anchors which trigger past
4-tuples. Any portion of any variable of any past 4-tuple can serve
as a trigger to access the full past 4-tuple. Check your own
experience—have you ever gone into an older person’s home and
the smell sent you back to memories of your grandmother's house?
Or have you ever been walking down the street and smelled the
scent of fresh-cut grass and went back to childhood memories of
your father cutting grass. The O variable of the 4-tuple has, in our
experience of selecting and using different lead system in the
process of transderivational search proven itself consistently the
most powerful choice for moving rapidly through time and space.
Having a client smell their blankie, cookies in their grand mother’s
house. ..produces immediate and profound age regression. The
olfactory tracts are the only one of the sensory tracts which do not
pass through the thalamic area, having direct cortical projections.
Have you ever seen someone who reminded you of an old
friend and thought about some experience you enjoyed with that
friend? When a couple says: “they are playing our song,” they are
explicitly stating that a certain song is an anchor which accesses
memories of 4-tuples of some other time and place and likely the
pleasures that went along with the past 4-tuple of falling in love.
Photographs in the family album, jingles for coca cola, sound
effects in the movies, are all examples of anchors that are familiar
to all of us in this culture. Transderivational search is such a
common feature of our spontaneous, typically unconsciousness
behavior that people in our Training Seminars have some initial
difficulty in identifying it.
Perhaps some of you have had the following experience. You
are ready to leave the house but you are unable to find your car
keys. One sequence of transderivational searches you might go
through would be the following: First you might ask in words (Ag
as lead in the Transderivational Search) whether anyone knows
where your car keys are (essentially, getting other people to do the
Transderivational Search for you). Next you might attempt to
visualize (V! as lead) where you left them. You might then listen
(Ai as lead) to the sound the car keys made hitting the surface you
put them down on. Finally, you could walk over the the door

[PAGE 066]

64 / TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH


(where you know for certain you last had them with you) and
walk into the house (K as lead) again to re-activate the motor
programs from the time/space coordinates in which you last had
the keys. The strategy of using the different variables of the
4-tuple (A¿A¿V,K, O )as lead/representational system (L and
R operators) in accessing and organizing experience presupposes
that you have a choice of altering your consciousness. Our
experience leads us to believe that when we understand language,
the Ag portion of the complete Complex Equivalence (the word
plus the 4-tuples which is the meaningful segment of language.
Typically, we experience in consciousness only the portions of the
4-tuple(s) which are in our most highly valued representational
system (the R-operator).
We first began to suspect that the whole past 4-tuple is
accessed by naming it when as hypnotists we began asking clients
and participants in our seminars and workshops whether they had
ever been in a deep trance. Similarly at lectures we would
frequently ask people if they had ever met Milton H. Erickson
M.D. of Phoenix, Arizona. Preceding or concommitant with an
affirmative answer to this question, the person with whom we
were talking would drop into trance momentarily. If we lifted
their left arm catalepsy was evident and a few suggestions would
deepen the trance with ease. We also had learned from Milton H.
Erickson that it is useful to give clients a signal for re-induction
after a deep trance had been obtained to facilitate an immediate
return to deep trance should it prove useful at some later date.
This re-inductionsignal could be a word, a particular tonal quality
to my voice, a kinesthetic sensation such as a squeeze on the
wrist—in fact, any part of any variable of the 4-tuple of deep
trance. At first, we thought of these as simple post-hypnotic
suggestions? But what does it mean to carry out post-hypnotic
suggestions? Thus, we now find it more useful to regard re-
induction signals as a special type ofanchor; an anchor which
accesses the 4-tuple of deep trance. This explains what makes
amnesia for post-hypnotic suggestions possible—they are 4-tuples
and anchors for 4-tuples which are in»R systems and therefore are
disassociated enough that conscious access by the client's normal
R operator is not available. The post-hypnotic behavior of trance
subjects and ordinary people carrying out TOTES such as shaking
hands, lighting a cigarette, turning the page, or answering the
telephone is very similar. In both states, if the subject is

[PAGE 067]

TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH / 65


interrupted, there is a momentary lack of response and, if useful, a
trance can be easily induced almost instantly. In both cases eye
dilation is evident, and in both cases raising of the client's arm
reveals catalepsy. In fact, we have found that marking a word in a
sentence, either tonally, visually, or kinesthetically, accesses
whole 4-tuples associated with the experience named. For
example, late one night in an evening seminar some of the students
began to tire and become sleepy when the circumstances required
full attention. One of the authors asked the group if they had
noticed anyone exceptionally ALERT (this word was marked with
exaggerated tonality) in the group tonight and they did.
Erickson has detailed an exquisite example of the use of
kinesthetic transderivational search as a trance induction. Notice
how in the following excerpt Erickson instructs the boy to use the
K variable of the 4-tuple which he desires to access to transport
himself back through time and space.


Another highly technical and complicated procedure of
trance induction was developed that summer and repeated in
many variations, but with no real understanding at that time of
what was involved. A sixteen-year-old boy, who regularly drove a
milk wagon, had never before been hypnotized. He was asked to
sit quietly in a chair and silently review in his own mind every
feeling throughout his body as he systematically recalled the
events of the twenty-mile milk route over which he regularly drove
a team of horses. The further explanation was given that, even as
one can remember names, places, things and events, so could
one remember body feelings of all sorts and kinds. This he was to
do by sitting quietly in the chair with his eyes closed and to
imagine himself driving along the highway, feeling the reins in
his hands and the motions of the wagon and of the wagon seat.
Shortly it was noticed that he was shifting his hands and
body in a manner suggestive of the actual experience of driving a
team of horses. Suddenly he braced his feet, leaned backward,
and presented the appearance of pulling hard on the reins.
Immediately he was asked, “What are you doing now?” His reply
was, as he opened his eyes, “Going down Coleman Hill.” (The
writer himself had often driven that same milk route in the same
wagon and recognized the characteristic behavior of handling the
team in going down that steep tortuous hill!)

[PAGE 068]

66 / TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH


Thereafter, with his eyes open and obviously in a somnambulistic trance, although he continued to sit in the chair, the boy
went through a long, slow process of seemingly driving the
horses, turning now right, now left, and heaving with his
shoulders as if lifting cans of milk, thus reliving largely the
experience of actually driving the milk route. The writer's own
experience with that same milk route permitted a ready
recognition of the progress being made along the route.
However, at one particular stretch of the road where there
were no farm houses, the boy went through the motions of
pulling on the reins and calling “whoa!” He was told to “drive on”
and replied “Can't.” After many futile efforts to induce him to
continue driving and always eliciting the same response of
“Can't,” he was asked why he couldn't. The taconic reply of
“Geese” was given. The writer immediately recalled that on
infrequent occasions in his own experience a certain flock of
geese happened to choose the moment of the milk wagon’s
arrival to cross the highway in single file on their way to another
pond, thus stopping traffic.
This first trance lasted several hours as the boy went through
the events of the “trip,” and it seemed impossible to break into
and interrupt it. Not until he turned the horses into the home
driveway could the trance be terminated.
This particular trip was repeated in later similarly induced
trances with similar results. The boy was also asked to relive
other trips, in none of which the geese happened to appear, but
his neglect of the established practice of letting the horses rest at
a certain customary spot was disclosed in one such reliving.
At the same time of this work, there was no recognition by
the writer of kinesthetic memories and iamges as a trance
induction technique, but it led to a systematic and profitable
investigation of the possibility of using any sensory modality as
a basic process in inducing hypnotic trances.

Milton Erickson, Historical Note on the
Hand Levitation and Other Ideomotor
Techniques, Haley (ed.), 1967, pages 89-90.

[PAGE 069]

TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH / 67


We wish to emphasize Erickson’s closing statement:


. Systematic and profitable investigation of the
possibility of using any sensory modality as a basic
process in inducing hypnotic trances.


Indeed, the generalization of the notion of transderivational
search from the verbal system (the Ag operator) to all the
variables of the 4-tuple (A; , K, V, O) is the representation in the
model we are presenting of the ”...systematic and profitable
investigation of the possibility of using any sensory modality...”


Those of you reading this book who have had any direct
experience of Gestalt work will recognize the same formal pattern
as it occurs in the context of Gestalt therapy. Typically, the
Gestalt therapist notices that the client is experiencing difficulty
responding in the present time/space coordinate, and will instruct
the client something like the following:


Now I want you to stay with those feelings, ..., in fact
intensify those feelings and let yourself drift back to
some other occasion on which you had exactly those
same feelings.


Essentially, the Gestalt therapist is instructing the client to use the
K variable of their ongoing 4-tuple as the lead system for a
transderivational search to access the set of past 4-tuples which
have the same body sensations (K variable held constant) which
constitute the “unfinished business” which is preventing the client
from having the choice of remaining in the present and responding
creatively. The so-called body therapies are an excellent example
of the use of the K system as an accessing device.

[PAGE 070]

68 / TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH


The process of transderivation search is constantly at work.
This accounts for the mixture of the externally and internally
generated experience that constitutes the state that most of us live
in. In fact, most of the work that the authors have done in the field
of communication can be understood as providing specific
techniques to allow the communicator to stay in up-time: that is,
to have no consciousness of the transderivational search process
while remaining congruent and creative in his responses. This
allows him to have the maximum amount of sensory experience by
using his 772 chunks of attention focused on externally generated
experience. Take, for example, the Meta Model for language we
presented in volume I of The Structure of Magic. This set of
language patterns is designed to allow communicators/therapists
to communicate verbally with a client about his difficulty by
asking questions based on form of the language he uses as opposed
to the content. So when a client says “I'm scared” the listener detects the pattern of syntactic deletion: (see Magic I, Chapters 3 and
4) and responds by asking for the missing portion of the language
representation — “Scared of what specifically?” This allows the
communicator to respond appropriately without going into
down-time (transderivational search within himself) to understand
the communication at the content level. The communicator in the
context of therapy who has learned the Meta Model has a TOTE
which allows him to respond effectively and creatively to the
client's utterance (of sentences with a deletion) without being
forced to remember what it feels like to be scared. Thus when the
client says “I'm scared”, the communicator does not need to
respond by accessing feelings and experiences of past fear. Having
this choice allows him to be effective for the purposes of therapy.
Specifically, it first keeps him from mixing up his experiences with
that of the client, (traditionally referred to as projection and
countertransference) and second, it allows him to stay inup-time
to attend to sensory experience to detect all the important
analogue messages that are constantly being offered by the client.
Each moment of down-time is a moment of lost communication
and the agent of change cannot afford to miss any messages if he is
going to assist his client in accomplishing powerful and lasting
change.
As we stated earlier, most of the learning that occurs is
primarily the sequencing of already available unconscious TOTEs
into new configurations, and with new content. As hypnotists/

[PAGE 071]

TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH / 69


therapists/communicators, it is a powerful learning to realize that
clients who come for assistance of any kind already have all the
resources they need to make the changes and accomplish their
goals. The help they need from us as communicators is to organize
the resources they already have in a way which is useful for their
particular needs. In fact, as hypnotists, it is important to
understand that each person has at some time in his life had an
experience in which he displayed the very resources he needs to
accomplish the changes he presently wants to make. Consider, for
example, the so-called deep trance phenomena of positive and
negative hallucinations. As children, we hallucinated freely in all
systems as a learning technique: playing house, cowboys and
Indians,.... Negative auditory hallucinations (not hearing what
someone says) are a major part of most people's everyday life. The
hypnotist need only organize these otherwise rather random
abilities to be utilized in a directed fashion for the specific purposes
of the hypnotic encounter. If we as communicators, for example,
ask a client to access five times when they have been really
creative in their past, and attach to the accessed 4-tuples the verbal
anchor of “creative part,” we then have assisted that client in
organizing his past experiences and learnings in such a way as to
create a ‘creative part.’ When we then later ask them to use this
creative part, the verbal label, the anchor, will access the common
portions of the past creative 4-tuples. This is one way, therapists
typically reorganize past experiences to assist clients in coping in
the present. An experience guided by the therapist in using the
“creative part” will then serve as a future reference structure for
making meaning just as the word “unicorn” does. Anchoring of
parts by name is, of course, only: one way to anchor and
reorganize resources and is an excellent choice for working with
the client’s conscious mind. Anchoring can be done covertly as
well, since the client will be aware only of a portion of his and the
hypnotist's ongoing communication. The hypnotist may anchor
4-tuples covertly selecting anchors (analogue markings) in any of
the clients“R-representational systems. As clients unconsciously
access 4-tuples, they can be anchored visually, kinesthetically, and
tonally as well. As a client describes past creative moments, a
specific touch (for example, a squeeze on the knee) can also be
used as a way of anchoring 4-tuples to create a resource for the
client. The use of anchors, whether convert or overt, constitutes
one of the primary tools of the agent of change working with
clients.

[PAGE 072]

70 / TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH


Erickson, during the many years he has spent systematically
exploring these possibilities, has used all of the systems (Ag, At,
V, K, O). At present, confined as he is to a wheelchair, his options
are somewhat reduced. Our experience of him leads us to believe
that his primary and most frequent choices of anchoring resources
with his clients are verbal (A q , especially metaphor, the subject
of volume III of the Patterns series), the tonal and tempo (A ¿ )
qualities of his voices and body postures shifts. This last is
particularly interesting. When the client Erickson is communicating with has his or her eyes open, the systematic
movements of Erickson's body is detected at the unconscious level
visually by the client. When the client has his or her eyes closed,
the systematic movements of Erickson’s body are detected
auditorily by the client as Erickson's voice is spatially dislocated
— a feature of communication subtle enough that it lies outside
the conscious appreciation of nearly everyone: thus, it constitutes
a very powerful anchoring choice.
In summary then, the tools of transderivational search and
anchoring constitute a set of basic techniques for the accessing and
stabilizing of precisely the resources that a client needs in order to
accomplish the change which they come to you for assistance
with. By generalizing the notion of transderivational search from
the verbal system to all variables of the 4-tuple, you as a
hypnotist have a full set of powerful, simple and elegant choices as
to how to proceed to assist the client in accessing the resources he
needs. The use of anchoring, whether overt or covert, provides
you with a full set of techniques for stabilizing the resources
accessed by the transderivational search techniques for stabilizing
the resources accessed by the transderivational search techniques
for use in creating the new choices the client desires.
Transderivational search and anchoring are purely formal
patterns extracted from the natural meaning making processes
employed by all of us typically at the unconscious level of
functioning. As such they have two very powerful properties:
first, they are a maximum pace of our ongoing unconscious
process — that is, they are the explicit representation of the
processes which we use spontaneously. As with all pacing patterns
(and especially those which pace unconscious processes), this
ensures that they will be powerful and effective tools of
communication. Secondly, transderivational search and anchoring are names for two formal or process patterns. Since they are

[PAGE 073]

TRANSDERIVATIONAL SEARCH / 71


formal, they each effectively represent a potentially infinite’
number of hypnotic communication choices — they can easily be
adapted for any particular content situation. Finally, as the astute
reader will have already noted, the pattern we call transderivational search is the name of the process of using some
particular lead system (the L operator) to access and/or organize
experience.
We introduce one final distinction into the 4-tuple model, that
of congruency. Suppose, for example, that you as a hypnotist ask
the client if he has ever been really creative and the client responds
verbally “Yes” however shakes his head no at the same time, the
communicator will have to do more than just anchor. He will have
to communicate with more than just one part ofthe client
simultaneously. This brings us to the next topic and the next
distinctionin the 4-tuple, the C operator. Very often your client
will have more than one part which is communicating at a single
point in time. All the communication will be a valid and useful
representation of the client’s experience. The effective communicator will need a way to organize his experience in order to
know how to communicate to the client who presents
multi-messages, especially those which do not agree with each
other.

[PAGE 074]

The C-Operator


Once you understand the limitations of consciousness you
can begin to understand both the necessity and usefulness of
unconscious programming of behavior. At any point in time, ti, a
person has some experience, that is, a 4-tuple. His R operator
determines what portion of that 4-tuple will be consciously
represented to him. The rest of the 4-tuple occurs and is stored in
memory and can be accessed into consciousness at some later
time. However, it is not represented consciously at the time tı,
when that 4-tuple initially occurs. This process of selective
awareness is both necessary and useful, but like any other useful
process of human modeling, it can also be used in a way that
immobilizes a person. R-operators on experience allow us as
human beings to process information in amounts we can handle.
However if we organize ourselves in such a way as to apply the
R-operator that we delete important information such as signals of
physical danger, this unconscious choice on consciousness can
have a negative result. For our purposes here, it is sufficient to
note at any time, tı , there will both Rand»R on a 4-tuple, such that
the following would be possible.


R< V, K, Au O> ——>(V)
and
wR
< V, K, Au O> —->(K, Ap, O)


A few examples will help to clarify:
Joel says to his wife Martha in a harsh tone, “I really liked
dinner, dear.” She turns to him and says, “Well, if you think you
can do better, do it yourself.” She begins to leave the room; he
says, “What's the matter with you? I said I liked it.” His voice is
angry but his facial expression is cowering and palms are turned
up. He turns to one of the authors and shrugs his shoulders. This

[PAGE 075]

74 / C-OPERATOR


kind of communication is commonplace to the astute observer/
listener. When Joel spoke to his wife Martha, her experience can
be represented as if she had applied an R operator.on the 4-tuple of
that experience that represented only A ¿into consciousness.


R< A; V, K, O> >(Af)
Martha


The words Joel used, how he looked. ..were not accessed into
consciousness.

~R< Ap V, K, O> >(V, K, O)
Martha

Joel similarly was aware only of the digital (words) aspect, and his
feeling when he spoke.

RiAg
< Au V, K, O>) ———->(Ki, AS)
Joel


As the authors elicited this information from both parties, they
agreed, “it was just a misunderstanding.” Happily Martha asked
Joel if he would like a cup of coffee. As Joel mumbled, “Sure,” he
shook his head back and forth no. The authors waited patiently to
discover how this would turn out. After a few minutes Joel
yelled out, “Where's the coffee?” (incidently at the same time
displaying an artificial smile to the authors), Martha returned only
to state that she thought he had said no. Joel then said he didn't
want coffee anyway.
How is one to make sense out of such experiences? To the
astute person such communications will be the rule not the
exception. How do Martha and Joel fail to represent the multiple
messages being communicated? This question is vital to the
student of human behavior. As the R-operator indicates, Joel is
limited to what he can represent in his own behavior. if his own
behavior is inconsistent and he represents only one part of the
inconsistency, he is said to be incongruent although he will not be
aware of it. We now define another operator on the 4-tuple, C for
congruency. When the messages carried by the variables of the
4-tuple and Aq are consistent with one another, we represent this
as:


C(Ag < V, K, At O >) ——->
Yes

[PAGE 076]

C-OPERATOR / 75


When the messages carried are not consistent with one another,
we have:


The C operator determines whether or not for any specific
4-tuple(s) being experienced or expressed at a point in time, t,,
the values for the variables Ay, V, K, O, and A gare consistent in
meaning. For example, when Joel says (Ag) Yes and shakes his
head “no” (K) the message value of the two of the variables are
inconsistent:

C (Ag < V, K, Ap O> ) > no


If a person were to communicate with words “yes” while shaking
his head up and down, sounding and looking affirmative, such
that all his output channels have messages which have meanings
which match, then he would be said to be congruent:


Similarly when Martha represents this same communication by
Joel of a verbal yes and a visual no, and she has conscious access
only to the visual dimensions of her experience, (her R-operator is
V), she will not be aware (~ R is K, O, A, A) of the no message.
The disassociation of two simultaneously presented inconsistent
messages allows Martha to respond to these two inconsistent
meanings from the world. However the unconscious portions of
the inconsistent 4-tuple ( R variables) are still accessed present.
Let us take another example. In a family therapy session
Frank tells Mary he loves her. As he does this he slowly and
unconsciously (involuntarily) moves his head back and forth no.
Mary looks at him knitting her eyebrows. The therapist asks Mary
if she believes Frank. She again hesitantly replies yes. The
therapist asks Mary about the hesitant tone of her yes. She replies,
“IT don’t know— it's just a feeling. I can't get a handle on it.” In this

[PAGE 077]

76 / C-OPERATOR


case when Mary was presented with incongruent communication
the R-operator brought the verbal message Ad into consciousness,
however the visual message which was in»R was represented
kinesthetically. In the session described, the therapist accused
Mary of not being totally honest. This accusation was a gross and
ungraceful simplification of the complex processes at work in this
communication. The therapist had failed to observe Frank's
incongruent communication, let alone to try to understand its
source. And it is that source we wish to now discuss. Was Frank
lying or was it accident that his head moved? These two answers
are both inadequate with respect to the complexities of human
beings. Any incongruent communication by a person is a
reflection of two (minimally) inconsistent models for their
behavior. Since consciousness is a limited phenomenon and the
R-operator determines what will be represented, then as the
R-operator shifts (as it typically does for most people), then
separate representations can be constructed and thus separate
models which may or may not be consistent with respect to being
guides for their behavior are created. Check your own experience,
have you seen something you wanted to try, but felt it was too
dangerous. Or conversely perhaps you have felt a longing for
something in your life, but saw it as to risky to try for. These are
common expressions and are frequently the result of inconsistent
representations or models for the same experience. If such
inconsistent models are expressed simultaneously, then the result
is incongruency such as the examples described above. (See Part
IL, The Structure of Magic, volume II for further discussion.)
The usefulness of the C-operator distiction is most evident in
the case of hypnotic communication with clients who are
incongruent — that is, clients who have more than one model for
their behavior and these model are inconsistent with one another.
To review briefly, there are two logical possibilities when the
client the hypnotist is working with has inconsistent models—
either the client expresses the conflicting models simultaneously or
the client expresses the conflicting models sequentially. The first
case—that of simultaneous incongruity—can be represented, as
we have stated:


C(A at” K, A,.O>) >no

[PAGE 078]

C-OPERATOR / 77


In other words, the messages carried by at least two of the output
systems do not match—this indicates to the hypnotist that the
client has conflicting models and that effective hypnotic communications will require that he communicate multiple messages
simultaneously to each of the models involved. The second
possibility —that of sequential incongruity—can be represented as:

no
4, AC ClAd< V, K, At, O > jtg—>
C (C(Ad< V, K, Ay OF)

while both

C (Ag<V, K, Ap, O> hi —> yes


and


The symbol C is used to identify the consistency operator when it
is used to compare the consistency of two or more complete
4-tuples at two or more distinct moments in time. Such is often the
case with clients who come for hypnosis for weight control. They
congruently state that they want
to lose weight, but when they try
to maintain a diet they inevitably fail. During the time tı when
they are expressing the desire to lose weight they are congruent—
that is, there is no model which contradicts the desire to lose
weight. However there is a model or models whch contradicts the
desire to not eat. Such models are often stronger than post
hypnotic suggestions, and in fact, work in much the same way. A
series of TOTES which constitute the act of going to the kitchen
and eating, are both disassociated and programmed to respond to
an anchor represented in one of the variables of the 4-tuple. So
very often the well meaning client is only discouraged to find him
or herself half-finished with a consciously unwanted trespass on
their vow of not eating. Many clients trigger the TOTE sequence
by internal imagery of food, or the mention of food with internal
dialgoue, this anchor is typically not represented in consciousness
(that is, it isVR). Thus the sequence is fired and the sin committed.
Client will often get hungry at the mere mention of food, just as
the average person will automatically extend his hand for a handshake at the slightest indication it is appropriate. Such sets of
behaviors are almost involuntary unless the deliberate awareness .

[PAGE 079]

78 / C-OPERATOR


is used to control them. The limits of conscious representation,
however, prevent long term concentration and so the smoker will
smoke, the obese will eat, until reprogramming creates some
pervasive change in the intact series of TOTES. Further, if the
trigger or anchor which initiates the series of TOTES is in~R for
the client, they will not have the choice of bringing it into
consciousness as a way for regaining choice and control over their
own behavior.
In terms presented previously, these particular forms of
incongruency are examples of the split between lead system and
representational system where the contents of the two systems are
inconsistent* Part of the job of an effective communicator
hypnotist will be to access all parts or models of the client they are
working with particularly relevant to the changes the client wants.
For example, in the case of sequential incongruity, it will be
particularly important for the communicator/hypnotist to access
the parts of the client, the models which in the past have sabotaged
all attempts at weight loss or any other type of habit control such
as smoking, nail-biting...By accessing models which would
otherwise express themselves sequentially after the session,
sequential incongruity is converted into simultaneously expressed
incongruity, thus allowing the communicator to communicate
with all models at the same time.* In this way all the parts of the
client are available as resources to produce the desired change
instead of just a portion which will be overpowered by other parts
at some later time. Here the hypnotist /communicator will do well
to insure he or she has a full range of choice in their own verbal
and non-verbal repertoire of communication skills. With regard to
this, we mention in passing the techniques of asking the client to
pretend they are different and noticing incongruities, asking the
client to speculate freely about how their life would be different if
they had accomplished the change (essentially the Meta-Model
question for modal operators — “What would happen if you
did?”), playing polarity (see Part II, The Structure of Magic,
volume II), asking the client to pretend to not want to make the
change and then demand that he explain why they don't want
to....
The usefulness of a communicator/hypnotist understanding
and being able to detect and utilize incongruency, is of vital
importance. In our training seminars many hypnotists ask for
techniques for working with resistant clients. Our understanding

[PAGE 080]

C-OPERATOR / 79

of resistance is that some part of a person is not willing to
cooperate with the hypnotist, say, for example, in the context of a
trance induction, even when the client verbally has stated a desire
to go into a trance. If the hypnotist/communicator does not use
up-time strategy and does not detect the multiple messages of an
incongruent client, then he will meet resistance. If he detects multiple messages and does not have the tools to pace, and communicate
with more than one model of asingle client at the same time, then
he will meet resistance. If he detects multiple messages and does
not have the tools to pace, and communicate with more than one
model of a single client at the same time, then he will also typically
meet resistance. Resistance, in our understanding, is a lack on the
part of a communicator to detect, communicate with and utilize
creatively all parts of a client.*
We break the following discussion into two parts, first communication with congruent clients (where C(Ad<At, V, K, O>)
= yes) then secondly the incongruent client case (where C (Ad
<At, V, K, O>) = no).

[PAGE 081]

Patterns of Meaningful Communication in
Hypnosis with Congruent Clients


Communicationin hypnosis or in any context for that matter
is meaningful to the degree that it serves the desired purpose. To
chat over morning coffee is meaningful to serve the purpose of
amusing a friend, or the sharing of thoughts. Simple conversations
during the day of an average person may sometimes serve his
purposes, and sometimes he may be understood. Sometimes he is
aware is he is misinterpreted when he is not. Sometimes he
believes he is misinterpreted when he is not. Sometimes he is misinterpreted in a way that assists another person greatly. The range
of possibilities is immense and as the serious student of
communication becomes more and more aware of the complexities
and multi-messages involved in communication, he cannot help
but be fascinated by the amount of really meaningful communication that goes unnoticed by all agents in the communication
process. It is as if two simple conscious minds discuss matters of
little importance while their unconscious minds communicate
about matters of more importance. How does the inquiring mind
come to see and hear such multi-messages in communication, and
how does the hypnotist use them to assist his clients in going into a
trance and make changes that are beneficial to him as a human
being? Erickson has devoted his life to the exploration of these
phenomenon, and if half of what he has incorporated into
unconscious patterns of his own behavior can be formalized it
will make a solid foundation for a science of communication.
The case of communicating with the congruent client in
hypnosis is the simple one. Typically, when asked if they want to
go into a deep trance, the answer is an emphatic-yes, voice

[PAGE 082]

82 / CONGRUENT CLIENTS


tone-sure, body gesture responsively agreeing.* Almost any
technique of induction will work to some degree; such congruent
clients usually are capable of almost any hypnotic phenomenon,
and also rarely need hypnosis for psychological assistance. They
are most often encountered by the dental and medical practitioner
or the experimental practitioner. People in pain or faced with the
prospect of pain are usually very congruent about their desire to
avoid it. They are the willing and effective subjects in
demonstrations and classrooms. However this is not signal for the
practitioner to become careless in his work. Quite the contrary,
the congruent client offers the opportunity for the profoundly
creative use of hypnosis. The patterns presented in Volume I of
Patterns provides the hypnotist with a structure for verbal
suggestions in trance induction and trance utilization. The
sytematic use of these patterns in conjunction with one another
and the non-verbal components of communication (the 4-tuple)
offer the astute hypnotist a multitude of choices. But on what basis
is he or she to make that choice? What in essence are the
well-formed meta-patterns for induction of a congruent client?
Each client brings to the hypnotist a plethora of ideosyncratic
ideas, beliefs, and past experiences which constitute his model or
models of the world. However the processes by which that model
of. the world is constructed are not nearly so numerous or
overwhelming. First, we need an organizing principle such as the
4-tuple, and an understanding that each client organizes his
experience by applying an L-operator and an R-operator over the
4-tuples of his experiences. Each client will have highly valued
representational system principle. If the clients’ kinesthetic
who watches the accessing cues and listens to the predicates for
accessing and bringing information into consciousness by his
clients. Hypnotists need to realize the importance of determining a
client's R-operator, for example, induction of trance will in essence
be shifts in the R-operator over the client's experience. To say that
someone has shifted awareness from one representational system
to another is to say that they have altered their consciousness.
Visualizations where imagery of escalators and such are used will
induce light trance in the client but will not alone enable him to
achieve deep trance. Here the hypnotist has two general classes of
choices. First, he may choose to use the overlap/intersection of
representational system principle. If the clients kinesthetic
representational system is accessed, the visual client will have

[PAGE 083]

CONGRUENT CLIENTS / 83


altered his awareness more radically and he may then proceed into
even deeper trance states. The Huxley article presented in volume 1
should be consulted as an example of this principle at work — the
use of representational sytem shifts with a congruent client.
The second class of choices makes use of the fact that even
when using V? with a client who has V for an R-operator, the
entire 4-tuple is accessed. The perceptive hypnotist can detect that
visualization of an elevator, for example, serves not only to access
the 4-tuple connected with seeing an elevator—but also accesses
the feelings connected—the sound and perhaps the smell will
also be accessed. Understanding and training himself to detect
such changes in the client’s non-verbal response and developing
choices about utilizing the R response will provide the hypnotist
with powerful choices. But such a simple and overt use of the
accessing of past 4-tuples to construct meaningful sequences of
experience for the induction of trance, powerful as it is, is onlyone
way to use their tool. Once you understand and use the 4-tuplé”
with its associated distinctions (e.g. R, C, L operators...)
gracefully, you will begin to realize the vast number of choices it
makes available. As a client's past 4-tuples are accessed, the whole
experience, the entire 4-tuple, as well as the words used to describe
it, are accessed: resources to be utilized to assist the client in
change. What a vast array of potential for the student of hypnosis
to explore!
Examples of the escalator-type of accessing are easily‘
produced in your own experience. More sophisticated analogue
marking is done by determining the client's most highly valued
representational sytem and if the client is congruent, marking in
the highly valued representational system or all systems
simultaneously. So, for example, if a client who has a well
developed and highly valued kinesthetic representational systemcomes for hypnosis, the hypnotist may gracefully and gently as a.
matter of course place one of his hands on the client’s knee and the
other on the client's wrist. Once this has been naturally and
comfortakly accomplished a set of meaningful messages can be
marked out while talking to the client. (Capital letters indicate
squeezing when speaking that word.)
Hypnotist: Ms P. You have expressed some fear about your ability
to GO INTO A TRANCE and I would like to reassure you
COMFORTABLY and with PLEASURE so that you can allow
yourself the SATISFACTION OF LEARNING to BEGIN A

[PAGE 084]

84 / CONGRUENT CLIENTS


TRANCE, NOWI want to FEEL RELAXED, I and you are not
CLOSED to this NOW (her eyes close). Trance will offer (her eyes
open) a change to RELAX and LEARN, REALLY LEARN to
BLINK (she blinks) and away your problems with...

Analogue marking of multiple messages in this way allows
communication to take place with more than one part of the
client. At the same time while a meaningful conversaton about the
benefits to be obtained from trance are being described, another
set of meaningful messages is being marked by squeezes which
indicate a sequenced set of 4-tuples to induce trance.

Going into a trance
comfortably
pleasure
feel relaxed
I closed (phonetic ambuiguity for eye closed)
Relax
learn, really learn
blink

The 4-tuples associated with each marked word or phrase in this
sequence are themselves a well formed sequence for the development of trance. Thus the repetitious verbage and often quoted
ritualistic verbal inductions and repeating of hypnotic commands
is nothing more than a trivial example of the trance inductions
used by Milton H. Erickson in a sophisticated way. Instead of
repeating a single word louder and over and over, the hypnotist
using the 4-tuple model can utilize all the available channels of
communication in a way that the 4-tuples themselves would be
sequenced for the induction and utilization of hypnotic trance.
Further using analogue marking allows accessing not only of one
set of 4-tuples but double and triple sets simultaneously
reinforcing the sequence of 4-tuples which lead into trance.
The astute reader will have noticed by this time that analogue
marking as described here and in volume I, is just a special case of
anchoring. Tonal or kinesthetic marking of verbal anchors is just
one of many ways to create multi-message communication.
Communicators can anchor the ongoing behavior of their client in
a systematic way and get just as complex a result. For example if
each time a client describes experience which approximates the

[PAGE 085]

CONGRUENT CLIENTS / 85


desired altered state, the hypnotist may simply anchor this by a
‘specific touch on the right shoulder. Then later a touch on that
shoulder will elicit at the unconscious level the commonality of the
anchored 4-tuples. Erickson presents an excellent example of this
technique of overlap or intersection of 4-tuples (using in this
particular example a verbal transderivational lead to access the
appropriate 5-tuples).

Perhaps a very simple and easily understood example can be
given to clarify this type of accumulation of minimal cues leading
to a specific response: The rest of the family was out for the
evening, | was ill but comfortably seated in a chair, Bert, aged 17,
had volunteered to remain at home to keep me company although
there was no such need. A casual conversation was initiated by
Bert in which he mentioned the rush and turmoil of getting
everybody dressed and fed and everything packed up for a past
vacation trip to northern Michigan. (We were living in Michigan at
the time.) Next he mentioned the fishing, the catching of frogs
and a frog-leg dinner, the beach dinner and the sand that the
smaller children managed to sprinkle over every item of food, and
then the albino frog at the abandoned quarry we had found.
Next he described in vivid detail the turmoil of getting
everything out of the summer cabin, the oversights, the hunting
for misplaced items, the wandering off of the smaller children
and the hurried search for them, the locking-up of the cabin, and
the hungry tired state we were in when we arrived at Wayne
County General Hospital near Detroit where we lived. -
At this point, a vague notion passed through my mind to
suggest to Bert that he might take car and visit some friends, but
this idea vanished as Bert laughingly told of how his brother
Lance particularly liked eating Grandma Erickson's fried chicken
on the way back to Michigan from Wisconsin. With much
laughter, he recalled another occasion in which his small brother
Allan had amused everybody, and especially Grandma and
Grandpa Erickson with his “bulldozer” pattern of eating, that is,
holding his plate up to his mouth and systematically using his
other hand to shove the contents of the plate slowly and steadily
into his mouth.
Again, this time a clearer idea came to mind of suggesting
that Bert take the car keys and go for a ride so that | could enjoy
reading, but I forgot it as | recalled my father’s amused comment

[PAGE 086]

86 / CONGRUENT CLIENTS


on the absolute efficiency and speed of Allan’s method of eating.
While we were laughing about this, Bert mentioned the trip
to my brother’s farm, and six-year-old Betty Alice’s long solemn
explanation to three-year-old Allan’s worried inquiry about how
the mama chickens nursed their babies, that chickens were not
mammals and only mammals nursed their young. While we were
laughing about this, a third time the thought came to mind of
offering the car for the evening, this time most clearly, and |
recognized why. In every item of reminiscenses, Bert was
speaking of pleasant and happy memories based each upon the
driving of acar. Yet not once had he actually said the word “car,”
the nearest he came to that was to say “packing up,” “trip,”
“went to see,” “way out to the old quarry,” “down to the beach,”
“on the way back to Michigan from Wisconsin,” and the trip to
my brother's farm, and not once did he mention the word key —
locking-up the cabin was as close as he came to that.
| recognized the situation at once and remarked, “The
answer is ‘No’.” He laughed and said, “Well, Dad, you'll have to
admit it was a good try.” “Not good enough, | caught on too fast.
You overemphasized trips in the car. You should have mentioned
the picketing of Ned’s place, where our car was serviced, Ed
Carpenter from whom | bought the car, the ice-fishing trip which
was in Emil's car but did involve an automobile. In brief, you
restricted yourself to constant indirect mention of pleasure trips,
always in relationship to us, it was always in our car. The
inference to be drawn became too obvious. Do you really want
the car?” His answer was, “No, I just thought ld get a little fun
out of getting you to offer me the car keys.”

Milton H. Erickson, The “Surprise” and
“My Friend John,” Techniques of Hypno-
sis, Haley (ed.), page 117.

One way we have found useful to organize our trance
induction experiences is the notion of tracking. Tracking is the
methodical organization of accessing 4-tuples in the client in such
a way as to track him from one specific 4-tuple (present state -Sı)
to another 4-tuple—S! (deep trance, for example) with.the
minimum steps or 4-tuple accessed on the way. For instance, we
frequently teach participants in our training seminars to use a
technique called the shuffle to induce trance. A client is asked

[PAGE 087]

CONGRUENT CLIENTS / 87


what experience they would have just before entering a deep
trance. They are questioned methodically about what their
experience would be, covering the values of all the variablesin the
4-tuple. When they express a complete description, thereby
accessing those 4-tuples, this experience is named the before
4-tuple. Clients typically find this terminology somewhat
humorous. Usually, in addition to this verbal anchor, some
trigger, such as a squeeze on the knee, is also used either overtly
with a congruent client or covertly with an incongruent client) to
ensure that the client can re-access the before 4-tuple when it is
named later and the knee squeeze anchor is repeated.
Next, a complete description of the 4-tuple that would be the
client's experience just after deep trance is taken, allowing the
client to fully access all the portions of that 4-tuple both a verbal
and K anchors are established. Then the clientis told to make the
before 4-tuple(K trigger fired simultaneously), the after 4-tuple (K
trigger fired simultaneously) and then, the after 4- tuple (K trigger),
the before 4-tuple (K trigger) and then both K triggers for both the
before and the after 4-tuple simultaneously. Usually a deep trance
results, as the client accesses the deep trance 4-tuple while passing
from the before 4-tuple to after 4-tuple level.
Another technique which we sometimes use in lecture
situations for demonstration purposes is to ask some member of
the audience to compare the last thing they were aware of before
they woke up this morning With a deep trance. If this question is
congruently asked of someone who has beenin a trance and the
authors wait expectantly, typically a trance readily develops as the
task of comparing the two named altered states requires that they
be accessed, (that is, the 4-tuples for both experiences). Utilization
of the ensuing trance provides a rapid means of inducing a
profound trance. Tracking procedures of this kind can be
accomplished most easily by simply asking a question which
presupposes the 4-tuple desired be accessed. In a lecture situation
during a discussion of this very topic, one of the authors turned to
the audienze and asked sincerely, “Do any of you know how it
feels to have asthma?” An array of choking, gagging and coughing,
followed by laughter, resulted. The important thing here is that
people do what they talk about as they talk about it — accessing 4tuples and then commenting on them. Questions are answered by
then commenting on them. Questions are answered by accessing
the relevant 4-tuples and using them as the basis of understanding

[PAGE 088]

88 / CONGRUENT CLIENTS


and responding whether or not the person responding brings those
accessed 4-tuples into consciousness. As someone describes happy
memories, they feel, look and sound happy; as someone describes
a terrifying experience they feel, look and sound terrified; as
someone talks about an exceptionally good meal, they taste it; and
the astute observer will be able to detect the movements of their
mouth and tongue. The systematic accessing of 4-tuples by
tracking or sequencing, whether overt or covert, with or without
anchors, offers a structure for communication of multiple
messages in ways that give meaning to the principle of maximal
direction (see Patterns, volume I, pages 249-251).
In our work, we have developed communication, and of
organizing our experience in the hypnotic encounter—experiences
which we believe are common to many practicioneers of hypnosis.
We present a discussion of three specific tracking models we have
found useful in our experience of hypnosis. We urge you to
experiment with these models, thereby increasing your effectiveness and grace in your work in hypnosis.

[PAGE 089]

Tracking Model I


The simplest tracking model logically is one where the
hypnotist tracks the client from the client's present state (S,) to the
desired state (Si) directlyin a single step. Let us use a trance
induction as an example. o
Once a gentlemen came to us for assistance; he wanted us to
use hypnosis to help him find the solution to a problem. A brief
interview disclosed that he was a surgeon by profession. From his
own description of his work we deduced that when doing surgery,
this gentleman entered an altered state where the focus of his
conscious attention was on one and only one thing—the operation
—and nothing could distract him. If the sounds or movements
around him were to distract him it might prove to be fatal to his
clients. We therefore asked him to review in detail the last
interesting, successful operation he had performed—to review it
with the same interest and diligence he has used when he was
actually performing the operation. He was to go through each and
every step of the operation, making sure nothing was overlooked
and that he was to accomplish this with the same quality work this
time that he always does. We explained that while his conscious
mind was occupied with the operation we would speak privately
with his unconscious mind. Within seconds a trance insued—we
simply deepened it and began our work. The point of this is that
the communicator with some creativity will succeed in finding a
4-tuple for almost any desired altered state in his client's own
personal experience. This 4-tuple, once accessed, can be utilized as
a resource to assist each client with his individual needs. We
recommend that each of you identify common 4-tuples for states
of consciousness which you find yourself repeatedly creating with
your clients— for example, for general deep trance, 4-tuples such
as day dreaming, highway hypnosis, the so-called hypnogogic
state, boring lectures, sermons. . .

[PAGE 090]

Tracking Model II for Sequencing of
4-Tuples


For either the induction of trance or the utilization of trance
for some purpose, the model for sequencing of 4-tuples provides a
viable option about how to proceed. Taking a client from any
state Si to any other state of consciousness Si can be
accomplished by describing 4-tuples, preferably ones that the
client has had such that the values of the variables of the 4-tuple of
Si change fluidly to the values of the variables of the S1, For
example, the client is a willing and congruent person who wishes
to learn about going into a deep trance. Questioning him
regarding this and discussing his understandings with him gives
the hypnotist the opportunity to watch accessing cues and listen to
predicates. The present state of the client is one which might be
called the waking state. In the process of questioning the client
about his understanding, he will search transderivationally (L
operator) to understand and respond. Thus portions of the client's
present state 4-tuples are internal. The client has a mixed focus of
attention between internally generated experience and externally
generated experience. Suppose while trying to watch and listen to
the hypnotist the client is visualizing and having internal dialogue;
and further, that his R-operator on the 4-tuple is kinesthetic—that
is, the client is aware only of his body feelings, such as feeling
confused and overwhelmed.* The hypnotist quickly reviews the
communication he has had with the client and began as follows:
(Underlined words and phrases were analogically marked with
tonal shifts and the dots. . .indicate pauses.)

[PAGE 091]

92 / TRACKING MODEL Il


Hypnotist: Do you remember reading a book in the outer office
while waiting for your appointment?
Client: Yes.
Hypnotist: I noticed that you were reading that book and I like to
try a little experiment with you before we begin. Is
that alright?
Client: Sure.
Hypnotist: Now I would like you to close your eyes, and see that
book open to the first page you read...and even
though the words are not clear as they could be you
just keep looking at that book comfortably... watch
it closely and as you begin to breath deeper words can
become clearer and clearer till you can begin to read
that book just as you did before. It might assist you if
noticed the smell of the paper and pretended you were
feeling the binding as you hold that book and begin
to read, now when I walked through the outer office
you didn’t even notice me you were so engrossed in
that book. . .and it is easy to become engrossed in a
book so deeply that you don’t even hear the sound of
those people around you who are talking. . you might
even become so engrossed in reading that book that
you forget where you are and whom you're with...
in fact this book may become another one you get
engrossed in even deeper. ..so deeply engrossed that
you lost track of time and your whole world became
the world of the book in your. ..and your conscious
mind may continue to read and enjoy that book while
your other mind listens to me because you don’t have
to listen to me...in fact that will make it easier to
become totally engrossed in that book your other can
lift up one of your hands to your face so that I will
know when your conscious mind is gone off reading
and your other mind and I are along to get to work
on the problem you want to solve...now the only
important thing is that your conscious mind stay off
reading that book and remember just what the most
interesting point to your ear was. (The hand begins to
lift up off his knee slightly, but appears to be having
some difficulty.) You can turn the page when you

[PAGE 092]

TRACKING MODEL II / 93


need to...you can scratch your face when it
itches... you've done that before without knowing
about when you were lost in reading. . .(client’s hand
lifts off knee).


The sequencing of 4-tuples for the trance induction is simple—it
requires only that the hypnotist be willing to explore the client's
experience thoroughly enough to find experiences 4-tuples which
would naturally lead from the client's present state, Si, to the
desired altered state which had occurred earlierin the hypnotist's
waiting room (becoming engrossedin reading a book) as a way of
tracking the client from attending to externally generated
experience to attending exclusively to internally generated
experience (shifting to 4-tuple superscripts from e to i). Thehypnotist also effectively used a portion of the K variable of the
internally generated 4-tuple of reading a book (turning the page)
to track the client quite naturally to the 4-tuple of hand and arm
levitation. This is a simple yet powerful example of the principle of
4-tuple overlap which allows the hypnotist to track the client into
an altered state. Specifically, the overlap between the 4-tuple of
reading a book, more specifically, turning the page and the 4-tuple
of hand and arm levitation occurs in the K system. In both 4-tuples
there is a completely automatic, comfortable unconscious
movement (TOTE) of the hand and arm up. These common
TOTEs provide a natural bridge to track from one state (Sı =
reading a book) to another state (S; = hand and arm levitation),
closer to the desired state (deep trance, SR),
Just as words are anchors for past 4-tuples, so too is any
portion of a variable ofa past 4-tuple an anchor for the whole
4-tuple (experience). Of course, past 4-tuples can be arranged to
track anyone to any experience we wish to create. In the
preceding example it was easy for this client to start by
remembering reading, then move to the 4-tuple of reading and
then experience of becoming so engrossed in the reading that his
external world began to disappear visually as well as auditory.
From that point, it was a relatively simple to task to disassociate
him for the purposes of trance utilization. Model II for the
sequencing of 4-tuples requires that the hypnotist be able to
discern what kind of an altered state will be required for the
specific hypnotic purposes, whether psychotherapeutic, dental, or
medical, and to be able to find the bridging 4-tuplesin the client's

[PAGE 093]

94 / TRACKING MODEL II


past. This tracking model can be represented visually as:


S1.S2....S¡.... Spa Sn

where
S,= present 4-tuple state of client S,m desired 4-tuple state
and
Sz thru S„.ı area logical progression of 4-tuples from the client's personal
history by systematically altering the variables such that
they overlap.


This tracking model is especially effective with children as so
much of children’s experiences are altered states which
approximate trance. For example, we often will ask a child client
who is brought to us by his parents for hypnotic work if he knows
about his dreaming arm. The hypnotist’s analogue communication
is a very important aspect of this maneuver. The hypnotist must
look and sound genuinely excited and sincerely interested.
Children are very sensitive communicators and detect incongruent
communication quickly.
We then typically proceed as follows:

Transcript


Hypnotist: Do you know about your dreaming arm (hypnotist's
voice tone, tempo and facial and other body message
youthful, excited and somewhat conspiratorial)?
Child: No (looks intrigued and a bit confused)
Hypnotist: You mean nobody ever taught you about your
dreaming arm?
Child: No.
Hypnotist: Would you like to learn?
Child: Sure.
Hypnotist: Do you promise not to tell anybody else?
Child: Yes (hypnotist eyes child with suspicion). . .1 promise
I won't tell.
Hypnotist: Well, OK, I guess you can be trusted. What's your
favorite
TV program?
Child: Steve Austin.

[PAGE 094]

TRACKING MODEL Il / 95


Hypnotist: You mean the six-million-dollar man?
Child: Ya.
Hypnotist: Now can you see the first scene of your favorite epi-
sode (analogical tonal shift)
Child: Ya.
Hypnotist: Now close your eyes... .(hypnotist lifts up the child’s
left arm). . Now you keep watching Steve Austin and
allow your arm to go down only as fast as you watch
the whole show and the only thing you have to do is
to remember just what your favorite part was and tell
when you're done. ..take all the time you need to
really enjoy it.


Typically this will be all the tracking that is necessary for the
trance induction. The arm will go down slowly and cataleptically.
As the child accesses eidetic images, the side of the body
contralateral to the hemisphere with eidetic images can be gently
manipulated and typically the client will have no awareness of the
kinesthetic sensations as cerebral competition is occurring. We
caution you to investigate with each child which hemisphere has
the eidetic images. In many left-handers, the dreaming arm will be
their right hand as the localization of functions (such as eidetic
images) and in fact all cerebral functions will be hemispherically
reversed. This can easily be checked by accessing cues—that is, by
asking the child to make a picture of the house he lives in. If his
eyes move up and to the right, then he is a reversed case and the
cerebral competition between eidetic images and the K system will
occur maximally when the right hand is lifted. If the child's eyes
move up and left, like most right handers, then his dreaming arm
will be the left arm. If appropriate, the child’s arm can be gently
stopped (thereby stopping the eidetic images) and a “psychological
commercial” inserted such as: “How surprised will you be when
you discover your dry bed is so comfortable?” Once the
“commercial” has been inserted, the arm is released and the
sequence of eidetic images runs off. Typically the child will have
no conscious representation for the commercial. This also works
well as an inducution for many congruent adult clients. We
typically proceed by having them visualize the first scene from
their favorite movie and then lifting their arm up and stating
congruently to them to let their arm go down only as fast as their

[PAGE 095]

96 / TRACKING MODEL IL


eyes close and they drop into a very relaxed state watching that
movies from beginning to end. We have as a demonstration from
time to time asked one of the members of the audience within reach
a question about something which requires visualization—such as
describing in detail the house they lived in as a youngster while
commenting on it. While congruently asking for more and more
details about the visual dimensions of the house, one of the
authors will reach over lifting the left arm (if the person is a right
hander) of the person with whom we are speaking. As the member
of the audience continues their verbal description of the visual
image they are making the left arm stays suspended cataleptically
in the air until the description ends and their eyes refocus. We
have the choice of utilizing the catalepsy as the beginning of a
trance induction if the situation makes this maneuver appropriate.
This model for the sequencing of 4-tuples offers a viable way of
inducing trance either directly or indirectly. Describing experiences which themselves serve as anchors for internal experiences
approximating more and more closely the altered states required.
There is no limit to the possible ways of utilizing this type of a
model to guide your behavior as a hypnotist if you are willing to
use your own creativity and the experiential resources of your
clients.

[PAGE 096]

Tracking Model III — Constructing
4-Tuples


Tracking Model Il —Constructing 4-Tuples

A third choice about how to organize your experience while
doing hypnosis is the tracking model for the construction of
4-tuples. Again consistent with the Ericksonian principle that the
client has the resources somewherein his personal history to make
the changes he has come to the hypnotist for assistance with, the
hypnotist may choose to use the principles of transderivational
search to find there past 4-tuples which already contain the
elements of behavior required for the new choice or experience the
client wants. This third model differs from tracking models I and II
in that the specific 4-tuple that the client desires which represents
the new choice or experience he has come to the hypnotist for
assistance in getting does not exist in his past experience. Thus the
hypnotist must access a series of different past 4-tuples from the
client's personal history, each of which includes an element of the
4-tuple the client and the hypnotist are working to create.
Suppose, for example, the client is a young woman who has great
difficulty being assertive with older men. The hypnotist might
select tracking model III and begin to question the client closely
regarding the nominalization assertive: in other words, which
specific set of feelings, voice tone, tempo and melodic qualities,,
way of presenting herself visually constitutes being assertive with
older men. As the hypnotist discusses this with the client, the
client will be demonstrating based on her past experience her
understanding of being assertive. As a natural part of this
communication interchange the hypnotist may ask the client if she

[PAGE 097]

98 / TRACKING MODEL III


has ever felt that particular way, or sounded that particular
way...Typically, the client will reply that she has indeed but
never with older men, or not since she was a young girl or. .In
other words she will offer a series of disclaimers which disqualify
any single one of her past experiences as an appropriate model
4-tuple for her being assertive with old men in the present. In the
course of this interchange, the hypnotist establishes a series of
anchors (either overt or covert) for the individual portions of the
other words she will offer a series of disclaimers which disqualify
any single one of her past experiencs as an appropriate model
4-tuple for her being assertive with old men in the present. In the
course of this interchange, the hypnotist establishes a series of
anchors (either overt or covert) for the individual portions of the
series of 4-tuples, each containing a portion of the desired 4-tuple.
Once the component parts of the desired 4-tuple are anchored,
having been extracted from a series of partially appropriate
4-tuples, the hypnotist may trigger them, thereby creating a
unified new 4-tuple, the one desired by the client. In our
experience, when this approach to change is used, it is essential
that the hypnotist test his work thoroughly. In the example, we
have been using, the author who had worked with the client and
established the 4-tuple, turned control over the established
anchors for the newly created 4-tuple over to the client and
excused himself. After the client had been sitting by herself for
several minutes in the office, another of the authors (older than the
woman client who entered the office) asked the client where the
author was. When she replied that she didn’t know, he
immediately attacked her verbally in a vicious manner. Her initial
response was to reverse breathing, pale and begin to apologize;
however, her right hand crept down to her knee (where the anchor
for the newly created 4-tuple had been established) with typical
unconscious movement. Once her hand had made contact with her
knee, her entire communication shifted —she became assertive; her
voice tone, tempo and melody, her body posture and gestures
“ . . «ll changed to the values of the 4-tuple she and the first author
had created. In the midst of the continuing quarrel she glanced
down, noticing her hand grasping her knee firmly and giggled. She
then stood up, brushed by the second author with an amused smile
and left the office in high spirits. This technique for festing the
effectiveness of a newly constructed 4-tuple—we call it living
metaphor (it will be discussed in detail in volume III of Patterns of

[PAGE 098]

TRACKING MODELIII / 99


the Hypnotic Techniques of Milton H. Erickson, M.D.) is only one
of a number of techniques to insure that the work done in altered
states and in the rather restricted context of an office transfer with
full force to the client’s coping patterns in the world of everyday
experience.
Tracking model III is also an excellent choice for trance
inductions with naive clients. Either the clientis consulted directly
or the hypnotist
uses his own personal experience to discover,
access and anchor portions of the client’s past 4-tuples which in
combination constitute the desired 4-tuple—deep trance. Since the
hypnotist and the client are simply earnestly discussing these
matters in a harmless conversation, there typically will be no
recognition on the client’s part that an induction is in progress
until the deep trance (the desired 4-tuple) is an accomplished fact.
The hypnotist using the 4-tuple model to organize his experience is
systematically working through each of the variables in the
4-tuple, accessing and anchoring the portions of the client’s past
4-tuples which most closely approximate the values of the
variables in the desired 4-tuple.
In the context of communicating hypnotically with a client,
one of the most important pieces of information you can come to
detect is whether the client is congruent about the task you've
engaged in. In the event that the client is congruent—all the
messages carried by the client’s body posture, gestures, tonality,
tempo, syntax, words, breathing, . . .are consistent


C (Ag
< At,O, K, V >) ——-> yes


you have available in the 4-tuple a plethora of choices about how
to proceed. The three tracking models presented in this section,
while very powerful, represent only the simplest applications of
the 4-tuple model.
In cammunication with congruent clients the hypnotist/
communicator himself will most effectively communicate congruently to both the client’s conscious and unconscious minds. This,
of course, still allows the hypnotist/communicator many interesting choices about how to organize his communication. One such
interesting choice revolves around the question of whether the
hypnotist desires to be overt or covert in his communication. For

[PAGE 099]

100 / TRACKING MODEL IH


example, in the context of trance inductions the hypnotist may
choose to be overt, announce his intention to assist the client in
entering an altered state. He may even describe to the client how
he will proceed. The hypnotist then proceeds to induce trance with
multiple messages in all channels each supporting and reinforcing
the others. For example as he says,

...and your hand is beginning to lift...

his voice rises in pitch as he says the word lift. He simultaneously
lifts his own hand slightly with movements typically of
unconscious responses. If the hypnotist is making contact with the
client on his knee with his other hand, he may press down slightly
on the client’s knee just before he says lift and then release that
pressure as he says the word lift. In this way he communicates
consistent and reinforcing multiple messages in the Ag A+, K and
V channels simultaneously.
The hypnotist/communicator may choose a covert induction
with a congruent client. In this case, he arranges his
communication somewhat differently. He may in communication
with a congruent client who is attending to the language and visual
dimensions of the hypnotist’s communication; that is:


R (Aq
< Ay, O, V, K> ) ——-> (Ag, V)


talk to the client about hypnosis and the multitude of ways which
are available for him to assist the client in going into a deep trance.
As he does this, he matches his body movements (detected visually
by the client) to the words and sentences he presents. At the same
time, the hypnotist/communicator marks out kinesthetically
(hand pressure on the client’s knee, for example) and with tonal
and tempo shifts portions of the verbal message for special
attention (see Patterns, volume I, analogue marking) to the client's
unconscious mind; that is since


the portions of the verbal message marked in the K and A,

[PAGE 100]

TRACKING MODEL III / 101


systems will be accepted and responded to by the client without
any awareness. Thus the client inexplicably finds himself going
into a deep trance in the middle of a discussion. Again, such
maneuvers are what has traditionally been called magic.

[PAGE 101]

Meaningful Communicationin Hypnosis
with Incongruent Clients


As we stated previously, there are two types of incongruity
that we as hypnotist /communicators will typically encounter: that
of simultaneous incongruity — the situation where the client offers
in his or Ker communication, a set of messages which are
inconsistent where the message carried by the client’s voice tone
(A¿ ), for example, fails to match the messages carried by the
client’s words (A d) or the messages carried by the client's body
posture, breathing rate or body movements (K detected by the
hypnotist in his V system) or any of the other output channels the
client is using to express himself. In the visual representation we
have been developing,

C( ASA, K, V,0>)
—-> no


The second case is that of sequential incongruity — where the
client is congruent at one point in time, t:, and again at some later
point in time, t; . However, when the message value of the two
4-tuple from tı and t; are compared, they are inconsistent with
one another:


C(C(AS Ay K, V, 0>) ty (CASA, Kv, 0” )—> no
where '
C(AF Ay K, V, 0>)es
and

[PAGE 102]

104 / INCONGRUENT CLIENTS


In our experience, one of the most useful maneuvers that a
hypnotist/communicator can make when faced with sequential
incongruity is to convert it initially into simultaneous incongruity.
One of the fastest and easiest ways to accomplish this is
anchoring. Specifically, the hypnotist/communicator can anchor
(either overtly or covertly) either of the parts which are expressing
themselves incongruently overtime (sequentially) and then access
the other one. Once the second one is accessed and is being
expressed by the client, the hypnotist/communicator uses the
anchor aleady established for the first part. One rather typical
outcome of this maneuver is a profoundly altered state of
consciousness as the client experiences the two incongruent parts
simultaneously. The maneuver has always in our experience
created (minimally) a state of profound confusion. The alert
hypnotist can then easily utilize the resulting confusion state to
track to a profound trance, We assume for the remainder of this
section that the hypnotist is dealing with a simultaneously
incongruent client.
Perhaps the most efficient method of presenting the set of
choices which our models offer for effective and creative hypnotic
communication with incongruent clients is for us to simply state
that all of the patterns presented in volume I and up to this point in
volume II of the Patterns series apply with full force to the
incongruent client if the hypnotist/communicator regards each of
the parts (represented by one of the sets of consistent messages
presented) of the client to be a separate and congruent client. In
other words, you as a hypnotist/communicator can accept each of
the messages which you receive from an incongruent client as a
valid representation of that human being as respond to each with
the same principles and patterns which you would use toward
a separate congruent client. Thus, for example, if one set of
messages from the incongruent client is carried by the words
(Ag ), another by the body movements (K) and a third by the
tonal and tempo patterning of the client’s voice (A ¿), you would
apply that very same initial pattern that we have urged over and
over again — meet the client at his model of the world —
specifically, you would respond to each of the client's parts in the
representational system and output channels you received the
messages from them in. When you next replied to the client, your
words would match in content the sense of the words (Ag) he had
offered you while at the same time your voice tone and tempo

[PAGE 103]

INCONGRUENT CLIENTS / 105


(A+) qualities would approximate those you had received from
him and your body movements (K) would be a response to those
he had offered you in his previous communication. This simple
application of the pacing technique of matching representational
systems will guarantee that you will not encounter resistance.
Resitance is simply a signal that the hypnotist/communicator has
failed to pace some part of the client. By accepting each of the
parts of the incongruent client as a valid representaton of that
human being and by responding to each with the ‘same care and
with the same patterns you would use with individual clients, you
proceed rapidly to come to be trusted by each of those parts, and
resistance is impossible. This is an explicit representation of one of
Erickson's famous double and triple takes.
One way to organize your thinking about how to respond to
an incongruent client is to consider the whole continuum of
possible responses you have as a communicator in that particular
situation. At one end of the continuum of possible responses is
what therapists call meta .-commenting. For example, with an
incongruent client who states the words “Oh, yes, I'm ready to go
into a deep trance,” while simultaneously shaking their heads from
side to side, meta-commenting would consist of the communicator
saying something like, “I heard you say that you are ready to go
into a deep trance and as you said that I noticed that your head
was slowly shaking from side to side, ...I'm a little confused.
Could you help me with understanding what you really want?” At
the other end of the continuum is a mirroring response; that is,
the communicator responds by saying, “Oh good, I'm glad that
you are ready,” while simultaneously shaking his head from side
to side. The first possibility is typical of what is commonly called
insight or conscious mind therapy. It has the effect of forcing into
the client’s conscious awareness some portion of their communication which had been outside of consciousness until the
communicator’s meta-comment. The typical response is one of
shock. It fails to respect the channels of communication which the
client is selecting (both consciously and unconsciously) to
communicate the various parts of himself. The second response —
that of mirroring — is in our experience more typical of hypnotic
communication, especially that of Milton H. Erickson. As.
communicators, we believe that there are no mistakes in
communication — there are simply outcomes. The outcome of
meta-commenting is shock value and the bringing into conscious-

[PAGE 104]

106 / INCONGRUENT CLIENTS


ness of material/parts that the client was previously unaware of.
The outcome of mirroring is an immediate effective pace of all
parts of the client expressing themselves and the avoidance of
resistance. Our personal preferences run to what we consider the
more graceful choice — that of mirroring. We all three maintain
the choice of using either as the context dictates. Since this is a
volume on hypnosis, the choices of responding to incongruent
clients we will concern ourselves with are those located toward the
mirroring end of the continuum. For these readers who are
interested in developing a wide range of choices of response which '
cluster around the meta-commenting end of the continuum, we
have created a model of a number of them in part II of volume II of
The Structure of Magic (Grinder and Bandler).
The first, and in our experience, one of the most powerful of
the choices of a hypnotic response to an incongruent client is the
one already mentioned — mirroring. In order to be an effective
mirrorer, the hypnotist/communicator must train him or herself
to have a full range of choice about controlling his or her verbal
and non-verbal output channels. The ability to provide an
adequate mirroring response presupposes that the hypnotist/
communicator has the ability to detect incongruency in order to be
able to mirror it. The gracefulness with which the hypnotist/
communicator adopts the particular patterns of incongruent
cmmunication offered by the client will determine how effective
this response. In teaching this response in our training seminars,
we have the person learning to mirror copy the client in only one
output channel at a time until they have developed their ability
and confidence in that ability to gracefully alter their own
communication until it matches the communication patterns of the
client. One of the most frequent outcomes that the people we have
trained in our seminars elicit when initially developing their skills
in this type of response is that of accessing into consciousness in
the client some other part or model of the world — usually one
which is radically inconsistent with the previous one. We have
called this the polarity, and the entire maneuver, playing polarity
(see The Structure of Magic, volume II, part II.) For those of you
familiar with the work of John Rosen, you will recognize this as
one of the patterns he uses very effectively with schizophrenia. As
an acquaintance of ours once stated: “Rosen so effectively meets
the client at his (the client's) model of the world that he (Rosen)
ruins the client's psychosis.” The difference between these two

[PAGE 105]

INCONGRUENT CLIENTS / 107


outcomes (each an excellent choice yielding a useful outcome) is
the subtleness with which the communicator adopts the patterns
of incongruent communication offered by the client. If the
maneuver is carried out with subtleness, the outcome is an
immediate and profoundly effective pace. If the client detects in
consciousness the maneuver, the outcome will be a rapid access
into the client’s behavior of some part of him which was
previously outside of consciousness — the polarity maneuver.
Another choice of responding to incongruent clients is that
offered by any of the covert induction techniques we have
presented earlier. For example, the hypnotist/communicator may
choose to question the client closely about his understanding of
what a deep trance would be like (working his way systematically
through the variables of the 4-tuple). As he does so, he is alert to
note the responses by the client and to covertly anchor the
responses which in combination will yield the type of altered state
which will be useful for the purposes of the hypnotic encounter.
The client, of course, is conscious only that he is having a harmless
conversation with the hypnotist. Once the components of the
altered state the hypnotist desires have been solidly anchored, he
need only trigger the anchors for the components simultaneously,
and the altered state will result. In making a choice about which
system to anchor ‘in, the 4-tuple and its associated R operator
provide the hypnotist communicator with a principled and
effective way of deciding — specifically, with incongruent clients,
anchor in any system which is “R. Another excellent choice with
incongruent clients is to converse comfortably with the client
about a relatively harmless topic while marking analogically
certain portions of the verbal communication for special attention
at the unconscious level. Again the R operator indicates which
system to use for the marking of verbal messages — that is, any of
the VR systems. A third class of covert inductions which are
effective with incongruent clients are those involving the
intersecton of TOTES as detailed in tracking model II. In using this
model with incongruent clients the hypnotist/communicator may
usefully select 4-tuples which involve TOTEs where the
intersection occurs in one of the“R systems. For example, ifyou as
a hypnotist were working to get eye closure with an incongruent
client whose R operator was V using tracking model II, you might
have a conversation which included a discussion of among other
things: watching a sunrise, diving into cold water, walking down a

[PAGE 106]

108 / INCONGRUENT CLIENTS


dusty, dirt road with a lot of traffic on it. Visually (the client's
consciousness) these 4-tuples have very little in their intersection
but kinesthetically, each includes a TOTE which leads in the
direction of eye closure.
Another excellent choice is responding to incongruent clients
is the surprise induction. The fact that a client is incongruent is a
signal that he or she is not unified to their ability to respond. You
may utilize this by creating a situation where they experience confusion. The client's being unable to act in a unified manner insures
that their recovery from this state of confusion will take some
time. There are many classes of surprise inductions. We suggest
that you discuss earnestly with the client the issue which he is
incongruent about. Once he is expressing the incongruency
strongly, you need only detect any repetitive pattern of movement
in the client and interrupt it. The handshake interruption
induction we discussed at the beginning of this volume is the
paradigm example. The handshake is, in this culture, an automatic
response which is experienced as a single unit of behavior in
consciousness. Its interruption leaves the client momentarily
without a program — a state of confusion insues which can then
be utilized to induce any useful altered state. Any repetitive motor
patterns presented by the client offers the same opportunity to the
alert hypnotist/communicator.
The choice of using metaphor with incongruent clients is one
of the most powerful in our experience, especially the technique of
stacked realities — these patterns are the subject of volume III of
the Patterns series. Finally, we mention the choice of re-framing,
either metaphorical or literal. This is an extensive area containing
many interesting patterns some of which will be contained in a
forthcoming publication (Neuro-Linguistic Programming I).
Each of the choices mentioned above as a creative and
effective response to incongruent clients are formal patterns —
patterns of process. As such the offer the hypnotist/communicator
a potentially infinite number of specific choices in his or her
response to those clients who come seeking assistance and who are
incongruent.

[PAGE 107]

SUMMARY / 109


Summary


One of the skills which most distinguishes Milton H.
Erickson, M.D., of Phoenix, Arizona from other practitioners of
hypnosis and the art of change has been his world reknowned
ability to succeed with “impossibles” — people who have
exhausted the traditional medical, dental, psychotherapeutic,
hypnotic and religious avenues for assisting them in their need,
and have not been able to make the changes they desire. One
characteristic of such clients (both from the descriptions Erickson
has offered to us and from our own experience with our
“impossible” practice) is that they seem to be quite incongruent.
They typically seek help, demanding or begging that they receive
the assistance they verbally claim to want, yet there are portions
of their behavior available to the astute communicator which
indicate that there are parts of these clients (typically, outside of
their consciousness) which have needs, desires and goals different
from those presented verbally.
There are many ways to characterize those unique features of
the fine human being Milton H. Erickson, M.D. of Phoenix,
Arizona which account for this phenomenal ability. The two
volumes of Patterns series constitute one such attempt; Jay Haley
has offered another, Uncommon Therapy. We have stated
repeatedly throughout this series that the patterns which we
presented in our model are simply one way of organizing the vast
and fascinating world of Ericksonian communication—as such,
they can be evaluated most appropriately in our understanding by
their usefulness in making available the same powerful hypnotic

[PAGE 108]

110 / SUMMARY


communication skills possessed by Erickson. Thus, they represent
a set of choices to be learned and used by you as a practitioner in
order to determine through your own experience how useful these
models are for your work. Our experience of Erickson as well as
our experience in utilizing the many learnings we have from him in
our own work leads us to identify two characteristics which
Erickson possesses which we believe accounts for much of his
phenomenal success:


(1) Erickson believes that the resources which the client
needs to effect the change he desires are already available
within him.

(2) Erickson accepts and utilizes all communication/
behavior presented by his clients.


We wish to add that we also have found it extremely useful to
incorporate these two beliefs as presuppositions of our communication and behavior.
Notice that given these two beliefs as presuppositions of
communication and behavior in the hypnotic encounter, many of
the otherwise unconventional patterns of Erickson's behavior
follow quite naturally. Consider the first of these—if this is a
presupposition of hypnotic communication, then the relevant
question becomes how specifically to access those resources and to
turn control of them over to the client either at the conscious or
the unconscious level of functioning. In the Patterns series, we
have identified a number of such techniques: the verbal patterns
explicitly presented in volume I, the powerful patters of the
4-tuple, transderivational search, anchoring. . .in Patterns II. The
second of the two beliefs we have identified —that of accepting and
utilizing all the behavior presented—leads naturally to two
questions: first, how to detect the communication/behavior being
presented by the client; and secondly, how to utilize such
communication and behavior once detected. Essentially the
answer to the first question is the communication strategy —the
the answer to the first question is the communication strategy we
have referred to in this book as the up-time strategy—the
communication strategy by which the communicator/hypnotist
uses his 7¥2 chunks of attention to detect externally generated
sensory experience —more specifically, the communication behav-

[PAGE 109]

SUMMARY / 111


ior of the client. This strategy allows him to detect the messages
being offered by the client. There are particularly useful classes of
messages which the effective and creative communicator/hypnotist will find useful: information which allows him to determine
which portion of the world of potentially infinitely rich sensory
and internally generated experience the client has an awareness of
— the client’s R-operator. This can be effectively and comfortably
accomplished by the communicator/hypnotist by training himself
to hear predicates which indicate representational system. The
second useful class of messages offered by the client are these
which allow the hypnotist/communicator to identify how the
client is creating/organizing his or her experience — the client's L
operator. Again, this can be easily accomplished by learning to see
the accessing cues used by the client which indicate which lead
system the client is using at a point in time. The third class of
messages which will become available to the communicator/hypnotist operating with an up-time strategy is those which allow him
to know whether the messages which the client is offering are
consistent or inconsistent with one another — the client's
C-operator. These three pieces of information are crucial to the art
of graceful, effective and creative communication and change.
Suppose the client's C-operator is yes—that is, the messages .
offered in response to the communicator/hypnotist are consistent
with one another. At that point in time, the communicator/hypnotist who also knows the client's R-operator, has a broad
spectrum of choice of techniques to access and utilize the client's
resources: the R-operator overlap principle, the tracking and
sequencing of 4-tuples technique...
Suppose that the client’s C-operator is no — that is, the
messages offered by the client are inconsistent. It is precisely here
that the powerful techniques offered by the 4-tuple model become
particularly. useful. Consistent with Ericksonian principle of
accepting and utilizing all communication/behavior, the hypnotist
/communicator accepts all the conflicting messages as valid
representations of potentially powerful parts of the client. The
client with his limited ability to represent in consciousness his
ongoing experience, including his own communication behavior,
will be aware also of anly a portion of the multi-messages which
the hypnotist/communicator uses in responding to the multimessage offered by the client. In general, the hypnotist /communicator will accept and respond to the portions of the client's

[PAGE 110]

112 / SUMMARY


unconscious communication in such a way as to remain outside of
the client's consciousness, thus preserving the choice offered by
the client, the hypnotist/communicator effectively paces all the
models of the world the client as the first movement in successful
hypnotic communication. By this relatively simple device, the
term “resistant” client becomes unnecessary. This is, of couse, a
simplified review of some of the major patterns offered up to this
point in this volume — the use of multi-message communication
requires a learning process just as does any complex skill. This is
the structure of the phenomena referred to by Erickson as the
“double take” and the “triple take”.


The final section of this book is essentially as integration
of the explicit techniques offered by the 4-tuple and its operators.
It consists of two previously unpublished transcripts of Erickson
working with the two clients who have come to him for psychotherapeutic help. The films/videotapes from which these transcripts are taken are available as The Artistry of Milton H. Erickson,
M.D. from Herbert S. Lustig, M.D., Ltd., P.O. Box 261, Haverford,
PA 19041. We have organized the transcript into three columns:
the first column presents the actual work done by Erickson with
the clients. The second column presents what we refer to as the
mini-patterns—essentially the verbal patterns identified and presented in this volume of Patterns. We strongly urge that you
secure copies of Artistry of Milton H. Erickson, M.D. They are
excellent in quality and together with the commentary which
constitutes the bulk of the remainder of this volume of Patterns,
they represent a powerful set of resources for developing your
gracefulness, effectiveness and creativity in using the Ericksonian
techniques. We recommend that you study these patterns carefully,
selecting one or two of them for intensive use for several days
at a time until they become part of your systematic, unconscious
communication. At the end of the transcripts, we compare them,
identifying and presenting the next higher level of patterning
— the patterns, for example, of the sequencing of 4-tuples (one
example of an Ericksonian tracking mode) as Erickson demonstrates his grace and power in accepting, utilizing all communication /behavior and accessing the appropriate resources in these
two clients to assist them in the process of change.

[PAGE 111]

Footnotes
Part 1, Patterns II


1. We suggest to the readers who sincerely desire to make these
patterns of behavior part of their communication repertoire
that they select one or two of the patterns presented each day
and practice detecting and utilizing these patterns until they
understand the outcome or consequences of the use of such
patterns. Once you have gone through this procedure, the pat-
terns will drop into unconscious behavior leaving you free to
detect and utilize a new set. During the period of time when you
are practicing these patterns, utilize your own most highly
valued representational system as an aid in training yourself.
2. We recommend Gregory Bateson's excellent article concerning
difference, Form, Substance and Difference in Steps to an
Ecology of Mind, pages 448-466 (Ballantine Books, New York,
1972).
3. The term a bit of information has a well-defined technical
meaning (see any presentation of Information Theory). .
4. The alert reader will have noticed that having both the {2}
superscript and the time/space subscript on the variables
involves a certain amount of redundancy. Specifically,
whenever the superscript on a variable is e, then necessarily the
time/space coordinate is now/here. In other words when a
person is attending to sensory experience (experience generated
externally), they are experiencing sensory distinctions which
are taking place at the present time and place. It is only in the
case that the superscript on the 4-tuple is i, that the time/place
coordinates could be other than now/here. Thus, a less
redundant representation (and therefore, more elegant by
modeling criteria) would simply use time/space coordinate sub-
scripts: if no subscripts appeared on one of the variables of the
4-tuple, by convention, that variables would be assumed to be
now/here. We have preserved the redundancy in the 4-tuple
presented in the text as we have found it useful pedigogically in
instructing people in the use of the 4-tuple in our workshops
and seminars to use both of these representations.

[PAGE 112]

114 / FOOTNOTES


5. Another way of understanding the up-time strategy in terms of
the 4-tuple model is that the person operating out of the up-time
strategy has introduced a constraint on his R operator. Specific-
ally, this constraint can be thought of as a filter such that he is
aware of, represents in consciousness, only externally generated
experience. We can represents this visually as

Re (AgV. K,A, O>)


This representation suggests that a person operating out of the
uptime strategy may or may not be generating experience internal-
ly. In either case they have organized themselves so that they
bring into consciousness only the portion of their experience which
is externally generated. This is more congruent with our experience
in using and teaching up-time strategy. Our thanks to Paul Carter
for pointing this out as well as other comments.
6. This is a representation of the Whorf-Sapir hypothesis
regarding the influence language systems have on the
perception and experience of the users of the language systems
involved.
7. Acomplete model of how to identify and utilize form patterns
of verbal communicaton in order to assist a client in connecting
language representations with experience.
8. Another way of understanding the way that the Ag and R
operators interact is to assume that the R-operator applies first
to the 4-tuple (primary experience):

R<V,K, Ay 0>-— AV)

yielding, for example, the result that the client is at that point in
time attending the visual dimensions of the experience. Then,
once this has occurred, the client represents (to himself and to
others) the portion of experience he is aware of in language
forms.


If the Ag and R operators are applied in this order, then the 4-
tuple serves as a model for production of linguistic forms.
Specifically, this explains how people who consistently attend
in consciousness to the visual dimension of experience typically

[PAGE 113]

FOOTNOTES / 115


use predicates which presuppose a visual representation of
experience. Thus when the 4-tuple model is being used for the
purposes of a model of how people represent which portion of
the messages which they receive from some other person, then
it is useful to apply the R operator to the entire unit.

Adev. K, A, O>

That is,
R (A¿EV, K, A, O>)


If, however, the 4-tuple model is being used for the purposes of
understanding the relationship between a person’s most highly
valued representational system and the language forms they
select (unconsciously) and use in their verbal communication,
then the order of application which is most useful is


A, (R<V,K, A, 0>)

[PAGE 114]

PART II

[PAGE 115]

Transcript I


The following previously unpubished transcripts and
commentary demonstrates Milton H. Erickson's combination of
hypnotic and psychotherapeutic techniques. The transcripts
illustrate Erickson's exquisite and systematic use of language
patterns as well as the refined way these lower level patterns are
grouped in order to effectively access and utilize the client’s own
resources in trance induction and utilization. These technical skills
make his work powerful, effective, and subtle. It is useful to
remember that Erickson is acutely sensitive to non-verbal
communication, and is adroit in his use of such communication.
Monde is 32 years old, married and the mother of three
children. She has had three therapy sessions with Erickson during
the six months preceding, and proved to be an excellent hypnotic
subject, demonstrating her ability to carry out deep trance
phenomena. Her major concern was her insecurity about herself as
a person, wife, and mother.
Nick is 20 years old and single, he has had no previous
experience with hypnosis or psychotherapy. His only experience
with Erickson occurred the day before the session presented here,
in a social setting. Nick volunteered as a demonstration subject.
Erickson’s work with Nick is as systematic as his work with
Monde.

[PAGE 116]

120 / TRANSCRIPT I


The following transcripts contain three levels of patterning:


1. Verbal patterns outlined in Volume I of Patterns of
Hypnotic Techniques of Milton H. Erickson, M.D., by Richard
Bandler and John Grinder.
2. Second level patterns of accessing and utilizing the client's
own past experiences, the 4-tuples which contain the resources
each of the clients needs to make the changes he desires. Essentially,
this level of patterning is the grouping of the first level patterns
into natural classes for the purposes of trance induction and
utilization. For example, the first level patterns of deletion, causeeffect linguistic causal modeling, nominalization, conversational
postulate, missing referential index. ..combine to form instructions for the client to employ the higher level patterns of transderivational search as an integral part of the hypnotic session.
3. Third level patterns of the sequences of the 4-tuples. One
delightful result of applying the 4-tuple model to reach a deeper
understanding of Erickson's work is that the two transcripts which
appear and sound so different have a parallel (isomorphic)
structure at this third level of patterning. This very powerful level
of patterning therefore provides the hypnotist with an explicit
overall formal strategy for organizing their hypnotic communication. This level of patterning will be discussed separately at the
conclusion of the transcript and commentary on the first two level
patterns.

[PAGE 117]

TRANSCRIPTI / 121


Transcript I


E:

(1) (1) (1,2,3)

Well, Monde, this presupposition: . . this Transderivational search
time, I'd like to have time . . . take your time to past trance experience
you take your time about going... with verbal lead.
about going into a
trance.


(2) (2)


I don't want you to go presupposition: ...into a
into a trance too trance too soon.
soon.


(3) (3)

And you know how mind reading: . + . you

easy it is for you. know ...; presupposi-
tion: ...know...,..
how easy... ; missing
referential index: it; cau-
sal modeling conjunc-
tion: And you know...
(E turns to N)


(4) (4) (4,5,6)


And while Nick is causal modeling - con- Transderivational search
here, I'd like to have junction: And while to clients (M) past trance
you watch how Nick... ., implied caus- 4-tuple instructing (N) to
Monde’s face. ative: ... while. sen- use visual lead: pacing
tence fragment: .. . I'd observable and non-
like to have you watch observable behavior.
how Monde's face.; em-
bedded command: ...
watch how Monde's . . .


(5) (5)

And your uncon- causal modeling - conscious mind will learn junction: And your... .;
a great deal. embedded command: ...
learn a great deal. nomi-
nalizations: mind, deal;
presupposition: ...
learn . . . a great deal.

[PAGE 118]

122 I
/ TRANSCRIPT


(6) (6)

So turn and look so causal modeling implied
you can see her. causative: ...So turn...,
embedded command: ...
turn and look...
(E turns to M)


(7) (7) (7,8,9)

Not quite that fast, presupposition: . . . that Fractionation and
Monde. fast, .. . quite that fast.; building of response po-
deletion: what not quite. tential (instructing cli-
ents (M) to not experi-
ence the accessed 4-tuple
(8) (8) fully yet).

Let's have a little talk nominalizations: talk,
first, 'cause in the trance, importance; pretrance | will want you supposition: . . . first...
to do something of ..in trance. missing
importance for you. referential index:
something of importance

(9) (9)

And just for you. presupposition: . . . just
...; deletion: what just
for you?; casual model-
ing - conjunction: And...


(10) (10) (10 - 14)

And just waiting. causal modeling - con- Pacing clients (M) obser-
junction: And... pre- vable and non-observ-
supposition: .. . just..; able behavior.
mind reading: .. , wait-
ing. . . ; deletion: who's
waiting for whom/
what? sentence frag-
ment: And just wait.


(11) (11)

And you know why causal modeling - conI'm waiting for. conjunction: And you. .
sentence fragment:
And you know why I'm
waiting for.; mind read-
ing: ... youknow. ..;
deletion: . . . waiting for
what?

[PAGE 119]

TRANSCRIPT
I / 123


(12) (12)

That's right. (M's face missing referential index:
flattens) That's. . . ; deletion: ...
right for whom/what?


(13) (13)

That's right. missing referential index:
That's. . . ; deletion: ...
right for whom/what?


(14) (14)

All the way shut. (M's deletion: ... what all
eyes close) the way shut:..., pre-
supposition: .. . all the
way. .., sentence frag-
ment: ... all the way
shut. . .nominalization:
. Way...


(15) (15) (15 - 17)

Now go deeply into presupposiiton: Instructs client to attend
trance, so that your deeply. ... ... mem- to K variable (R-operaunconscious can deal ories that you have. . ; tor) of accessed 4-tuple:
with that vast store of ... vast... , nominali- Polarity Move.
memories that you zations: ... trance,
have. store, memories, uncon-
scious. . . , causal mod-
eling - implied causative:
. $0..., embedded
command: ... deal
with that. . .


(16) (16)

And I'd like to have causal modeling - conyou feel very comfort- junction: And. .., preable. supposition: ... com-
fortable..., ... very
comfortable. ..; em-
bedded command: ...
feel very comfortable. ..

[PAGE 120]

124 / TRANSCRIPT
I


(17) (17)

And while you're in causal modeling - conthe trance, | would junction: And... , imlike to have you feel plied causative:
the coolness, not too while..., ...80...,
cold, but just cool- presupposition: ...
ness—just enough while you're in... ,...
coolness so that you not too..., ...just...,
might want it to get cn. fust..., ..ejust a bit warmer. nough...,.. .just...,
. @ bit... , deletion:
. . too cold for what/
whom?...., ...a bit
warmer compared to
what/whom?. ..,nom-
inalizations:. . . trance,
coolness, coolness, cool-
ness. .., missing refer-
ential index: ... it. ..,
embedded command:
.. + feel the coolness. . .


(18) (18) (18-22)

Now, while you go nominalizations: Pacing age regression indeeper and deeper in- trance, scene, scene, life structing client to attend
to the trance, it is as .. , casual modeling - to visual variable (R-opif you're traveling a implied causative: erator) of accessed 4highway, passing this while... , ambiguity tuple begins metaphor.
scene, that scene, in scope: ... in your life.
your life. . . ‚presupposition: . .
deeper and deeper....,
missing referential index:
eo this
scene. .., ... that
scene. .., ...a high-
way... , embedded
command: . . . go deep-
er... , unspecified verb:
... traveling. ..,
passing. ..


(19) (19)

And perhaps some- causal modeling - conthing very nice that junction: And. .., misyou could recall that sing referential index:
you haven't thought . . something very nice
about for years. ..., sentence fragment:
And perhaps. .. for

[PAGE 121]

TRANSCRIPT
I / 125


years, unspecified verb:
...recall...,
thought. . .


(20) (20)

And | think it'd be causal modeling - conmost interesting if junction: And...,...
you would find some and. .., missing referchildhood, infantile ential index: ... it...
memory that you some childhood, infanhaven’t thought of for tile memory that...,
years—such as the presupposition: ...
time when you dis- most interesting. ..,
covered you could nominalization: .
stand up and the en- memory..., causal
tire world looked dif- modeling implied causaferent, tive: ...such as...,
missing referential index:
... the time..., un-
specified verb: .. . dis-
covered. . . , presuppos-
ition: .. . you discover-
ed..., deletion:
looked different to
whom/different how?
..., presupposition: ...
looked different. ..,
nominalization:
world...


(21) (21)

The world suddenly nominalization: .
takes on a wonderful world. ..., unspecified
look when you stand verb: ... takes on... ,
up and are no longer presupposition: ...
Creeping. takes on. . . , embedded
command: . . . takes on
a wonderful look when
. . , presupposition:
.. stand up... , impli-
ed causative: .. . when


(22) (22)

And, older, you bent causal modeling - conover and looked at the junction: ...and...,
world from between deletion: ...older than
your legs, whom?...

[PAGE 122]

I
126 / TRANSCRIPT


(23) (23)

so you would have causal modeling implied
another view of this causative: ...and..., ...so
world look, that you ..., embedded command:
looked at and found ...you would have...
so interesting. view... , unspecified
verb: .. . have. .., ref-
erential index: ... this
world look. .., nomi-
nalization: ... world
look. .., unspecified
verb: ... found...,
deletion: .. . found in-
teresting how:... pre-
suppostions: . . . would
have..., ... you
looked at. . .


(24) (24) (24 - 26)

t would like to have embedded command: ... Instruction to access
you single out some single out...thing..., (transderivationa]
one thing that you missing referential index: search) past pleasurable
could talk to me ...thing..., unspecified 4-tuple (kinesthetic variabout, that you could verb: ...single out..., im- able - R-operator).
talk to strangers plied causative: ...that
about, that you could wey »esthat..., ...that...,
share. embedded command: ...
you could share..., un-
specified verb: ...share...


(25) (25)

Something very pleas- sentence fragment:
ing, very charming. something..., ...charm-
ing..., referential index:
...something..., presup-
positions: ...very..., ...
very...,


(26) (26)

And just as you're implied causative: ...and
Spreading a feeling of just as..., presupposicool comfort, you can tion: ...spreading..., emSpread a feeling of bedded command:
warmth and comfort you can spread..., unover your experi- specified verb: ...radiate
ences, ‘cause they do ee, »«»SPread.... nomiradiate. nalization: ...feeling...,

[PAGE 123]

I / 127
TRANSCRIPT


...experiences..., selec-
tional restriction:
spread feeling...over ex-
periences..., deletion: ...
do radiate what/to
whom?...


(27) (27) (27)

Now you remember embedded command: Access (transderivationwatching Nick’s (hus- Now you remember... al search—L-operator
band) hands lift up: lift upward. . . , unspec- [V]) 4-tuple tracking to
ward. ified verb: ... remem- arm levitation.
ber... , presupposition;
... remember... , del-
etion: ... lifted up
when/where?. . .


(28) (28) (28)

| wonder if you know presupposition: .. . if Instructions to overlap
which of your hands you know. . . , unspeci- from V variable of accesis going to move up fied verb: ... know... sed 4-tuple to K variable
toward your face? ... move. .., presupposi- (R-operator). Pacing ob-
tion; ...move..., servable behavior con-
embedded question: . . . tinued arm levitation.
I wonder. .. which...
hands...


(29) (29) 29 - 35)


And | have that doubt, implied causative: .. Pacing observable and
it's going to lift and and..., nominaliza- non-observable behavior
move rapidly, up to- tion: ...doubt..., continued arm levitaward your face. missing referential index: tion.
.. its..., embedded
command: . . . its going
to lift and move...,
verbs: . . . lift and move
..., presuppositions:
..- rapidly...


(30) (30)

You're just beginning presupposition: ...
to know which one it know. . . , missing referis, since you're not ential index: ... which
going to be too sure one....,... it... ,imuntil it’s off your plied causative:
thigh. since... presupposi-
tion: . . . not be sure. .,

[PAGE 124]

128 / TRANSCRIPT
I


implied causative: ...
until... , referential in-
dex: . .. its...


(31) (31)

Up it comes. Faster. missing referential index:
And faster. (M's left ...1£..., unspecified verb:
hand and forearm lift ...comes..., ...know..,
slightly) Now you deletion: ...know what?
know. And it's pleas- ..., implied causative: ...
ing to know. and..., presupposition:
...to know...,


(32) (32)

And it's something implied causative:
like that feeling—up And..., missing referentoward your face— tial index: ...its...somethat feeling when thing...that feeling...,
once before in your nominalization: _...feelinfancy you discover- ing..., missing referened your hand belong- tial index: presupposied to you. tion: ...discovered...,
...Once before..., un-
specified verb: ...discov-
ered..., ...like...


(33) (33)

And a nice thing to implied causative: And.
learn—up toward your . - , missing referential
face. index: ... thing. ..,
embedded command: . .
. thing to learn... , un-
specified verb: ... to
learn... , presupposi-
tion: .. . learn... , del-
etion:. . . learn what?


(34) (34)

And your uncon- implied causative: ...and
scious is showing ..., missing referential
that jerky movement, index: ...that...movebecause your uncon- ment..., cause effect: ...
scious has allowed because..., nominalizayour conscious mind tions: ...unconscious...
to use fluid move- conscious mind..,,
ment; ...MOVEMENÍ..., presup-

[PAGE 125]

I / 12
TRANSCRIPT


position: ...use..., un-
specified verb: ...use...
.. Showing...


(35) (35)

and your unconscious implied causative: . .
does it in this more or and. .., nominalizaless reflex-like way. tion: .. . unconscious
(M’s left hand and . , missing referential
forearm continue to index: ...it..., un
lift slowly) specified verb: ... . does
..., presupposition:
.. does it in this... way


(36) (36) (36 - 38)


And sooner or later, | implied causative: ... Access . (transderivationdon’t know just when, And..., embedded al search V-variable Lyou will be wondering command: ... will be operator) 4-tuple to age
about something that wondering..., unspeci- regression and positive
you would like to see. fied verb: ...will be hallucination.
wondering..., missing
referential index:
wondering. . . ‚ missing
referential index: .
something. .., embed-
ded command: ... you
would like to see. ..,
presupposition:
would like to see...


(37) (37)

I don’t know if you embedded question: . . .
can open your eyes I don't know... open
and see it; maybe your eyes... , conjuncyou'll see it with your tion: ... and, missing
eyes closed. referential index: .. . it
ae | ras |
. , presupposition: . .
.. Open eyes..., ...
seeit...,... with eyes
closed. . .


(38) (38)

A something you have missing referential index:
not seen for a long . - . something. . . , pretime that pleased you supposition: . . . haven't

[PAGE 126]

130 / TRANSCRIPT I


then, and which you seen. ..,; unspecified
have forgotten about. verb: ... pleased...,
presupposition: ...
pleased. . . , missing ref-
erential index: .. . then
. , implied causative:
..and..., presup-
position: .. . have for-
gotten. .., unspecified
verb: ... forgotten...


(39) (39) (39 - 41)

1 talked with a young missing referential index: Metaphor continuation
woman the other ... young woman... (from 18) access (transnight and she’s other night. ... she's. . , derivational search Lknow what that good embedded command: . . operator V) to 4-tuple
feeling was. .. She's know what that age regression and pleas-
good feeling was..., ant memory (R-operator
nominalization: K)
good feeling. .., un-

specified verb:
know. .., presupposi-
tion: . .. know...


(40) (40)

She was holding her missing referential index:
dog, and that was ...She..., ...that...,. ...
before she went to she..., implied causaschool. tive: ...and...


(41) (41)

And some of the implied causative: ...
hopes that you had (E and. .., missing referapplies slight upward ential index: ... some
pressure to the sides . , nominalization:
of Monde's right ... hopes. . . , unspeciwrist) in your child- fied verb: ... had. ..,
hood. (M's right hand presupposition: ...had in
and forearm lift) your childhood..., sen-
tence fragment: ...and
some..., ...child-
hood...

(42) (42) (42 - 44)

And going to touch Conjunction: .. And Pacing (L operator V)
your face; and when it ., embedded com- access 4-tuple of limited
touches your face you mand: ... going to vision and negative halwon't be able to keep touch your face..., lucination.

[PAGE 127]

TRANSCRIPT! / 13

your teft, your right cause effect: ...and
hand in that position. when. .. you won't be
able. .., missing refer-
ential index: ...it...,
presupposition: ...
won't be able. . . , miss-
ing referential index: . . .
that position. . .


(43) (43)

You can't put it down presupposition: ...
now, your left hand can't put it down...,
has to touch your face unspecified verb:
first . . .Up it goes. can't put, missing refer-
ential index: ...if...,
presupposition: .. . has
to touch..., cause ef-
fect: ...has to..., first...,
presupposition: ...up...


(44) (44)

Now you and | can be presupposition: ...... all
all alone here. That's alone..., unspecified
alright. And | can talk verb: ...can be..., conto anybody I wish. versational postulate: ...
can be all alone here...,
implied causative: ...and
..., missing referential
index: ...anybody...

(Turns to Nick)

(45) (45) (45 - 49)

And Nick, I don’t want conjunction: _...and..., Pacing observable and
you to go into a presupposition: ...just non-observable behavior
trance just yet. But reap Yet..., unspecified continued arm levitayour unconscious verb: ...go..., nominali- tion.
mind is learning a zation: ...unconscious
great deal right now; mind..., presupposition:
...@ great deal..., unspec-
ified verb: .. .is learning
..+, deletion: . . . is learn-
ing what?...

(46) (46)


only you don't know presupposition: ...just
just what it is learn- ... unspecified verb: ...
ing. don't know..., missing

[PAGE 128]

I
132 / TRANSCRIPT


referential index: ...it...,
presupposition: ...is
learning..., unspecified
verb: ... is learning...,
deletion: ...what?...


(47) (47)

Vil tell you one of the missing referential index:
things you're learn- ...one thing..., presuping. position: ...you're learn-
ing.... unspecified verb:
...you're learning...


(48) (48)

And that is that your implied causative: ...and
left hand is beginning «se, presupposition: ...is
to lift without your ...15 beginning to lift...,
intention. unspecified verb: ...is
beginning...


(49) (49)


And now your eyelids implied causative: ...and
are showing you diffi- ..., unspecified verb: ...
culty, and your face is are showing..., presupsmoothing out. position: ...are showing
..., implied causative: ...
and..., unspecified verb:
...smoothing..., presup-
position: ...smoothng...
(Turns to Monde)

(50) (50) (50 - 67)

And while I’ve been implied causative: ...and Pacing—arm levitation
talking elsewhere, while..., missing referen- (L-operator - V) to age
Monde, you've been tial index: ...elsewhere regression 4-tuple (Rgoing deeper and ..., presupposition: operator K)
deeper asleep. have been going..., un-
specified verb: ...have
been going...


(51) (51)

And now let's get that conjunction: ...And...,
left hand up to your unspecified verb: ...get
face so that your right .... cause effect: ...so
hand can go down. that..., embedded com-
mand: ...right hand can

[PAGE 129]

TRANSCRIPT I / 1:

go down..., unspecified
verb: ...g0..., presup-
position: ...go..., ...get


(52) (52)

Closer and closer. It’s presupposition: closer
only about three closer..., deletion:
inches; two and three what's closer..., missing
quarters. (M smiles) referential index: ...its
That's right, you en- ..., presupposition:
joy that. only..., unspecified
verb: ...is..., missing ref-
erential index: ...that...,
presupposition: ...is
right..., unspecified
verb: ...is..., presupposi-
tion: ...enjoy..., unspec-
ified verb: ...enjoy...,
missing referential index:
...that..., ...only...

(53)

And it can come to conjunction: ...and...,
you as a surprise missing referential index:
when your right hand .ft..., presupposition:
knows before you do ...can come..., unspecifjust when your face is ied verb: ...can come...,
touched by your left conversational postuhand. late: ...and it can come
to you as a surprise...,
cause effect: ...when...,
selectional restriction: ...
right hand knows..., un-
specified verb: ...knows
..... presupposition:
knows..., presupposi-
tion: ...knows..., pre-
supposition: ...is touch-
ed..., conversational
postulate: ... your face is
touched...


(54) (54)

Closer and closer. presupposition: ...closer
and closer..., deletion:
.. what's closer to what?

[PAGE 130]

134 / TRANSCRIPT I


(55) (55)

And maybe you can conjunction: ...and....,
do a bit of cheating, presupposition: ...can
only you don't know do..., unspecified verb:
what | mean. That's ...can do..., conversaright, you're begin- tional postulate: ...do a
ning the cheating. bit of cheating..., mis-
sing referential index:
...bit of cheating...


(56) (56)

Only you don’t know presupposition: ...don’t
what ! mean; know..., unspecified
verb: ...don't know...,
deletion: ...what...


(57) (S7)

but your unconscious implied causative: ...but
does, and I'll Identify your..., nominalization:
it for you. ...unconscious..., pre-
supposition: ...does...,
unspecified verb: ...does
wee,» ddentify..., missing
referential index: ...it...,
conjunction: _ ...and...,
.. identify...


(58) (58)

You’re moving your presupposition: ...are
head so slightly moving...
downward to meet
your hand. (M smiles)


(59) (59)

And | hope you enjoy conjunction: — ...and...,
it as much as I wish. presupposition: ...enjoy
..., unspecified verb: ...
enjoy..., missing referen-
tial index: ...it..., impli-
ed causative: ...as much

[PAGE 131]

I / 13!
TRANSCRIPT


(60) (60)

And you probably will conjunction: ...and...,
enjoy it more than 1 presupposition: ...will
can know. enjoy..., unspecified
verb: ...will enjoy..., ...
know..., missing refer-
ential index: ...it..., im-
plied causative: ...more
than...


(61) (61)

How's it going to missing referential index:
culminate: ...it..., presupposition:
.. going to culminate...,
unspecified verb: ...go-
ing...


(62) (62)

your head going to embedded question: ...
move down and touch head going to move
your hand, your hand down and touch your
going to move up and hand?... presupposition:
touch your face? ...going to move..., un-
specified verb: ...going
to move..., embedded
command: ...touch your
hand...; presupposition:
...touch..., unspecified
verb: ...touch...


(62a)

embedded question: ...
hand...move ' up...face
+++) presupposition:
going to..., unspecified
verb: ...going..., embed-
bed command: ...touch
your face..., deletion:
...touch where?..., pre-
supposition: ...touch...


(63) (63)

You really don't know, presupposition: ...don't
but you're going to know..., unspecified
find out. verb: ...know..., implied

[PAGE 132]

136 / TRANSCRIPT]

causative: ...but..., pre-
supposition: ...find out
..., unspecified verb: ...
going..., sentence frag-
ment.


(64) (64)

Now which is it going presupposition: ...going
to be? to be..., unspecified
verb: ...going to be...,
missing referential index:
...it...,. deletion:
which is what going to
be?...


(65) (65)

Now you thought for presupposition: ...
a moment it'd be your thought..., unspecified
hand. verb: ...thought..., mis-
sing referential index:


(66) (66)

Still thinking it's your presupposition: ...still
hand— thinking..., unspecified
verb: ...thinking..., dele-
tion: ...who's thinking
about what?..., sentence
fragment.

(67) (67)


and when it touches, implied causative: ...and
your right hand will when..., missing referendrop. (M's left hand tial index: ...it..., preand face touch; her supposition: ...touches
right hand returns to ..., unspecified verb: ...
her thigh) touches..., presupposi-
tion: ...will drop..., un-
specified verb: ...will
drop..., deletion:
touches where, when?...

(68) (68) (68 - 72)

And very deeply. sentence fragment: Dele- Positive hallucination
tions: ...very deeply instructions for V/K dis-
what/where?... association.

[PAGE 133]

I / 137
TRANSCRIPT


(69) (69)

Now somewhere out missing referential index:
of the past you'll ...somewhere..., presupcome upon a happy position: ...will come...,
scene. unspecified verb:
come..., unspecified
verb: ...come..., dele-
tion: ...scene of what/
whom?... missing refer-
ential index: ...a happy
scene..., nominalization:
...SCene...


(70) (70)


And I want you to conjunction: ...And...,
visualize it. A happy embedded command: ...
scene. want you to visualize
it..., presupposition: ...
visualize it..., missing
referential index: ...it...,
sentence fragment. mis-
sing index: ...a happy
scene..., deletion: ...vis-
ualize what/whom/
where?...

(71)
(71)

And just reach in and conjunction: ...And...,
take it and bring it selectional restriction,
forth. embedded commands:
reach in...take it...
bring it..., presupposi-
tions; ...reach, take,
bring... missing referen-
tial index: ...it, it..., de-
letion: ...for whom/
what?...


(72) (72)

You don't have to presupposition: ...have
have everything, just ..., unspecified verb: ...
the happiness. have..., missing referen-
tial index: ...everything
..., nominalization:
happiness...

[PAGE 134]

138 / TRANSCRIPT
I


(73) (73) (73 - 81)

Let's see if you can conversational postu- Maintain V/K disassociopen your eyes a little late: ...let’s see if you ation 4-tuple reference
bit, and be alone with can...bit..., presupposi- for limited vision, posime. tion: ...open..., unspeci- tive and negative halluc-
fied verb: ...open..., inations. (L operator V)
implied causative: ...and
..., embedded command:
..be alone with me...,
presupposition: ...be a-
lone..., unspecified verb:
...be alone...


(74) (74)

And where we are conjunction: ...and...,
isn’t important. (M deletion: ...important to
partially opens her whom?... ,
eyes)


(75) (75)

You remember last presuppositions: ...you
time—you knew that remember..., unspecified
you were seeing verb: ...remember...,
everything. referential index:
last time — ..., presup-
position: ...knew..., un-
specified verb: ...knew
..., embedded command;
... were seeing every-
thing..., presupposition:
... Were seeing..., missing
referential index:
everything...


(76) (76)

But you saw that vide- implied causative: ...But
otaping, a scene that ..., missing referential
you didn’t remem- index: ...that videotapber— ing, a scene..., presup-
position: ...didn't re-
member..., unspecified
verb: ...remember...

[PAGE 135]

TRANSCRIPT
I / 139


(77) (77)

how Herb held up a missing referential index:
sign for me to read; ...@ sign..., deletion: ...
and you didn't see it when?..., conjunction:
at all. ...and..., presupposi-
tion: ...didn't see...


(78) (78)

And | want your atten- conjunction: ...And...,
tion just on me, while nominalization: ...attenyou sense and see tion: ..., scene..., ...past
that scene from the ..., deletion: ...attention
past. on me how/when?...,
implied causative:
while..., presupposition:
...sense..., unspecified
verb: ...sense..., presup-
position: ...see..., miss-
ing referential index: ...
that scene..., deletion:
... whose past? ...embed-
ded command: ...see...

(79) (79)

Your head will move presupposition: _ ... will
back so you can look move back..., deletion:
at me. (M's head ...when..., implied causmoves upward and ative: ...SO...
backward, her eyes
open fully and gaze
toward E, and her left
hand remains elevated near her face)


(80) (80)

And you're going to conjunction: ...And...,
go through a learning presupposition: ...going
experience, and see to go..., unspecified
just me. verb: ...go..., nominali-
zation: .. experience...,:
embedded command: ...
see just me..., missing
referential index: ...a
learning experience...

[PAGE 136]

140 / TRANSCRIPT
I

(81) (81)

And that’s all. You conjunction: ...Änd...,
hear my voice. And missing referential index:
now will come to your ...that's..., deletion: ..
mind some very nice, all...what?..., presuphappy experience out position: ...hear..., conof your childhood. junction: ...and..., pre-
supposition:...will come
..., unspecified verb: ...
will come..., missing ref-
erential index: ...some
very happy experience
..., nominalization: ...
experience..., childhood
++, presupposition:
out of your childhood...


(82) (82) (82)

And | tell you to conjunction: ...And..., Dialogue
describe it. presupposition: ...deM: Splashing in the scribe..., missing refer- Pacing
water. ential index: ...it...
E: Splashing in the
water?

M: Alake.
E: Tell me more
about it.
M: I'm doing so with
total abandon-
ment.
E: You what?
M: I'm playing with
total abandon-
ment.
E: A total abandon-
ment. And where
is the water? Or
don’t you really
know yet?
M: It’s a lake, not the
ocean. And I'm
very small.
E: Would you say
you're three feet
tall? Or don't you
even know what
three feet means?
M: I'm about two
years old.
E: Oh, twoyears
old.

[PAGE 137]

TRANSCRIPT I / 141

(83) (83) (83 - 88)

Now was two-year- unspecified verb: ...hav- Instructions to client (M)
old Monde having a ing..., missing referential to attend to V variable
very good time? index:...a very good (R-operator) of accessed
time... 4-tuple then overlap (R
operator) to K variable.
Continued metaphor
(84) (84) meta instructions.

And memorize all conjunction: ...And...,
those good feelings, unspecified verb:
because there’s a lot memorize..., missing
of them. referential index: ...all
those good feelings...,
nominalization: _ ...feel-
ings..., presupposition:
...there's..., missing ref-
erential index: ...them
..., cause-effect: ...be-
cause...


(85) (85)

It's a learning. missing referential index:
dE... ...learning...,
nominalization: ...learn-
ing...


(86) (86)

Just as learning an implied causative: ...just
alphabet and learning as..., presupposition: ...
to recognize letters learning an alphabet...,
and numbers is the unspecified verb:
basis for an entire learning..., missing refuture of reading, ferential index: ...an alwriting, enumerating, phabet...letters...num-
bers..., unspecified verb:
...recognize..., dele-
tions: ...reading, writ-
ing, enumerating what?


(87) (87)

so are the good feel- selectional restriction:
ings of splashing with implied causative: ...so
total abandonment in ..., missing referential
water— index: ...good feeling...,
deletion: ...whose feel-
ings of.... nominaliza-

[PAGE 138]

142 / TRANSCRIPT I

tion: ...total abandon-
ment...


(88) (88)

something that you missing referential] index:
learn and will stay ...something..., embedwith you in later life ded command: ...someto be used in a direct- thing that you
ed fashion. learned..., unspecified
verb: ...learned..., pre-
supposition: ...you
learned and will stay...,
referential index: ...later
life..., unspecified verb:
...used..., presupposi-
tion: ...to be used... fash-
ion..., missing referen-
tial index: ...directed
fashion..., nominaliza-
tion: ...fashion..., dele-
tion: ...who/how used
learning’...


(89) (89) (89 - 92)

And now I'd like to causal modeling con- Instructs client (M) to
have you see yourself junction: ...And..., em- access (L-operator - V)
over there, (E briefly bedded command: ...see positive K 4-tuple atpoints to M's left; she yourself over there..., tending (R-operator - V)
looks toward her left) presupposition: ...see to V variable, overlap
yourself.... missing re- (R-operator) to K vari-
ferential index: ...over able; pacing.
there...


(90) (90)

doing something presupposition: ...doing
else, very charm- ..., missing referential
ing... index: ...something else
..., unspecified verb: ...
doing..., deletion:
charming to whom?...


(91) (91)

Wt! clear up; you'll embedded command: ...
see it plainly. clear up...see it plainly
.... missing referential
index: ...it..., presup-

[PAGE 139]

I / 143
TRANSCRIPT

position: ...clear up...,
unspecified verb: ...clear
up...


(92) (92)

Tell me what it is. deletion: ...tell when/to
: Chasing ducks. whom?...missing _ refer-
Chasing a duck? ential index: ...tell me
: A group of ducks. what...it is...
msms A group of ducks.
Now how do you
like the looks of
little Monde?
M: Very carefree.
E: What's that?
M: Very carefree.
E: Very carefree.


(93) (93 - 96)

And that is something conjunction: ...And..., Meta instructions to
that little Monde can missing referential index: anchor positive K variuse in the years to .that..., ...something able of accessed 4-tuples
come, isn’t it? .., embedded com- for later use; continued
mand: ...Monde can use metaphor. Tag-question
in years to come..., un- (polarity).
specified verb: ...can use
..., presupposition:
can use...


(94) (94)

And she needs to conjunction: ...And...,
learn that enjoyment. embedded command: ...
needs to learn..., presup-
position: ...needs to
learn..., unspecified
verb: ...to learn..., miss-
ing referential index: ...
that enjoyment...


(95) (95)

"Cause along life’s implied causative:
highway are various cause..., nominalizathings and you need tion: ...life's highway...,
to Jearn the things, missing referential index:
...various things..., con-
junction: ...and..., em-

[PAGE 140]

144 / TRANSCRIPT I

bedded command:
need to learn the things
..., unspecified verb: ...
to leam..., presupposi-
tion: ...need to learn...,
missing referential index:
...thing...


(96) (96)

and discover later conjunction:. ...And...,
how you can use presupposition: ...disthose learnings. You cover later..., unspecifi-
"re not cold, are you? ed verb: ...discover...,
: No. discover when/where
Comfortable? /how?..., presupposi-
: Yes. tion: ...can use..., unmemes It’s nice to be specified verb: ...use...,
comfortable, isn’t missing referential index:
it? ..those learnings...,
nominalization: ...learn-
ings..., tag question: ...
are you...


(97) (97) (97 - 100)

Now, think of some- presupposition: ...think Instructs client (M) to
thing bad, before the of something bad..., un- access (L-operator - V)
age of six; and watch specified verb: ...think negative K 4-tuple, atyourself doing it, ., deletion: ...bad to tending (R-operator) to
whom?..., missing refer- V variable; trade K value
ential index: ...some- of negative K 4-tuple for
thing bad..., conjunc- previously anchored
tion: ...and..., presup- positive K value. Pacing
position: ...watch your- tag question.
self doing it..., missing
referential index: ...it...


(98) (98)

‘cause before the age implied causative: ...beof six you can't do cause..., presupposition:
anything that's really ...can't do anything very
very bad. bad..., unspecified verb:
M: Kicked in a win- ...do..., missing referen-
dow. tial index: ...anything
E: You what? that’s very bad..., deleM: Kicked in a win- tions: ...bad to whom?
dow.
E: Did you enjoy
kicking in that
window?

[PAGE 141]

I / 145
TRANSCRIPT

M: | was shocked
that it broke.
E: You were shocked
that it broke.


(99) (99)

It's nice to learn what tag question: ...isn't it
a shock is, isn't it (M ..., missing referential
laughs) index: ...it..., ...it's...,
unspecified verb:...learn
..., Nominalization:
shock...


(100) (100)

And adult understand- conjunction: _...and...,
ings are based on missing referential index:
understandings that . there..., ...adult unwe get. How do you derstandings..., ...unfeel, being here and derstandings..., delebeing there? (M looks tion: ...get from whom/
to the left and then where?..., unspecified
returns her gaze to- verbs: ...based..., ...get
ward E)
M: It feels natural.
E: Quite natural. And
how tall are you
over there? (E
briefly turns his
toward M's left; M
looks toward her
left)... . Where
is the window?
: Ws a school win-
dow.
And where's the
broken glass?
In the cafeteria.
Anybody around?
: |! was too young to
eat lunch there,
but the funch-
room’s full of
people. And I have
on a red raincoat.
And my mother's
picking me up at
12 o’clock.
M: How hungry are
you?

[PAGE 142]

146 / TRANSCRIPT
I

M: And I’m gonna be
in trouble.
E: How hungry are
you?
M: Um not, I’m scar-
ed.
E: Real scared. Scar-
ed little Monde.
M: Yep.


(101) (101) (101 - 102)

E: And doesnt a conjunction: ...And..., Instructs client (M) to
small child's ter- embedded command: ... access (L-operator - V)
ror look different- small child's terror look positive K 4-tuple at-
ly than it really differently than it really tending (R-operator - V),
feels to the child? feels..., missing referen- overlap (R-operator - V)
tial index: ...small child's to K variable.
terror...it...the child...,
presuppositions: ...ter-
ror looks..., nominaliza-
tions: ...terror...


(102) (102)

The child sees some- missing referential index:
thing very big, and ... The child...something
you can smile about very big...it..., presupit. position: ...child sees
something...you can
smile..., conjunction: ...
...Child sees...and...you
smile...


(103) (103) (103 - 105)

Now let's go to some missing referential index: Transderivational search
happy thing when you ...Let's...some happy (L-operator - V) to K
were about 10 years time...something...long variable of accessed 4old—something you time ago..., presupposi- tuple, maintaining V/K
forgot a long time tion: ...let's go...you disassociation.
ago... Going to tell forgot..., unspecified
me about it? verb: ...go..., ...forgot
M: 1 caught my first ..., deletions:...happy to
fish. whom?...
E: How big was the
fish?
M: It's a little sun-
fish.
E: A little sunfish.

[PAGE 143]

TRANSCRIPT I / 147

(104) (104)

Why didn’t you show presupposition: ...why
me how big the sun- didn't you show me...,
fish was? There's missing referential index:
something strange, ... There's something
isn't there, about you strange..., tag question:
right now? | can do ...isn't there..., presupthis (E briefly holds position: ...something
his hands apart) strange...about you...
M: 1 feel very unat-
tached to the rest
of my body.

(105)

E: You're unattached
to your body. (M
looks toward E) In
other words,
would you like to
see your adult
body sitting (E
briefly points to
M's left; M looks
toward her left) in
that chair over
there? And your
unconsclous
mind over here, (E
briefly turns his
body to the left,
points to M's left,
and continues to
point) but your
body's over there?
Tell me the posi-
tion in which
you're sitting. (E
briefly turns his
head toward M's
left)
M: My feet are on the
floor.
E: What's that?
M: My feet are on the
floor.
E: Your feet are on
floor, yes.
M: My toes are turn-
ed in.
E: (E returns his
hands to the rest-
ing clasped posi-

[PAGE 144]

148 / TRANSCRIPT 1

tion) Now I'd like
to
zZ : I'm leaning to the
left.
What's that?
zm : I'm leaning to the
left.
m Vil tell you some-
thing else that's
interesting — yes?
= My hand is still
up.


(105)

presupposition:
You're unattached...,
unspecified verb: ...un-
attached..., presupposi-
tion: ... you like to see...,
nominalization: ...un-
conscious mind. ..,
(106) (106) (106 - 107)

E: Your hand’s still conjunction: — ...and..., Pacing, arm levitation
up; and now you presupposition: ...you and dialogue.
know you can’t know you can't put it
put it down. (M down..., unspecified _
laughs) verb: ... know...


(107) (107)


The only way you can cause-effect: ... The only
put it down is if the way you can...is if...,
right hand moves up presuppositions: ...you
at the same speed can put it down...right
that the left hand hand moves up...left
moves down... Oh, hand moves down...,
you can try harder. (M unspecified verb: ...
looks toward E and moves..., embedded
then gazes to the left) command: ...move up at
than that (M laughs) same speed that...
— much harder. | want
some action.
M:I think Um too
lazy?
E: What's that?
M:| think Um too
lazy.
E: You think you're
too lazy?
M: I’m comfortable.

[PAGE 145]

TRANSCRIPTI / 149


E: You're comfort-
able, very com-
fortable.
M: Yes..


(108) (108) (108 - 115)


E: That's way it's missing referential index: Metaphor, meta-
nice to be, now, ...that’s way...its nice... instructions (R-operator'
in the future. At in the future...in a cer- - K variable) for future
the present time, tain way..., implied use. Polarity pace.
even though you causative: ...even
can't move your though... presupposi-
hands except in a tion: ...it's nice...can't
certain way, you move your hands except
can feel comfort- ...can feel comfortable
able, can you not? ..., unspecified verbs:
M: Yes. ...moves...feel..., tag
question: ...can you not?


(109) (109)

E: And you could conjunction: ...And...,
feel comfortable presupposition: ...could
in a crowd?... feel comfortable..., un-
specified verb: ...feel...,
missing referential index:
...acrowd...


(110) (110)


I'd like to tell you missing referential index:
something. Every- ...something...everybody is like his finger- body..., presupposition:
prints. ...is — like...fingerprints
..., unspecified verb: ...
like...


(111) (111)

They're one of a kind. missing referential index:
And never will be ...they're one of..., deleanother like you. And tion: ...to whom?..., ...
you need to enjoy conjunction: — ...and...,
always, being you. missing referential index:
...Another..., presuppos-
ition: ...need to enjoy...,
unspecified verb: ...en-
joy...

[PAGE 146]

150 / TRANSCRIPT
1


(112) (112)

And you can’t change conjunction: ...And...,
it—just as finger- presuppositions: ...you
prints can’t be chang- can't change it..., uned. specified verb: ...change
..., missing referential
index: ...it..., implied
causative: ...just as...,
presupposition: ...fin-
gerprints can't be chang-
ed..., unspecified verb:
...Changed...


(113) (113)

And | want you have conjunction: ...and...,
that same secure feel- presupposition: ...have
ing that you had when same secure feeling...
you were splashing in you had when you were
the water, when you splashing..., unspecified
caught your sunfish. verb? ...have...had...,
missing referential index:
...Same secure feeling...
splashing in the water...
nominalization: ...feel-
ing..., implied causative:
...When...


(114) (114)

That same secure missing referential index:
feeling that you have ...that same secure feeleven now when you ing..., nominalizations:
can't move your hand, ...secure feeling..., preexcept in the way |! supposition: ...have
defined. even now..., can’t move
your hand..., unspecifi-
ed verb: ...have..., ...
move..., define..., impli-
ed causative: ...when...

(115) (115)

And you can feel com- conjunction: ...And...,
fortable anytime you embedded command: ...
wish. (M gazes to- can feel comfortable...,
ward E) presupposition: ...can
feel comfortable anytime
you wish.,., unspecified
verbs: ...feel..., ...wish

[PAGE 147]

TRANSCRIPT
I / 151


..., missing referential
index: ...anytime...


(116) (116) (116 - 122)

You think | ought to mind reading: ...you Meta-instructions linkprove it to you? Al- think I ought to..., pre- ing eye closure to negaright. suppositions: ...to prove tive K variable and eye
it..., unspecified verbs: opening to positive K
...think...prove..., mis- variable.
sing referential index:
..«it..., deletion:
what's alright for
whom?...


(117) (117)

As soon as you shut cause-effect: ...As soon
your eyes you'll begin as you'll feel..., presupto feel uncomfortable. position: ...shut your
(M's eyes shut) eyes...you'll beging to
feel...unspecified verb:
.. feel...


(118) (118)

And you'll feel com- conjunction: ...and...,
fortable as soon as cause-effect: ... you'll feel
you get them open, ...A5 SOON @S..., presup-
position: ...you'll feel
comfortable..., as you
get them open..., un-
specified verb: ...feel...,
missing referential index:
„them...


(119) (119)

but you can’t get 'em conjunction: ...and...,
open right away. And implied causative: ...but
you're really going to you..., presupposition:
feel uncomfortable— ...can't_ get ‘em open...,
very. (M winces) (M's missing referential index:
eyes blink) ...them..., presupposi-
tion: ...you're really go-
ing to feel..., unspecified
verb: ...feel...

[PAGE 148]

152 / TRANSCRIPT
I


(120) (120)

Now (M’s eyes open presupposition: ...you
and gaze to left) you know what to do to feel
know what to do to ..., unspecified verb: ...
feel comfortable; (M know..., ...feel..., misstooks toward E) then ing referential index: ...
you'll have more cour- what to do..., implied
age, won't you? (M causative: ...then..., presmiles and looks to- supposition: ...have
ward left) more courage..., unspec-

ified verb: ...have...,
nominalization: ...cour-
age..., tag question: ...
won't you?...


(121) (121)

You felt uncomfort- presupposition: ...you
able, did you not? (M felt..., tag question: ...
nods head vertically) did you not?...deletion:
...uncomfortable about?


(122) (122)

What (M looks to- missing referential index:
wards E) did it feel ...what...it..., deletion:
like? . felt like to whom?...
M: Like ! just had (M presupposition: ...felt...
shakes head hori-
zontally, briefly
closes her eyes,
then gazes toward
E) to move my
hands.
E: As if you had to
move your hand.


(123) (123) (123 - 131)

Now how about se- presupposition: ...how Transderivational search
lecting something about selecting some- (L-operator - unspecifelse that’s even more thing...that's even more ified) to negative K (Runcomfortable? uncomfortable..., mis- operator) 4-tuple. Meta-
sing referential index: instructions linking eye
...something..., dele- closure to negative K
tion: ... more uncomfort- 4-tuple and eye opening
able than what?/to to positive K 4-tuple;
whom?... dialogue.

[PAGE 149]

TRANSCRIPTI / 153


(124) (124)

One of the worst missing referential index:
things that you can ..One of the worst
think of. things..., presupposi-
tion: ...you can think of
.... unspecified verb: ...
think...


(125) (125)

Close your eyes and presuppositions: ...close
feel that discomfort, your eyes... feel...knowknowing you can con- ing you can control...,
trol it by opening your missing referential index:
eyes. „that discomfort...it...,
unspecified verbs: ...feel
...knowing..., nominali-
zation: ...discomfort...


(126) (126)


Now first you feel it embedded command: ...
thoroughly, the most first you feel it..., preuncomfortable feeling supposition: ...you feel
you've ever had. it...the most uncomfort-
able feeling..., unspecifi-
ed verb: ...feel..., mis-
sing referential index: ...
it..., the most uncom-
fortable feeling...,


(127) (127)

Close your eyes and presupposition: ...Close
feel it... (M closes your eyes... feel it..., uneyes) specified verb: ...feel...,
missing referential index:


(128) (128)

And you can afford to conjunction: _...and...,
suffer and feel miser- presuppositions: ...you
able because you can afford to suffer and
know that when you feel miserable...you
have really felt it thor- know..., open your eyes
oughly, you can open and banish..., unspecifiyour eyes and banish ed verbs: ...afford..., ...
it... feel..., ...know..., ...felt

[PAGE 150]

154 / TRANSCRIPT
I


un, «-Danish..., missing
referential index: ...feel
it..., banish it..., implied
causative: ... because...


(129) (129)

But really examine causal conjunction: ...
that uncomfortable But..., | presupposition:
feeling... ...really examine..., un-
specified verb: ...exam-
ine..., missing referential
index: ...that uncomfort-
able feeling...


(130) (130)

That's not as threat- missing referential index:
ening, really, as you ...that's..., presupposithought. . . You're tion: ...that’s not as
getting through it... threatening..., deletion:
.. threatening to whom?
..mind reading: ...as
you thought..., unspeci-
fied verb: ...getting...,
missing referential index:


(131) (131)

Have you had enough conversational postuof it? (M smiles and late: ...Have you had...,
nods head vertically) missing referential index:
You (M opens eyes enough of it..., presupand looks to left) position: ...you know...,
know what to do. unspecified verb:
Now I'd like to have’ know..., missing referyou look at two-year- ential index: ...what to
old Monde... . What do...
is she doing now?
M: Running.
E: Running? Now
let's look at her
with the ducks . .
What's she doing?
M: Giving them bread-
crumbs.
E: Giving them bread-
crumbs. ..How
plainly do you see

[PAGE 151]

TRANSCRIPTI / 155


the ducks?
: They're very clear.
How many?
: About twelve.
mame You say about
twelve. Can you
count to twelve?
= :(M laughs)...Can
count to ten.


(132) (132) (132 - 149)

E: You count to ten. missing referential index: Meta-instructions; trans-
That’s right... ...that’s..., deletion: ... derivational search (L-
You can pretend right for whom?..., pre- operator - K; R-operator
anything and suppositions: ... you can - K) to negative K 4-
master it. . Now pretend... and master..., tuple; links negative K
that broken win- unspecified verbs: ...pre- 4-tuple to eye closure;
dow—did your tend...master..., missing pacing; links positive K
mother spank referential index: ...any- to eye opening; tag ques-
you? thing...it..., embedded tion tense change.
Yes. command: ...master it
Close your so, sentence fragment:
She made me pay „now that...
for it.
Close your eyes.
Out of my allow-
ance.


(133) (133)

E: Close your eyes, presupposition: ...feel
(M closes eyes) that spanking...feel it
feel that spanking intensely..., missing ref-
right now. (M erential index: ...that
winces) .. ..Feel spanking...it...
it very intensely...


(134) (134)

That's quite some presupposition:
spanking, wasn't it? that's quite some spank-
(M opens eyes, looks ing..., missing referential
toward teft, then to- index: ...some spanking
wardE)... ...it..., tag question: ...
question: ...wasn't it...,
ungrammatical sen-
tence...

[PAGE 152]

156 / TRANSCRIPT
1


(135) (135)


How did it feel to be presupposition: ...feel to
spanked? (M looks be spanked..., missing
toward left) referential index: ...it...,
M: It’s worse before deletion: ...spanked by
than it is during, whom?...
(M looks toward
E) or after. (M
briefly closes
eyes, smiles, and
looks toward E)


(135a) (135a)

E: And while it’s go- causal conjunction: .. .
ing on, you don't and while. .., presup-
think you'll live position: ... you don't
through it, do think you'll live through
you? (M laughs, . , unspecified verbs:
and looks toward ... think... live. ..,
left)... Isn't it tag question: ...do
that way with all you?. .., missing refer-
troubles? ential index: .. . it that
M: Umhuh.... way... all troubles. . .
nominalization:
trouble. . .


(136) (136)

E: But you did live causal conjunction: ...
through that but..., unspecified verb:
spanking... And ...live..., missing refer-
you can live ential index: ...that
through (M looks spanking..., conjunc-
toward E) other tion: ...and..., presup-
troubles. . . position: ...you can live
..., unspecified verb: ...
live..., missing referen-
tial index: ...other
troubles: ...nominaliza-
tions: ...troubles...


(137) (137)

How would you like conversatonal postulate:
another spanking? (M ..How would you...,
looks toward left, deletion: ...spanking by
smiles, and shakes whom?
head horizontally).

[PAGE 153]

TRANSCRIPT
I / 157


(138) (138)

Well, you’re going to conjunction: ...presupget another... (M position: ...you're going
looks toward E) Anda to get and a very hard
very hard one. And one..., missing referenyou'll get it as soon tial index: ...another...
as you close your hard...one..., conjunceyes. tion: ...and..., presup-
position: ...you'll get it
..., unspecified verb: ...
get..., missing referential
index: ...it..., cause-
effect: ...as soon as...,
embedded command: ...
close your eyes...


(139) (139)

And you want to think conjunction: ...and...,
they won't close. presupposition: ...you
want to thnk..., unspeciM: (M looks toward fied verb: ...won’t think
left) No, I'd want ..., embedded com-
to know who's go- mand: ...close...
ing to spank me.
E: You want to
know?


(140) (140)

You'll know when presupposition: ...you'll
your eyes are closed know..., unspecified
... It’s going to be a verb ...know..., implied
hard spanking. (M causative: ...when...,
looks toward E and presupposition:...going
then toward the left) to be a hard spanking...,
deletion: ...hard to
whom? ...spanking by
whom?


(141) (141)

And trying to avoid conjunction: ...and...,
that spanking, your presuppositions: ...tryeyes are going to ing to avoid..., unspeciclose and stay closed. fied verb: ...trying...,
Down go the lids. missing referential index:
Now. (M's eyes close ...that spanking..., emand she winces) bedded command:
eyes are going to close

[PAGE 154]

158 / TRANSCRIPT!

and stay closed..., pre-
supposition: ...going to
close...stay closed...

(142) (142)

And there’s gonna be conjunction: ...and...
some hate in you, for presupposition: ...going
that spanking—hate to be hate, anger and
and anger and pain... pain..., unspecified
verb: ...going..., nomi-
nalizations: ... hate...
anger...pain..., missing
refefential index: ...for
that spanking..., dele-
tion: ...spanking by
whom?


(143) (143)

And feel it all...(a conjunction: ...and...,
tear begins to form in presupposition: ...feel it
each eye) all..., missing referential
index: ...it all...


(144) (144)

And you're going to conjunction: ...and...,
feel some “never a- presupposition: ... you're
again"... going to feel..., nominal-
ization: ...“never again”


(145) (145)

And now you're going conjunction: ...and now
to feel “I can live .«, presupposition:
through this, and nev- you're going to feel “I
er again will | have can live”...and "never
that spanking and again will I have”...,
that hate and that unspecified verb: ...live
anger.” ... ..., missing referential
index: ...this...that...
spanking...that hate...
that anger..., nominali-
zations: ...hate...anger
.. spanking...

[PAGE 155]

I / 159
TRANSCRIPT


(146) (146)


And let your bottom conjunction: ...and...,
be stinging— still implied causative:
stinging after you after..., presuppositions:
open your eyes... ...bottom be stinging...
(M's eyes open) still stinging.... embed-
ded command: ...open
your eyes...


(147) (147)


And tell: me about conjunction: ...and...,
(M's eyes look toward presupposition: ...tell
right) the = stinging me about the stinging...,
feelings. (M's eyes missing referential index:
look toward left)... . ...the stinging feelings...
by whom?


(148) (148)


You don't need to presupposition: ...don't
remember the incid- need to remember...you
ent, but you can re- can remember..., unmember the feelings. specified verb: ...re-
(M looks toward E, member..., nominalizanods head vertically, tion: ...incident..., ...
and looks toward left) feelings..., embedde
command: ...you can
remember the feelings...


(149) (149)

How does your bot- presupposition: ...bottom feel? (M looks tom feel?...
toward E and then
toward left)
M: Hurt from a hair-
brush.
E: Like the hairbrush
had been used.


(150) (150) (150 - 155)

Is it alright (M looks conversational postu- Meta-instructions for futoward E) to tell me late: ...Is it alright to tell ture use of positive (anand strangers about . presupposition: chored to eye closure
the incident? (M looks tell me..., missing refer- and opening) K 4-tuple;
toward left)... ential index: ...strangers amnesia; begin reinte-
about the incident..., gration of all accessed
nominalization: ...inci- 4-tuples; re-orientation
dent... to adult Monde.

[PAGE 156]

I
160 / TRANSCRIPT


(151) (151)

Your unconscious presupposition: ...your
knows all (M looks unconscious knows...
toward E) about it— more than your conprobably more than scious mind does...; unyour conscious mind specified verb; ...knows
does. ..., nominalizations: ...
unconscious...conscious
mind..., missing referen-
tial index: ...about it...


(152) (152)

And your uncon- conjunction: — ...and...,
scious mind can keep presupposition: ...unfrom you, from your conscious mind can keep
conscious mind, any- from you conscious
thing it doesn't want mind anything it doesn't
you to know con- wnat you to know...,
sciously. unspecified verbs: ...
keep..., ...know..., mis-
sing referential index: ...
anything..., nominaliza-
tions: ...unconscious
mind..., ...conscious
mind..., embedded com-
mand: ...can keep from
you...


(153) (153)

And that way you can conjunction: ...and...,
lessen the pain. Is missing referential index:
that agreeable? (M ‚that way..., presupnods head vertically) position: ...you can les-
sen..., unspecified verb;
...lessen..., nominaliza-
tion: ...pain..., missing
referential index: ...that
.... deletion: ...agreeable
to whom?..., embedded
command: ...can lessen
the pain...


(154) (154)

And you can do that conjunction: ...and...,
in the future. Or many presupposition: ...you
things... can do that..., unspecifi-
ed verb: ...do..., missing

[PAGE 157]

TRANSCRIPT1 / 161


referential index:
many things..., ...that in
the future..., nominali-
zation: ...future..., sen-
tence fragment.

(155) (155)

And now, two-year- conjunction: ...and...,
old Monde, and the presupposition: ...twowindow-breaking year-old... window
Monde, and the duck- breaking...duck-chasing
chasing Monde, duck- ...duck feeding...grows
feeing Monde, grows up..., adult Monte...,
up, into an adult unspecified verb:
Monde. grows...

M: Not yet. (M looks
to left)


(156) (156) (156 - 165)

And she's going to conjunction: ...and..., Completes integration of
meet me. embedded command: ... all accessed 4-tuples; re-
she's going to meet me orientation to adult
«se, presupposition: Monde; tests anchoring
going to meet..., unspec- linkage between eye
ified verb: ... meet... opening and positive K
4-tuple.
(157) (157)

Only the window- presupposition: ...winbreaking, (M looks dow _ breaking... watertoward E) duck- splashing Monde doesn't
chasing, water- know...adult Monde
splashing Monde does..., unspecified
doesn’t knowme... verb: ...know...
But the adult Monde
does—


(158) (158)

the one with secure missing referential index:
feelings and comfort. the one..., nominaliza-
tion: ...feeling..., ...dis-
comfort..., presupposi-
tion: ...secure...

[PAGE 158]

162 / TRANSCRIPT
I


(159) (159)
Knowing that when presupposition: ...knowdiscomfort strikes ing that...you can close
you, you can close ...then open..., unspeciyour eyes and then fied verb: ...knowing...
open them. strikes..., embedded
commands: ...when dis-
comfort strikes..., you
can close your eyes...
and then open them...,
implied causative:
when..., ...then..., nom-
inalization: ...discom-
fort...

(160) (160)

and show me how: conjunction: ...and...,
you'll behave when presupposition: ...show
something makes you me...you'll behave...you
feel insecure or uncer- feel..., implied causatain (M’s eyes look tive: ...when..., missing
toward left, slowly referential index:
close, slowly open, something..., unspecifiand then quickty ed verbs: ...show...beclose)... have...

(161) (161)

And you need all that conjunction: — ...and...,
time, do you? (M’s presupposition: ...you
eyes open and look need all that time..., untoward left)... specified verb: ...need
.... Missing referential
index: ...all that time
.«.., nominalization: ...
time..., tag question: ...
do you?...


(162) (162)

Show me how quickly presupposition: ...show
you can close (M «.., how quickly...can
looks toward E) your close...and banish...,
eyes and banish the unspecified verbs:
discomfort. show...banish..., mis-
sing referential index: ...
the discomfort..., nomi-
nalization: ...discomfort

[PAGE 159]

TRANSCRIPT I / 163


(163) (163)

and open them with conjunction: ...and...
the discomfort gone. presupposition:- ...open
(M looks toward left, them..., discomfort gone
and blinks slowly) ..., unspecified verb: ...
gone..., missing referen-
tial index: ...the discom-
fort..., nominalization:
.. discomfort...


(164) (164)

You don't even have presupposition: ...even
to remember what have to..., missing refthat discomfort was. erential index: ...that
(M looks toward e) discomfort..., nominali-
zation: ...discomfort...


(165) (165)

By the way, you're tag question: ...by the
comfortable? way, you're comfortM: Yes. able?...


(166) (166) (166- 172)

E: I'm going to a- presupposition: ...go ing Meta-instruction for fu-
waken you very to awaken..., missing ture pacing and testing
shortly. referential index: ...very anchoring, linkage (be-
shortly... tween arm movement
and positive K 4-tuple)


(167) (167)

And I’m going to ask conjunction: _ ...and...,
of you something that presupposition: ...ask of
will cause you dis-. you something...will
comfort. Briefly. cause you..., missing
referential index:
something..., nominali-
zaton: ...discomfort...,
missing referential index:
...briefly...


(167a) (167a)


Will that be alright? deletion: ...alright - for
M: Yes. whom?..,

[PAGE 160]

164 / TRANSCRIPT I


(168) (168)

E: I'l! ask two things presupposition: ...two
of you; will that things of you..., missing
be alright? (M referential index: ...two
nods head verti- things...that..., deletion:
cally)... ...be alright for whom?


(169) (169)

After you’re awaken- implied causative:
ed, | want you to find after..., presuppositions:
out how horribly hot it you're awakened...to
is here— find out..., unspecified
verb: ...find...


(170) (170)

and how it’s impos- conjunction: ...and if...,
sible for you to move presupposition: ...you'd
your left hand... like...be irritable...
about it..., unspecified
verbs: ...like...,

(171) (171)

And if you'd like to be implied causative: ...and
irritable with me a- if.... presupposition: ...
bout it being so hot, you'd like...be irritable
will you do so? „about it..., unspecifiM: Yes. ed verbs: ...like..., nom-
inalization: — ...irritable
..., tag question: ...will
you do so?...


(172) (172)

E: Pd enjoy having presupposition: ...you
you be irritable. be irritable...close...,
Now close your unspecified verbs: ...en-
eyes. (M’s eyes joy...be..., embedded
close) command: ...be irritable


(173) (173) (173 - 179)

Your unconscious presuppositions: ...mind Amnesia; meta-instrucmind has learned a has learned...it knows... tions; future pace; polarlot—it knows it can can function by itself..., ity pace.
function by itself. unspecified verbs:

[PAGE 161]

TRANSCRIPTI / 165


learned... knows...func-
tion..., missing referen-
tial index: ...a lot...,
nominalization: ...un-
conscious mind...


(174) (174)

Your conscious mind presupposition: ...can
can learn from it, can learn...can use...learnuse the learning that ing that...mind has...,
the unconscious mind unspecified verbs:
has, learn...use..., missing
referential index: ... from
it...the learning..., nom-
inalization: ...the learn-
ing..., ...conscious mind
...learning, unconscious
mind..., embedded com-
mand: ...can learn from
it...can use the learning


(175) (175)

as well as the learning implied causative: ...as
your unconscious well as..., presupposimind can reach back tions: ...can reach back
into the past and sin- ...single out..., missing
gle out: any onething, referential index: ...the
two things, three learning...into the past
things—even twelve ...one thing...two things
ducks. ...three things..., selec-
tional restriction:
twelve ducks..., nomi-
nalizations: ...learning
.. things... unconscious
mind...


(176) (176)

I've given you a task, presupposition: ...given
two tasks. Discom- you a task...two tasks...
fort, and an immobile discomfort...immobile
hand. hand..., unspecified
verb: ...given..., missing
referential index: ...a
task...two tasks..., nom-
inalization: ...task...
tasks...discomfort...

[PAGE 162]

I
166 / TRANSCRIPT


(177) (177)

And which do you conjunction: ...and
think you want to which..., presupposibanish first? The dis- tion: ...you think...want
comfort or the arm? ...to banish..., unspecifi-
ed verbs: ...think...want
...banish..., missing ref-
erential index: ...dis-
comfort..., nominaliza-
tion: ...discomfort...


(178) (178)

And you don't know; conjunction: — ...and...,
but your unconscious presupposition: ...unmind will let you find conscious mind will let
it out. you find..., unspecified
verbs:...know..., ...find
.., deletion: ...know
what..., implied causa-
tive: ...but..., missing
referential index: ...it...,
nominalization: ...un-
conscious mind...


(179) (179)

Now take it easily and unspecified verb ...take
comfortably, and a- ..., Missing referential
waken. (M opens index: ...it..., presupeyes, smiles, turns position: ...and awaken
head to right and vee, - @asily...comfortab
looks at E) Hello, ly...
Monde.
M: Hi...(M looks
at her right arm,
moves it and her (179a)
trunk, and looks
around) It’s hot. sentence fragment, mis- '
E: Any interest there? sing referential index: ...
(M looks at E) any..., ...these..., nomiM: Hum? nalization: ... interest...


(180) (180) (180 - 190)

E: Have anything unspecified verb: have Polarity pace; test an-
interesting there? ..., missing referential choring linkage between
M: My hand? index: ...anything inter- arm movement and posi-

[PAGE 163]

TRANSCRIPT
I / 167


E: Um huh. esting there..., deletion: tive K 4-tuple by behavM: It's sweating. ...interesting to whom? ioral presuppositions.
E: Sweaty. (M looks
at her right hand)
M: Yeah, it's hot in
here.


(181) (181)

E: It's hot. (M looks missing referential index:
at and moves her it’s hot..., deletion:
right hand)... .. hot for whom?..., pre-
Which hand has supposition: ...which
the longer life- hand..., unspecified
line? (M turns her verb: ... has...
head to the left
and right, looks at
her right palm and
laughs)
M:| don't know; |
can't look at the
other one. (M
moves her head
downward)


(182) (182)

E: What do you embedded commands:
mean, you can’t ...cant look..., can't
look at the other look..., presupposition:
one? Look me in ..can't look..., cant
eye and tell (M look..., missing referen-
moves head up- tial index: ...other one...
ward and looks at
E) me you can't
look at the other
one.


(183) (183)

Do you expect me to missing referential index:
believe that? ...that..., unspecified
M: Yes, | expect you verbs:...expect..., ...be-
to... ls a very lieve...
strange feeling.
it’s as if my other
arm doesn't even
belong to me, it’s
so light. It’s just

[PAGE 164]

168 / TRANSCRIPT
I


hanging there
suspended from a
wire, it’s not at-
tached.


(184) (184)

E: It’s unattached. it missing referential index:
is yours, isn’t it? ...it’s unattached..., unM: I think so. (M specified verb: ...unat-
looks at left hand tached..., presupposi-
and then looks tion: ...it is yours...,
downward) missing referential index:
.it..., tag question: ...is
it not?...


(185) (185)

E: When do you presupposition: ...you
think you'll be able think...able to move...,
to move it? unspecified verb:
M:(M looks at E) think..., embedded com-
When /t becomes mand: ...you'll be able
uncomfortable. to move it..., missing
referential index:
move it...


(186) (186)

E: When it becomes missing referential index:
uncomfortable . . .. It... there..., unspecifi-
(E turns head to ed verb: ... becomes...
his right, looks
toward M's left,
and then looks at
M) Will you wheel
my chair over
there, please?
M: Put your chair? (M
points to her Jeft
with her right
hand) Shall | get
up to move it?


(187) (187)

E: I don’t know of unspecified verb:
any other way. know..., deletion: ...any
M: (M stands up and other way to do what?

[PAGE 165]

TRANSCRIPT
I / 169


her left hand falls for whom?..., referential
downward) | just index: ...any other way
moved my hand.


(188) (188)

E: You can move unspecified verb ...find
your hands. (M veep oe MOVE..., Missing
sits down, clasps referential index: ...the
hands together only way..., nominaliza-
and looks at E) Is tion: ...way...
that the only way
you can find out if
you can move
your hand?
M: Well, it didn’t
seem to respond
too much. I—(M
gestures with
both hands) it was
as if it wasn’t part
of me. It was very
comfortable; it
was fine left a-
lone.


(189) (189)

E: How very fine if deletions: ...what's fine/
left alone. How who?..., unspecified
does your arm feel verb? ...fine..., ...left...,
right now? deletion: ...what's fine?
Normal.
Mz Normal—no
fatigue?
No.
Is it still hot here?
zmz Yes, it's very hot.
(M wipes her fore-
head with her left
hand)


(190) (190)

E: Well, don’t worry, deletion: ...worry
a cool breeze will about?..., ...come from?
come. ..., unspecified verb...
All right. come..., ... worry...,

[PAGE 166]

Transcript II

[PAGE 167]

TRANSCRIPT I / 173


Transcript Il


(1) (1) (1-4)

E: Did you know that Implied Causative: transderivational search
you went into a while, nominalizations: to Nick's previous trance
trance while | was trance, presuppositions: 4-tuple; meta-
working with know. instructions.
Monde?
N: No. I thought |
did. | wasn't sure.


(2) (2)

E: And this is the Nominalizations: exper-
first time you've tence, hypnosis.
had any experi-
ence with hypno-
sis.
N: Yes.


(3) (3)

E: So you’re going to Implied causative: so,
find a lot of new embedded command:
things out about find a lot of..., missing
yourself. referential index: things:
unspecified verb: find...,
deletion: new for whom?


(4) (4)

Only you'll really Sentence fragment: Only
know what you’re go- you'll really. know...
ing to find out until until after... Embedded
after you have found command: know what
out. you'll [will] Presupposi-
tion: know, missing ref-
erential index: it, what
you're [are] going...,
Implied causative:
until, unspecified verb:
... know, digital confu-
sion.

[PAGE 168]

174 / TRANSCRIPT II


(5) (5) (5-8)

All you life you've Unspecified verb: suggests arm levitation;
known that you could known, Embedded com- polarity move.
lift’ your hand and mand: lift your hand...,
tower it. Presupposiiton: known
...you could..., mind
reading: ... You've
known...


(6) (6)

But there's something Polarity: but, referential
you learned long ago, index: ...something...,
and that was that you presupposition: ...learncouldn't lift your ed long ago, presupposihand tion: ...couldn'’t...


(7) (7)

that you didn’t know Missing referential init was your hand. dex: ...it..., mind
reading: ...you didn't
know..., unspecified
verb: ...know..., pre-
supposition: ... know...


(8) (8)

You were an infant, Presupposition: ...you
and your hands were werean...,

just objects.

(9-16)
(9) (9)
pacing observable and
And one of the first Conjunction: ...and..
non-observable behavthings that a person he looks. .., missing ref-
ior; suggests amnesia;
does when he goes erential index:...he...,
transderivational search
into a trance—he missing referential index: :
(L-operator and Rlooks at some one some spot, things, un-
operator are K) to prespot. specified verb: does.
vious trance 4-tuple.


(10) (10)

He doesn’t need to Missing referential inmove, he doesn’t need dex: ...he, deletion:
to do anything except move where: referential
fet his unconscious index: he, deletion: talk
mind take over and do to whom, referential ineverything. dex: he, anything, dele-

[PAGE 169]

TRANSCRIPT UI / 175


tion: do anything how?/
to whom: embedded
command: unconscious
mind take over, embed-
ded command: and do
everything, deletions:
who take over? take
over what?, referential
index: everything, un-
specified verbs: take
over, do.


(11) (11)

And the conscious Causal modeling conmind doesn’t have to junction: and, deletion:
do anything—it's whose conscious mind?
usually not even inter- unspecified verb: have
ested. to do, deletion: interest-
ed in what? unspecified
verb: interested, presup-
positions: have..., inter-
ested...


(12) (12)

And while I've been Causal modeling contalking to you, you've junction: and, implied
altered your respira- causative, while, Pretion, your heart rate is supposition: altered, unaltered. specified verbs: altered,
deletions: altered how?

(13) (13)

I know from past ex- Mind reading: I know
perience that your from past...that you,
blood pressure is presuppositions: changchanged, your pulse ed...blood pressure,
is changed, and your changed... pulse, changeyelid reflex is ed...eye reflex. In all
changed. three instances the verb
changed is unspecified.


(14) {14)


And you really don’t Causal modeling conneed to keep your junction: and, embedded
eyes open; but you command: close them
can close them now... now,

[PAGE 170]

176 / TRANSCRIPT II


(15) (15)

Yet a little flatter. Presupposition: yet, pre-
supposition: ... little flat-
ter, deletion: what is a
little flatter? for whom?
sentence fragment.

(16) (16)


Is learning to get ac- Sentence fragment, delequainted with yourself tion: what is...? unspeciat another level of fied verb: learning, unbeing. specified verb: get
acquainted, presupposi-
tion: learning, embedded
command: ...get ac-
quainted. ..
(17) (17) (17-18)

Now first of all I'd like Embedded command: continue R-operator - K
to have you enjoy the enjoy the comfort, un- variable of ongoing 4comfort. specified verb: enjoy, tuple digital confusion.
presupposition: enjoy
..., nominalization: ...
comfort...
(18) (18)

Pd like to have you Unspecified verb: disdiscover that your cover, presuppositions:
sense of comfort con- discover, continually intinually increases. creases, nominaliza-
tions: sense, comfort.


(19) (19) (19-22)

Now in the back of Nominalizations: back, amnesia suggestions;
your mind, which is a mind, selectional restric- mixing logical levels of
common phrase, we tion: which is a common communication (”...
know a lot of things; phrase, unspecified verb: back of mind, which is a
know, referential index: common expression...”)
we, things, deletion:
know a lot about what?
presupposition: know...


(20) (20)


and sometimes we Conjunction: and, referhave trouble getting ential index: sometimes,
those things into the we, those things, unspecfront of our mind. ified verb: have trouble,

[PAGE 171]

TRANSCRIPT II / 177


getting, presupposition:
have trouble getting,
nominalization: mind
mind... trouble...


(21) (21)

We can have a name Missing referential
on the tip of our index: a name, presuptongue, but we can't positions: have, can't
say it: we don’t know say, don't know, know,
what it is, but we can't think, embedded
know that we know It, command...think of it,
but we just can't think deletion: ready to be
of it, but it’s there said to whom?
ready to be said.


(22) (22)

That's because the Cause-effect: that's beunconscious Is hang- cause, unspecified verb:
ing on to it. is hanging, deletion:
hanging on to it for
what?, nominalization:
unconscious, presuppoi-
tion: is hanging on...


(23) (23) (23-28)

And you know, of Presupposition: know, meta-instructicns to
course, do you not, Tag question—polarity: both clients to utilize the
Monde, that you're in do you not, presupposi- succeeding experience.
atrance too: tion: you're [are], nomi-
nalization: trance.


(24) (24)

Well enjoy the trance, Presupposition: enjoy,
and intensify all the unspecified verb: enjoy,
learnings | started nominalization: trance,
with you. conjunction: and, un-
specified verb: intensify,
nominalization: learn-
ings, embedded com-
mand: intensify the
learnings...

[PAGE 172]

178 / TRANSCRIPT II


(25) (25)

And whatever | say to Causal modeling Conhim, you can adapt to junction: ...and..., preyourself. supposiiton: you can
adapt, unspecified verb:
... adapt..., missing re-
ferential index: ...what-
ever..., ...to him..,
embedded commana: ...
adapt...


(26) (26)

I might suggest that Unspecified verbs:
he recall a happy recall. .., recall, presupmeal, and you might positions: recall a happy
recall something else meal, recall something
that’s happy. else, causal modeling
conjunction: ...and.. +,
missing referential index:
a happy meal, ...some-
thing..., embedded
command: ...recall...,
deletion: ...happy for
whom?

(27) (27)

So you transform my Causal modeling implied
words to him, so that causative: So..., ...so
they fit you as a that..., ...and..., presupperson; and anything positions: ...you transI say to you, he will fit form my words..., they
to himself as a per- fit you..., he will fit...,
son. unspecified verbs: trans-
form, fit, fit, missing
referential index: my
words, ...they, ...any-
thing.


(28) (28) (28-34)

Now | know there is Presuppositions: ...there disassociation conscious
some reason why you is some reason why..., /unconscious mind sugcame to Phoenix to missing referential index: gestion; organ language
see me. ...some reason..., mind for arm leviation (”...
reading: I know..., nom- handle...”)
inalization: reason, em-
bedded command: ...
seeme...

[PAGE 173]

TRANSCRIPT II / 179


(29) (29)

You had some pur- Presuppositions:
pose in mind, but had some purpose..., ...
exactly what that pur- you had very much...
pose was, ! doubt if unspecified verbs: ...had
you had very much of .<» »--doubt...had...,
an understanding. missing referential index:
...some purpose..., that
purpose, an understand-
ing, mind-reading se-
quence: nominaliza-
tions: purpose, mind,
purpose, understanding.


(30) (30)

Usually you don't Causal modeling: ...usuknow why, but your ally...but..., presupposiunconscious mind tion: ...you don't know
does know a great ur «Mind does know
deal more. ..., Missing referential
index: ...a great deal...,
deletions: more than
what?, embedded com-
mand: ...mind does
know a great... nominal-
izations: unconscious
mind.


(31) (31)

And you unconscious Sentence fragment: Caumind in know- sal modeling, conjuncing that additional tion: And..., presupmaterial— position: ...mind does
know..., unspecified
verb: knowing, missing
referential index: .. . that
additional material...,
nominalization: ...un-
conscious mind...

(32) (32)

and let it come to Causal modeling, conyour mind slowly, junction: ...And..., Pregradually, in such a suppositions: ...let it
way that you're not come..., ...slowly, graddisturbed, you're not ually..., ...in such a way
distressed. sory You're not disturb-
ed..., ...not distressed...,

[PAGE 174]

180 / TRANSCRIPT II


unspecified verbs:
come..., ...disturbed...,
...distressed..., missing
referential index: ...it...,
...in such a way..., dele-
tion: ...disturbed by?...,
.. distressed by?...
(33) (33) (35-48)

in such a way that you Presuppositions: in such visual/kinesthetic disasbecome aware that a way..., you become sociation suggestions;
you can handle aware..., you can handle transderivation search
things, and under- ...» oe tinderstand..., un- (L-operator is V) for
stand things, specified verbs: become negative K 4-tuple tied
aware, handle, under- with reference 4-tuple
stand, missing referential from day before.
index: in such a way,...
things, ...things...,
causal modeling-implied
causative: ...that?...,
...that?..., and, em-
bedded commands: ...
you becomes aware...,
you can handle..., ...
understand...


(34) (34)

and discover there are Causal modeling consome things you dis- junction:...and..., and
like and some that ..., and..., presupposiyou like and that there tions: discover...,
are many different un- thing you dislike..., ...
derstandings that are some that you like..., ...
possible to you. there are many..., ...are
possible to you..., un-
specified verbs: ...dis-
cover, dislike, ...like...,
missing referential index:
somethings..., ...some
..., many different un-
derstanding..., deletion:
...possible how?/when?,
embedded command: ...
and discover..., ...some
that you like..., nomi-
nalizations: ...under-
standing...,

(35) (35)

Since this is really the Implied causative:
first time lve met since... but..., ...uncon-

[PAGE 175]

TRANSCRIPT II / 181


you, really talked to scious does know much
you, | can’t really we » "than you..., unknow very much a- specified verbs: know..,,
about you, but your ...than you..., deletions:
unconscious does ..very much about
know much more what?, ...know much
about you than you more about what? ...
do. talk about what?, miss-
ing referential index: ...
very much..., much
more..., nominaliza-
tion: unconscious..., ...
talk about?


(36) (36)

It's got a whole back- Presuppositions: ...got a
ground of years of whole background...of
learning, feeling, learning, feeling, thinkthinking, and doing. ing...doing..., unspecifi-
ed verbs: got, learning,
thinking, doing, missing
referential index: Its...,
... background of years...

(37) (37)

And all of our days we Causal modeling conare learning things— junction: ...and..., prelearning how: suppositions: ...we are
learning... learning how,
embedded command: ...
we are learning..., mis-
sing referential index: all
of our day, ...we...,
things..., unspecified
verbs: ...learning...
learning...


(38) (38)

how to appraise them, Presuppositions: .
how to assess them, to appraise..., ...how to
how to feel about assess..., ...how to feel,
them. embedded commands:
how to appraise, how to
assess, how to feel, un-
specified verbs: ap-
praise, assess, feel, mis-
sing referential index:

about them...

[PAGE 176]

182 / TRANSCRIPT II


(39) (39)

And no matter how Conjunction: ...and
many good things oc- . . ., presuppositions: ...
cur in one’s life, there many good things occur,
are bad things, too. there are bad things too,
unspecified verb: occur,
missing referential index:
...good things..., one's
life..., bad things, dele-
tions: ...good forwhom?
...bad for whom?, nomi-
nalization: life.


(40) (40)

And there’s no way of Conjunction: ...and...,
escaping unpleasant- presupposition: ...no
ness. way of escaping, unspec-
ified verb: ...escaping,
deletions: no way for
whom? nominalizations:
way, unpleasantness.


(41) (41)

And you need to /earn Causal modeling conto look at things that junction: And..., Causal
are unpleasant—with- modeling, conjunction:
out fear, with a will- ...and..., presupposiingness to under- tions: ...need to learn...,
stand, and with a will- to look at things..., ...
ingness to learn how without fear..., with a
well you can adjust. willingness to under-
stand..., ...with a wil-
lingness to learn..., you
can adjust, unspecified
verbs: ...leam, under-
stand, learn, adjust, em-
bedded commands:
learn to look..., ...un-
der stand..., ...leam...,
deletions: ...unpleasant
to whom?/without fear
of what/whom?,, miss-
ing referential index: ...
things..., nominaliza-
tions: fear..., ...willing-
ness..., willingness.

[PAGE 177]

TRANSCRIPT IT / 183


(42) (42)

And you do it without Sentence fragment.
a sense of discour- Causal modeling, conagement or fear... junction: ...you do it...,
without a sense of dis-
couragement..., or fear,
missing referential index:
.ét..., missing referen-
tial index: ...it..., nomi-
nalizations: ...sense, dis-
couragement, fear, un-
specified verb: ...do...


(43) (43)

Now when you were Mind reading: when you
Introduced to me yes- were introduced...you
terday, you had a had a feeling of fear...,
feeling of fear. You presupposition: ...you
didn't really need that had a feeling..., ...didn’t
fear, but you had It. really need..., you had it
..., unspecified verbs:
e. had... ..need..., ..
had..., missing referen-
tial index: ...a feeling of
fear..., ...that fear...,
...1£..., nominalization:
feeling, fear, causal
modeling conjunction:
...but..., deletion:
fear of whom/what? ...
feelings of what? embed-
ded command: ...know.

(44) (44)

It's nice that you did Presupposition: ...nice
have a feeling of fear, that you did have a
because you need to feeling.... ...need to
know all the feelings know all..., ...feeling
that you have. that you have..., unspec-
ified verbs: ...have...,
...know..., ...have...,
missing referential index:
. [t's nice..., a feeling...,
all the feelings..., nomi-
nalizations: ...feeling...,
. fear..., ...feelings
wee, embedded com-
mand: ...you need to
know all the things...,
causal modeling implied
causative: ...because...

[PAGE 178]

184 / TRANSCRIPT H


(45) (45)

And if you can Jook at Sentence fragment. Caufear in relationship to sal modeling conjuncme— tion: And..., ...if..,
embedded command: ...
can look at fear..., pre-
suppositions: ...can look
at..., ...in relationship to
..., selectional restric-
tion: ...look...fear,
nominalization: fear...,
relationship...


(46) (46)

and there was no Conjunction: ...and
reason to be afraid of ..-, presupposition: ...no
me— reason to be afraid...,
nominalization: _ ...rea-
son..., deletion: ...for
whom to be afraid?

(47) (47)

but you did have a Causal modeling consense of fear. junction: ...but..., pre-
supposition: ...had a
sense of fear..., missing
referential index: ...sense
of fear..., nominaliza-
tion: ...sense..., fear...,
unspecified verbs: ...had


(48) (48)

Now you can look at Presuppositions: ...can

that fear and wonder look at that fear..., wonjust exactly what der...just exactly...,
caused it in various caused it..., unspecified
ways. verbs: ...look..., wonder
sees _..caused..., missing
referential index: ...that
fear..., it..., ...various
ways..., embedded com-
mand: ...wonder just ex-
actly..., nominalization:
...fear..., ways...

(49) (49)

Now, it may be get- Presupposition: ...getting warm in here. ting warm..., in here...,

[PAGE 179]

TRANSCRIPT II / 185


unspecified verb: ...get- (49-60)
ting..., missing referen-
tial index: ...it..., dele- both clients attend to (R-
tion: warm for whom? operator) K variable of
ongoing 4-tuple; meta-
instructions to hold con-
(50) (50) stant K variable of pre-
sent 4-tuple while transI think both you and Presupposition: both derivationally searching
Monde would enjoy you...would enjoy... (L-operators are V and
having it cool and having...cool...comfort- A) for other 4-tuples
comfortable. able..., unspecified both positive and nega-
verbs: ...think..., enjoy tive.
., missing referential
index: ...mind reading:
think both...enjoy...


(51) (51)

I think it's very nice. Unspecified verb: _...
think..., missing referen-
tial index: it’s, presup-
position: ...very..., dele-
tion: ...nice for whom?


(52) (52)

because you here, Cause-effect: ...besleeping soundly in cause..., presupposibed, you enjoy aswim tions: ...sleeping soundin the ocean or the ly..., -..enjoy a swim...,
lake, or the swimming in the ocean..., in the
pool. lake..., ...in the swim-
ming pool..., unspecified
verbs: sleeping, enjoy,
missing referential index:
in bed..., a swim...,
the ocean..., the lake...,
the swimming pool...,
sentence fragment.

(53) (53)

You can meet friends Presuppositions: ...can
in your dreams, you meet friends...in your
can hear them talk dreams...can hear them
and you can talk to ‚can talk to them...can
them, you can drive a drive a car..., ...take an
car, take an airplane airplane ride..., ..hike in
ride, hike in the the woods..., embedded
woods. commands: ...can meet
friends..., can hear them

[PAGE 180]

186 / TRANSCRIPT II


see, fake... ...hike...,
unspecified verbs:
meet, take..., missing
referential index:
friends..., in
dreams..., ...them..., ...
them..., ...a car..., an
airplane ride...,
woods...


(54) (54)

But all the time this is Implied causative: ...but
going on, you're still .»., Presuppositions: ...
lying in bed. this is going on..., ...
still lying in bed..., un-
specified verb: ...going
lying..., missing referen-
tial index: ...all the time
...» «»»this..., in bed...,
nominalization: time.


(55) (55)

You’re not moving, Presuppositions: ...not
not talking. moving..., not talking,
deletion: ...not moving
what/how? ...not talk-
ing to whom about
what?, unspecified
verbs: ...talking ...., ....
moving...


(56) (56)

Your unconscious has Presuppositions: unconstored away many scious has stored away...
stores and many un- „dreams are dreams...,
derstandings, and ...in which you review
your dreams are .... embedded comdreams in which you mand: ...review your
review your experi- experience... missing reence; ferential index: ...many
memories..., many un-
derstandings...,
dreams..., dreams...,
your experience..., un-
specified verbs: stored,
review, nominalizations:
unconscious, memories,
understandings, dreams,

[PAGE 181]

TRANSCRIPT II / 187


experience, deletions:
memories of what/
whom?, understandings
of what/whom? dreams
of what?, experience of
what/whom?...


(57) (57)

and in the dreams you Causal modeling conalso put together junction: ...and..., preideas for better under- supposition: ...in the
standings... dreams you...put togeth-
er..., embedded com-
mand: ...put together
ideas and..., unspecified
verb: put together, nom-
inalizations: dreams,
ideas, understandings,
deletions: dreams of
what/whom?, ideas of
what?, understandings
of what?, referential in-
dex: ...the dreams...,
ideas..., ...better under-
standings...


(58) (58)

You dream you're in a Presuppositions: ...you
snowstorm and be dream..., ...you're
very cold, and the warmly..., embedded
truth is you're warmly command: ...and be
in bed. very cold..., causal
modeling conjunction:
..and,.., ...and..., un-
specified verb: ...dream
.., missing referential
index: ...a snow storm
.., the truth,..in bed...,
nominalization: ...truth,
sentence fragment.


(59) (59)

You can dream that Presupposition: ...can
you’re very hungry, dream..., ...very hungry
yet you ate a good ur vee YOU are..., a good
dinner. dinner..., unspecified
verb: dream, embedded

[PAGE 182]

188 / TRANSCRIPT II


command: you can
dream..., missing refer-
ential index: ...a good
dinner..., implied causa-
tive: ...yet...


(60) (60)

Anything that hap- Presuppositions: ...can
pens to you can come come forth..., as a
forth as a dream, and dream..., ...never have
you never have to be to be worried..., embedworried about it. ded command: ...can
come forth..., ...never
have to be worried...,
unspecified verbs:
happens..., come forth
vos, »»»WOrried..., missing
referential index: Any-
thing..., ...a dream...,
„about it...


(61) (61) (61-63)

Because your uncon- Causal modeling cause- meta-instructions to rescious is sorting over effect: ...because..., pre- organize previous 4your memories, your suppositions: ...uncon- tuples.
understandings, your scious is sorting...,
hopes, your anticipa- unspecified verb: sorttion, your wishes— ing, nominalizations:
unconscious, memories,
understandings, hopes,
anticipations, wishes,
missing referential index:
..your memories..., ...
your understandings...,
...your hopes..., your
anticipation...your
wishes.


(62) (62)

and trying to make for Causal modeling conanew arrangement of junction: ...and..., preeverything that you suppositions: ...frying to
have learned— make..., that you have
learned..., unspecified
verb: ...make, learned,
embedded command: ...
make for a new arrange-
ment..., missing referen-

[PAGE 183]

TRANSCRIPT II / 189


tial index: a new
arrangement..., ...of
everything..., nominali-
zation: ...arrangement...


(63) (63)

a new arrangement Presuppositions: ...that
that will be for your will be for your betterbetterment and for ment..., for your satisyour satisfaction. faction..., unspecified
verb: ....be..., missing
referential index: ...a
new arrangement...,
nominalizations: ar-
rangement..., better-
ment..., satisfaction...


(64) (64) (64)

And it's very nice to Causal modeling con- attend to (R-operator) K
be comfortable, com- junction: ...and..., pre- variable of present 4fortably cool, at ease. suppositions: ...very tuple.
nice to be comfortably
..., comfortably cool...,
at ease..., unspecified
verb: be, nominaliza-
tions: ease, missing ref-
erential index: its...


(65) (65) (65-68)

And as you are that Causal modeling implied meta-instructions to reway, you review your causative: ...and as..., organize previous 4understandings of presuppositions: ...are tuple (L-operator is V)
values of life. that way..., review your
understandings..., mis
sing referential index:
.. that way..., your un-
derstandings..., nomi-
nalizations: ...way...,
understandings...,
values..., life..., unspec-
ified verb: ...review...,
embedded command: ...
review your understand-
ings...

(66) (66)

You reach an under- Presuppositions: ...such

[PAGE 184]

190 / TRANSCRIPT Il

standing that every an understanding...,
happiness is earned happiness is earned... if
and, if given to you, given...it's merited...,
it’s merited. unspecified verbs:
...reach..., earned...,
merited..., nominaliza-
tion: ...understanding
..., happiness..., missing
referential index: ...an
understanding...,
every happiness..., ...it
deletion: understanding
of what?, given by
whom?


(67) (67)

Because there is no Causal modeling causesuch thing as a free effect: ...because..., pregift; you have to earn suppositions: ...no such
it or have to merit it. thing as a free gift...,
have to earn..., have to
merit..., unspecified
verbs: ...earn..., ...merit
.... embedded command:
...have to earn..., have
to merit..., missing refer-
ential index: ...such
thing..., a free gift...,


(68) (68)

And merit requires Causal conjunction: ...
labor and effort on and..., presupposition:
your part. .. merit requires
labor..., effort..., on
your part..., unspecified
verb: ...requires...,
nominalizations: ...merit
veep ee labor..., ...effort.


(69) (69) (69-73)

And what do you need Causal modeling con- Metaphor.
to fear? junction: ...and..., un-
specified verb: ...need,
nominalization: ...fear...
deletion: ... fear of?

[PAGE 185]

TRANSCRIPT II / 191


(70) (70)

Very little that you Presupposition: ...very
need to fear. little.... you need to
fear..., unspecified verb:
need..., nominalization:
fear..., missing referen-
tial index: ... very little...
deletion: ...fear of?

(71) (71)

I know that all my life Presupposition: ...who
| have encountered were afraid..., they
people who were would starve...to death
afraid that they would .... unspecified verbs:
starve to death. encountered, afraid,
...Starve..., missing ref-
erential index: ...people
we, «-they..., nominali-
zations: ...death...

(72) (72)

But in all the time I’ve Causal modeling implied
been in medical prac- causative: ...But..., mistice, | have never seen sing referential index: ...
a person who starved all the time..., ...a perto death. son..., nominalizations:
...medical practice..., ...
death..., unspecified
verbs: ... been...


(73) (73)

It takes a great deal of Presupposition: ...takes
effort to do that. a great deal of effort...,
unspecified verb: takes,
missing referential index:
elle, ..that..., ..a
great deal of effort...,
nominalizations: ...deal
.... effort..., embedded
command...do that...


(74) (74) (74-82)

Enough in the way of Presuppositions: ...E- meta-instructions for rebad luck can occur, nough...can occur..., organization of previous
so that you don't need ... don't need to add..., negative K 4-tuples; sugto add to it yourself. unspecified verbs: occur, gestions for amnesia.
add, nominalizations: ...

[PAGE 186]

192 / TRANSCRIPT II


bad luck..., way..., em-
bedded command:
don't need to add...


(75) (75)

You'll always have a ‘Presuppositions: ...alfull supply of that, ways a full supply..., ...
but you always need always need to add...,
to add to the good ...to the good luck...;
luck that you achieve. ...you achieve..., em-
bedded command: ...
add to the good luck...,
...that you achieve...
unspecified verbs: have,
add, achieve, nominali-
zations: ...supply..., ...
luck...


(76) (76)

And you'll achieve it Causal modeling conon your own merit. junction: ...and...,
presupposition: ...you'll
achieve it..., on your...
own merit..., unspecifi-
ed verb: ...achieve...,
missing referential index:
«».1f..., nominalization:
merit, embedded com-
mand: ...you'll achieve.


(77) (77)

and that way you will Causal modeling conreally enjoy every- junction: ...and..., prething. supposition: ...really en-
joy everything..., un-
specified verb: enjoy,
missing referential index:
.. that way..., ...every-
thing..., embedded com-
mand: ...really enjoy...


(78) (78)

Now | do not need to Deletion: ...talk about
talk all the time. what/whom..., ...talkto
whom?..., missing refer-
ential index: ...all the

[PAGE 187]

TRANSCRIPT II / 193


time..., nominalization:
.. time...


(79) (79)

It’s important for you Presuppositions: _...It’s
to realize that your important..., ...to realunconscious mind ize..., ...mind can start
can start a train of ..., Uunspecified verbs:
thought, „.realize..., ...start...,
missing referential index:
its, ...a train of thought
..., nominalization: un-
conscious mind, thought
..., embedded com-
mand: unconscious can
start...


(80) (80)

and develop it without Causal modeling conyour conscious know- junction: ...and..., preledge— suppositions: ...develops
it..., ...Without your
conscious knowledge...,
unspecified verb: ...de-
velop..., embedded com-
mand: ...and develop it
...» Missing referential
index: ...it..., nominali-
zation: ...conscious
knowledge...


(81) (81)

and reach conclu- Causal modeling consions, and let your junction: ...and...,
conscious mind be- and..., presuppositions:
come aware of those ...reach conclusions...,
conclusions... ... become aware..., un-
specified verbs: ...reach
..., 0 BWwAre..., missing
referential index: ...con-
clusions..., those conclu-
sions..., nominaliza-
tions: ...conscious mind,
conclusions..., embed-
ded command: ...reach
conclusions...

[PAGE 188]

194 / TRANSCRIPT II


(82) (82)

And you can enjoy Causal modeling condiscovering so many junction: ...and..., prethings that are pos- suppositions: ..can ensible for you. joy discovering...,
things that are possible
.., embedded com-
mand: ...can enjoy dis-
covering..., unspecified
verbs: ...enjoy..., dis-
covering..., possible...,
missing referential index:
...so many things...


(83) (83) (83-94)

When | see patients, | Causal modeling, impli- Metaphor.
really want them to do ed causative: ...when...,
a great deal of think- missing referential index:
ing, ..-patients..., ...them...,
...a great deal..., presup-
positions: ...do a great
deal of..., embedded
command: ...do a great
deal of thinging, un-
specified verb: ...think-
ing...


(84) (84)

because I don’t know Causal modeling, causewhat's right for them. effect: ...because..., mis-
sing referential index: ...
what's right..., ...for
them..., unspecified
verb: ...know...


(85) (85)

They have to reach Missing referential inthat through an under- dex: ...they..., ...that...,
standing of what they ...An understanding...,
know, have experi- ..they..., presupposienced. tion: ...have to reach...,
..through an under-
standing..., ...they
know..., ...have experi-
enced..., unspecified

[PAGE 189]

TRANSCRIPT II / 195


verbs: ...reach...,
know..., ...experienced
... embedded com-
mand: ...have to reach
that.... nominalization:
... Understanding...


(86) (86)

And each person can Causal modeling conput past experiences junction: ...and..., preand learnings togeth- supposition: ...person
er in a way that is can put..., ...together in
satisfying... a way..., unspecified
verbs: ...put..., ...to-
gether..., deletions:
satisfying for whom?,
nominalizations: ...ex-
periences, learnings,
way, missing referential
index: ...each person...,
past experiences...,
learnings..., ...in a way
..., embedded com-
mand: ...put past exper-
iences and learnings to-
gether...


(87) (87)

Now you're sitting here Presupposition: ...in
in comfort and ease, comfort and ease...,
nominalization: ...com-
fort..., ease..., mind
reading: ...you're sitting
«+s, comfort...


(88) (88)

and you're learning Causal modeling conabout yourself with- junction: ...and..., preout knowing Just how suppositions: ...learning
you're learning. about yourself..., with-
out knowing just how...,
unspecified verb: learn-
ing, knowing, learning...
deletion: ...learning
what?

[PAGE 190]

196 / TRANSCRIPT II


(89) (89)

In our present day Nominalizations: ...culculture, there’s much ture..., ... meditations...,
talk about meditation ...talk..., deletions:
much talk by whom...,
.. about what?...


(90) (90)

which only means Presuppositions: ...all
that we all ought to ought to do..., unspecifido a bit of thinking, a ed verbs: do..., thinking
bit of understanding. .., understanding...,
referential index: ...we
...p u bit of..., ...a bit
of...


(91) (91)

And we need not do /t Causal modeling conin some rigid way: junction: ...and..., pre-
suppositions: ...need not
do..., ...in some rigid
way..., missing referen-
tial index: ...we..., it...,
some rigid way..., un-
specified verbs: do,
nominalizations: ...way
.., embedded com-
mand: ...do it...


(92) (92)

we can fake our Presuppositions: ...can
dreams, we can take take our dreams..., ...
spare moments. can take spare moments
..., unspecified verbs:
...take...take..., dele-
tions: dreams of what/
whom?, moments when?
..., nominalizations:
dreams, moments, mis-
sing referential index:
...we...we..., embedded
command: ...fake our
dreams...take spare
moments...

[PAGE 191]

TRANSCRIPT Il / 197


(93) (93)

We do not need to Causal modeling conmake a show of medi- junction: ...but..., pretation. suppositions; thinking
for the self...by the self
.. freely...easily..., nom-
inalizations: mediation
u, Self...self..., unspeci-
fied verbs: ...thinking...,
. thinking...

...thinking..., deletions:
...thinking freely about
what/whom? thinking
easily about what/
whom?..., missing refer-
ential index: ...for the
self..., by the self.


(94) (94)

But meditation is Unspecified verbs:
thinking for the self, wondering..., ...offering
by the self, and think- ..., nominalizations: ...
ing freely and easily, self..., ...self..., missing
just wondering about referential index: ...what
what the self has to the self..., for the self...
offer for the self.


(95) (95) (95-96)

Now comfort in a hot Presuppositions: ...com- links metaphor (83-94)
room is possible, yet fort...is possible ..., ... to present 4-tuple.
you can let only cool can let only cool
thoughts come your thoughts come..., unway. specified verbs: ...pos-
sible..., ...let..., ...come
.., nominalization:
comfort, thoughts, way.
missing referential index:
...A hat room..., ... cool
thoughts..., embedded
command: ...let only
cool..., implied causa-
tive: ...yet..., selectional
restriction, deletion: hot
for whom?/cool to
whom?...

[PAGE 192]

198 / TRANSCRIPT II


(96) (96)

You can Jet quiet Presuppositions: ...can
thoughts come to let quiet thoughts come
you. You can let pain- in..., ...let painless
less thoughts come thoughts come..., emto you. bedded command: ...let
quiet thoughts come...,
unspecified verbs: ...let
...let..., nominaliza-
tions: ...thoughts...,
...thoughts..., deletions:
...quiet for whom?/
painless for whom?...,
selectional restrictions.


(97) (97) (97-114)

Now I'll tell you some- Presupposition: ...both metaphor with direct
thing that both of you of you can understand... quotes.
can understand. unspecified verb: ...un-
derstand..., missing re-
ferential index: ...some-
thing...


(98) (98)

A patient was brought Missing referential into my office by ambu- dex: ...a patient..., delelance. tion: ...brought when:
by whom? for what?


(99) (99)


The patient had, pos- Missing referential insibly, three months dex: ...the patient..., demore tolive. letion: ...live/how?...


(100) (100)

And the patient was Presuppositions: ...very
in very great pain, and great pain..., unspecified
drugs didn’t seem to verbs: ...help..., missing
help at all. referential index: ...the
patient..., very great
pain..., ...drugs..., nom-
inalization: ...pain...

[PAGE 193]

TRANSCRIPT II / 199


(101) (101)

And she hadn’t had Causal modeling condrugs for more than junction: ...and..., misseight hours when she ing referential index: ...
arrived at my office. she.... ...drugs..., un-
specified verb:...arrived.


(102) (102)


And she was wheeled Causal modeling, conin, and she said, junction: ...and..., miss-
ing referential index: ...
she..., ...she..., deletion:
...Wheeled by whom/to
here?...said to whom?


(103) (103)

“My doctor said you Quotes: Embedded comwould use hypnosis mand: use hypnosis to
to control my pain. ..., unspecified verb: ...
control..., nominaliza-
tion: ...pain.


(104) (104)

And | think that's Continued quotes: causridiculous. al conjunction: ...and...,
unspecified verb:
think..., referential in-
dex: ...that's..., dele-
tion: ridiculous to
whom?


(105) (105)

Even drugs don't con- Continued quotes: emtrol my paln. bedded command:
control my pain..., ref-
erential index: ...drugs
..., unspecified verb: ...
control..., nominaliza-
tion: ...pain...


(106) (106)

And in just a spoken Continued quotes:
word—that sounds causal conjunction: ...
ridiculous.”

[PAGE 194]

200 / TRANSCRIPT II


and..., missing referen-
tial index: ...a spoken
word..., ...that..., dele-
..ridiculous to


(107) (107)

{ said, “Madam, just Quotes: Embedded comlisten to me, and see mand: ...can underif you can understand stand: ...unspecified
what | mean. verb: ...understand...,
deletion: ...listen to me
say waht? ...missing ref-
erential index: ...what I
mean...


(108) (108)

As you sit there, if Quotes: causal modelyou saw a very hungry ing conjunction: ...and
looking tiger walk ..if..., missing referenthrough that door into tial index: ...you..., ...
this room, and look at there..., ...a hungry
you and lick Its looking tiger..., ...that
chops, how much door..., ...this room...,
pain do you suppose ...yOUt..., ...how much
you would feel?” pain..., ...you..., nomi-
nalization: hungry, pain.


(109) (109)

She said, “t wouldn't Quotes: referential infeel any pain, l'd be dex: ...she..., deletion:
thinking about the said to whom/when? ...
tiger. And now ! no- missing referential index:
tice | don't have any ...the tiger..., ...things
pain now, because ..., implied causal conI've gotten a new view junction: ...and..., ...beof things.” cause..., unspecified
verbs: ...thinking..., ...
notice..., ...have..., ...
gotten..., nominaliza-
tion: ...pain..., ...pain


(110)
(110)
And when she left, |
asked her what she Conjunction: ..and...,
was going to do. ...when..., unspecified

[PAGE 195]

TRANSCRIPT II / 201


verb: ...left going...,
missing referential index:
..her..., ...WHhab..., ...
she..., deletion: ...do
about what for whom?

(111) (11)

And she said, “I’m Conjunction: ...and...,
going to have a good ...but..., referential intime, but 1 don’t think dex: ...she..., quotes,
the nurses will under- embedded commands:
stand about the tiger „.have..., ...agood time
that I’m going to keep u, „„understand..., ...
under my bed. keep..., missing referen-
tial index: ...a good time
vee, HE nurses..., ...
that tiger..., unspecified
verbs: ...have..., ...t
think..., ...understand.


(112) (112)

| don’t think the doc- Quotes, embedded comtor will understand mand: ...understand...,
either.” missing referential index:
...the doctors..., un-
specified verb: ...think
ves, »». Understand. .., del-
etion: ...understand
what?...


(113) (113)

And everytime they Conjunction: ...and...,
asked her if she want- missing referential index:
ed drugs for her pain, -.-everytime..., ...they
she said, er ner... ...Shl..., ...
she..., unspecified verbs:
...wanted..., nominali-
zation: ...pain, drugs...


(114) (114)

“No, I'm keeping the Quotes: missing refertiger there, anytime | ential index: ...the tiger
need him.” wey ov there..., ...any-
time..., unspecified
verb: ...keeping...,
need...

[PAGE 196]

202 / TRANSCRIPT II


(115) (115) (115-116)

Well, you've got a lot Presuppositon: ...got a meta-instructions for
of things to help you, lot..., ...keep them utilization of past 4and keep them. handy handy..., unspecified tuples; organ language
—handy in every pos- verbs: ...got..., ...keep for arm levitation.
sibly way. +» missing referential
index: ...things..., them
..., every possible way
.., deletions: ...handy
how?..., causal model-
ing conjunction: ...and
.«.., nominaliation: ...
way..., embedded com-
mand: ...keep them
handy...


(116) (116)

And know that your Causal modeling impliown brain cell respon- ed causative: ...and...,
ses can meet your unspecified verbs:
needs. know..., ...meet...,
nominalizations: ...res-
ponses..., ...needs...,
selectional restriction,
missing referential index:
..onw brain cell, your
needs...


(117) (117) (117-126)

Now you had diffi- Presupposition: ...mind links utilization of past
culty while Monde knows... ...lot of things 4-tuples to client's (Nick)
was in a trance in .... unspecified verb: ... present 4-tuple (breathbreathing. knows..., nominaliza- ing),
tions: ...unconscious
mind..., missing referen-
tial index: ...a lot..., ...
things..., deletion: ..
know a lot of what/
whom?


(118) (118)

You breathed very Deletions: loudly to
loudly. whom/compared to
what? whom? presup-
position: very loudly.

[PAGE 197]

TRANSCRIPT II / 203


(119) (119)

You're breathing very Presuppositions: ...
nicely, very comtort- breathing very nicely...,
ably, right now. comfortably..., ...right
now..., deletions:
nicely to whom? ...com-
fortably for whom?


(120) (120)

And why shouldn't Implied causative: ...and
you. You know how. -., deletions: ...why
shouldn't you what? ...
know how to do what/
when?..., presupposi-
tion: ...you know how
..., unspecified verb: ...
know...


(121) (121)

And | feel very pleas- Implied causative: ...and
ed that you did not e... a that..., deletion:
need to think you had ...feel very pleased...,
to breathe that loudly about,.., presupposias you did before. tions: ...you did not
need..., ...that loudly...,
unspecified verbs: .
...» -» that loudly..., un-
specified verbs: ...need
wa» think,.., nominali-
zation: ...pleased, miss-
ing referential index: ...
that loudly..., deletion:
...before what/when?


(122) (122)

And you can be pleas- Causal modeling implied
ed. causative: ...and..., pre-
supposition: ...can be
pleased, unspecified
verb: ...pleased..,


(123) (123)

Your unconscious Presuppositions: ...mind

[PAGE 198]

204 / TRANSCRIPT ll


mind knows a lot of knows..., ...lot of things
things. ..., unspecified verb: ...
knows..., nominaliza-
tions: ...unconscious
mind..., missing referen-
tial index: ...a lot..., ...
things..., deletion:
know a lot of what/
whom?


(124) (124)

And | rather think that Causal modeling, conloud breathng, on junction: ...and..., preyour part, was a set- suppositions: ...was a
ting-up of something setting up..., ...could
you could notice— notice..., unspecified
verbs: ...think..., ...no-
tice..., missing referen-
tial index: ...that loud
breathing..., ...a setting
up of something. .., dele-
tion: ...loud to whom?
seep »..0n your part of
what/how?..., mind
reading: embedded com-
mand: ...something you
could notice...


(125) (125)

something that you Presuppositions: ...
could notice, as ab- something..., ...you
scence, when | work- could notice..., as abed with you directly... scence..., unspecified
verbs: ...notice...,
worked..., referential
index: ...something...,
causal modeling implied
causative: ...when...,
deletions: ...directly...,
embedded command: ...
something you could
nofice..., sentence frag-
ment.


(126) (126)

And you had a slight Causal modeling consmile on your face junction: ...And...,

[PAGE 199]

TRANSCRIPT II / 205


when | mentioned when..., referential inthat. dex: ...a slight smile...,
„that...


(127) (127) (127-130)


It’s nice to know that Presuppositions: ...nice digital confusion; metawe know more than to know..., ...that we instructions to attend to
we know about. know..., ...more than (R-operator) K variable
we know..., unspecified of positive K 4-tuples.
verbs: ...know...,
know..., ...know...,
missing referential index:
ls, Wr, 1 WE
..., nominalization:
nice..., deletions: ...nice
to whom?..., ...that we
know more than what/
about what/whom?...


(128) (128)

And we can under- Causal modeling constand more than we junction: ...and..., prethink we can. supposition: ...we can
understand..., more
than..., we think...we
can..., unspecified
verbs: ...understand...,
.think..., missing re-
ferential index: ...we...,
we..., we..., deletions:
more than what? we can
do what to whom? ...
embedded command: ...
we can understand...


(129) (129)

And we can feel plea- Presuppositions: ...feel
sure at times when we pleasure..., ...at times
think we can't. .--, unspecified verbs:
...feel..., think..., miss-
ing referential index: ..
we...at times..., we...,
we..., nominalizations:
...pleasure..., embedded
command: ...feel plea-
sure...

[PAGE 200]

206 / TRANSCRIPT II


(130) (130)

And we should be Causal modeling conwilling to feel, fully junction: ...and...,
the pleasures and the ‘cause..., ...and..., prehappiness that we supposition: ...be willing
want, cause all our to feel fully..., ...feelings
feelings are done by are done by ourselves...,
ourselves. unspecified verbs:
willing..., ...feel..., ...
want..., ...done..., miss-
ing referential index: ...
we..., ...the pleasures...,
...the happiness...,
our feelings..., ...by our-
selves..., nominaliza-
tions: ...pleasures..., ...
happiness..., ...feelings
..., embedded com-
mand: ...be willing to
feel...


(131) (131) (131-139)

We can use other Presupposition: ...can metaphor; metapeople as stimuli. use other people..., as instructions to utilize
stimuli..., referential in- past 4-tuples anchored
dex: ...we..., ...other to Arizona..
people..., ...as stimuli
ee deletion: ...stimuli
for what?..., unspecified
verb: ...use..., nominal-
ization: ...stimuli...


(132) (132)

You meet an excellent Presuppositions: ...meet
teacher, and he can an excellent teacher...,
teach you a lot of new ...he can teach you...,
ideas. ...4 lot of new ideas...,
unspecified verbs:
meet..., ...teach..., miss-
ing referential index: ..
an excellent teacher...,
Re... of fot, ...
new ideas..., nominali-
zation: ...ideas..., dele-
tion: ...a lot compared
to what?

[PAGE 201]

TRANSCRIPT II / 207


(133) (133)

—be stimulated into Embedded command: ...
accumulating his own be stimulated..., prewealth of ideas. suppositions: ...into ac-
cumulating..., ...own
wealth of ideas..., un-
specified verbs: ...stim-
ulated..., ...accumulat-
ing..., missing referential
.„.his..., wealth of ideas
«+» nominalization: ...
ideas..., ... wealth...


(134) (134)

You learned some- Presuppositions: ... you
thing about Arizona learned something..., ...
today; you're learning about Arizona..., today
a lot more about your- .»., you're learning a lot
self. more..., about yourself
.»., unspecified verbs: ...
learned...learning...,
missing referential index:
...something about Ari-
zona..., ...a lot more...


(135) (135)

And as long as you Causal modeling impliremember Arizona, ed causative: ...and as
you're going to re- long as..., presupposimember some of your tions: ...as long as you
learnings—a lot of the remember Arizona..., ...
learnings. going to remember
some..., ...leamings...,
... lot of..., embedded
command: ...remember
Arizona..., unspecified
verbs: ...remember...,
...remember some of
your leaming..., ...re-
member..., missing re-
ferential index: ...some
of your leamings, ...a
‘Jot..., nominalization:
...leamings, learnings,


(136) (136)


Because you've learn- Causal modeling, cause-

[PAGE 202]

208 / TRANSCRIPT II


ed them in Arizona, effect: ...because..., preand you'll never be suppositions: ...you've
able to forget Arizona. learned them...in Ari-
zona..., never be able to
forget Arizona..., un-
specified verbs: ...learn-
ed..., forget..., missing
referential index: ...them


(137) (137)

And so your new un- Causal modeling causederstandings, new effect: ...and so belearnings, are tied— cause..., presuppositied down, tied in— tions: ...are tied...tied
because they are a down...tied in..., unpart of a greater learn- specified verbs: ...tied
ing. «., tied down...tied in
.... missing referential
index: ...new under-
standings...new learn-
ings...they..., a greater
learning..., nominaliza-
tions: ...understandings
..., learnings..., learn-
ing..., selectional restric-
tion, embedded com-
mand: ...tied..., ...tied


(138) (138)

And the same is true Causal modeling conof you, Monde. junction: ...and..., pre-
supposition: ...same is
true..., deletion: ...the
same is true/how?


(139) (139)

You learn a great deal; Presuppositions: ...learn
it’s always. going to a great deal...always gobe a part of you; and ing to be a part...want
you want every good every...to be a part...,
new learnings to be a unspecified verb: learn
part of you. ... going...want...be...,
missing referential index;
..@ great deal...its...a
part...every good new

[PAGE 203]

TRANSCRIPT Il / 209


learning...a part....
nominalization, learning
...part..., deletions: ...a
great deal compared to
what? [a part how?]


(140) (140) (140-144)


Some way or other, Presuppositions: ...some disassociation for conyour unconscious way or another...mind scious/unconscious
mind knew that you knew that...would go mind; transderivational
would go into a trance into a trance while..., search to previous trance
while | put Monde in. unspecified verbs: 4-tuple; arm levitation
knew...go...put..., miss- suggestions.
ing referential
index:
some way...or another
.»., Causal modeling im-
plied causative: ...while
..., nominalizations: ...
unconscious mind...,
...trance..., deletions: ...
put in where/how?...


(141) (141)
How did your uncon- Presupposition: ...mind
scious mind know, in know...in advance...diadvance, how to rect your attention...ondirect your attention ly to your hand..., unonly to your hand? specified verbs: ...know
..., direct..., deletion: in
advance of what?
nominalizations: ...un-
conscious mind...atten-
tion..., embedded com-
mand: ...direct your at-
tention only to your
hand...


(142) (142)

But it did. Causal modeling: ...but
..., missing referential
index: ...it..., deletion:
...1t did what? when? to
whom?...


(143) (143)

And in that way, you Causal modeling con-

[PAGE 204]

210 / TRANSCRIPT U


became unaware of a junction: ...and..., prelot of things your suppositions: ...in that
unconscious wanted way..., ...became unto learn. aware..., ...unconscious
wanted to learn..., un-
specified verbs: ...un-
aware..., ..wanted...,
...learn..., missing refer-
ential index: ...in that
way..., ...a lot..., ...of
things..., nominaliza-
tions: ...WAY..., ...Un-
conscious mind..., em-
bedded command:
learn...


(144) (144)

And it took over, and Causal modeling condid learn. junction: ...and..., pre-
suppositions: ...it took
over..., ...did learn...,
unspecified verb: ...took
.»., learn..., missing ref-
erential index: ...it...


(145) (145) (145-150)

Now | want both of - Embedded command: ... both clients instructed to
you to be aware of the be aware of the..., pre- attend to (R-operator) K
tremendous impor- suppositions: ...to be variable of positive K 4tance of comfort and aware..., unspecified tuples; meta-instructions
ease: verbs: ...want.,.aware... to utilize past 4-tuples;
nominalization: ...com- organ language used to
fort... ...ease..., mis- suggest arm levitation.
sing referential index: ...
the tremendous import-
ance..., deletion:
important to whom?


(146) (146)

a sense of security; a Sentence fragment,
sense of readiness; nominalizations: ...sense
..., sense..., deletions:
...security for whom?
readiness for what?...

(147) (147)

a full knowledge that Presuppositions: ...you

[PAGE 205]

TRANSCRIPT II / 211


come what may, you can meet...handle...encan meet it and han- joy doing..., embedded
dle it—and enjoy do- commands: '...can meet
ing it. it and handle it...enjoy
doing it..., unspecified
verbs: ...come...,
meet..., ...handle..., ...
enjoy..., missing referen-
tial index: ...come what
may... it..., tt..., Ua,
deletion: ...a full know-
ledge of what?...

(148) (148)

it's also a nice learn- Missing referential ining to come up dex: ...a nice learning
against the situation ..», the situation..., it...,
that you can't handle that..., a learning...in
—and then later think many..., many different
it over, and realize ways..., embedded comthat, too, was a learn- mand: ..come up
ing that's useful in against..., ...think..., ...
many, many different realize..., presupposiways. tions: ...later think it
over...and röalize..., de-
letion: ...nice for whom?
useful to whom/how?
..., unspecified verbs:
...come up..., handle...,
think..., realize..., nom-
inalizations: ...learning
..., situation..., learning
very WAYS...


(149) (149)

It allows you to as- Presuppositions: ...alsess your strength. lows you to assess...,
missing referential index:
...it..., unspecified
verbs: ...allows, assess,
nominalization:...
strength..., embedded
command: ...assess your
strength...


(150) (150)

It also allows you to Presuppositions: ...also
discover the areas in allows you to discover...
which you need to which you need to use

[PAGE 206]

212 / TRANSCRIPT ll


use more of your own .»., your own security...,
security, which rests which rests within
within yourself. yourself..., unspecified
verbs: ...allows...dis-
cover...need..., nomi-
nalizations: ...areas ...,
...security.., embedded
command: ...discover
the areas..., missing ref-
erential index: ...it...,
the areas...

(151) (151) (151-159)


And remember always Causal modeling con- metaphor with direct
that you're unique. junction: ...and..., pre- quotes.
supposition: ...remem-
ber always..., unspecifi-
ed verb: ...remember...,
deletion: ...unique in
what way?


(152) (152)

And all that you have Causal modeling conto do is let people see junction: ...and..., prethat you are you. supposition: ...all that
you have to do..., miss-
ing referential index: ...
all people..., embedded
command:..see that you
..., unspecified verb: ...
do...

(153) (153)


One of the things | Missing referential inlearned very early— dex: ...one of the things
was that at a house ...» „very early..., a
call to see a little house call...a little child
child, beautifully ..., unspecified verb: ...
dressed, hair combed learned..., embedded
command: ...see..., de-
letion: ... beautifully
dressed to whom?...


(154) (154)

—and the face of the Causal modeling conchild would say, “No- junction: ...and..., mind
body likes me, just reading, missing refernobody.” ential index: ...the child

[PAGE 207]

TRANSCRIPT II / 213


veer oe MODOMY..., .. just
nobody..., unspecified
verb: ... likes...


(155) (155)

And the child was Causal modeling conright. junction: ...and..., mis-
sing referential index:
...the child..., deletions:
right about what: Pre-
supposition: ...was right
..., nominalization: ..
right...


(156) (156)

Go to another home Missing referential into see a little child, dex: ...another home...,
dirty face, untidy, hair ...@ little child..., ...the
tangled, and the chiid child..., deletions:
gives a gurgle of glee dirty to whom?..., ...unand rushes toward tidy to whom? ..., nomiyou— nalizations: ...glee, un-
specified verb: ...gives
..., oe PUSHES...


(157) (157)

and the face says, Causal modeling con-
“everybody likes me.” junction; ...and..., mis-
sing referential index: ...
the face..., quotes, refer-
ential index: ...every-
body..., unspecified
verb: ...says...


(158) (158)

And that child is Causal modeling: ...and
right, everybody does ..., presupposition:
child is right..., missing
referential index: ...that
child..., ...everybody...,
nominalization: ...right
.., deletion: ..right
about what?..., every-
body does what? ...

[PAGE 208]

214 / TRANSCRIPT II


(159) (159)

To have that attitude Embedded command: ...
is a precious posses- have that attitude...,
sion— and you're en- presupposition: ...you're
titled to it. entitled..., missing refer-
ential index: ...that atti-
tude..., ...a previous
possession...it.., unspec-
ified verbs: ...have...,
...entitled..., nominali-
zations: ...attitude...


(160) (160) (160-162)


As part of Arizona, Selectional restriction, metaphor with direct
and the total learning causal modeling: ...as..., "quotes.
of Arizona, the indian missing referential index:
meets the rattlesnake ...the total learnings...,
and says, “You go ...the indian..., ...the
your way, little broth- rattle snake..., Quotes:
er and I will go mine.” referential index: ... your
way..., embedded com-
mand: ...go your way...


(161) (161)

And both the snake Causal modeling conand the Indian are junction: ...and..., predignified and right. supposition: ...dignified
and right..., missing ref-
erential index: ...the
snake..., the indian...,
nominalizations: ...right


(162) (162)

And each goes his Causal modeling conway in dignity, in junction: ...and..., misssecurity, in comfort, ing referential index: ...
with respect. each..., ...his way...
unspecified verb: ...goes
..., Presuppositions: ...
in dignity..., ...in secur-
ity..., ...in comfort...,
with respect..., nominal-
izations: ...dignity...,
...security..., ...comfort

[PAGE 209]

TRANSCRIPT ll / 215


coer oe FeSpect.,., phono-
logical ambiguity: ...in-
security...


(163) (163) (163-168)

And 1 think self- Sentence fragment, caus- . transderivational search
respect and the full al modeling conjunction: for negative K 4-tuples
knowledge that you ...and..., embedded anchored to Arizona.
have self-respect— command: ...have self
respect..., unspecified
verb: ...think..., ...have
..., nominalizations: ...
self respect..., ...know-
ledge..., ...self-respect
..., referential index: ...a
fully knowledge...


(164) (164)

and you should have Causal modeling conthat by virtue of being junction: ...and..., emalive, and willing to bedded commands: ...do
do the things that the things..., do them
most interest you, well; presupposition: ...
and to do them weil. well..., missing referen-
tial index: ...that..., ...
the thngs..., ...them...,
nominalizations: ...vir-
tue..., unspecified verbs:
.--have..., ...willing...,
..do..., ...interest..., ...
do...


(165) (165)

You both have uncer- Presupposition: ..both
tainty in the past. have uncertainty..., de-
letion: ...uncertainty
about what?..., unspeci-
fied verb: ...have...,
missing referential index:
..in the past..., nomi-
nalization: ...uncer-
tainty...


(166) (166)


You can feave that Presupposition: ...can
uncertainty. leave that..., unspecified

[PAGE 210]

216 / TRANSCRIPT II


verb: ...leave..., missing
referential index: ...that
uncertainty..., embed-
ded command: ...leave
that..., nominalization:
...Uncertainty...

(167) (167)

You can leave it in Presupposition: ...leave
Arizona. it..., unspecified verb:
.. leave.,,, referential in-
dex: ...if..., embedded
command: ...leave it in


(168) (168)

It won't change Ari- Presupposition: ...it’ll
zona; it’il change you. change you..., unspecifi-
ed verb: ...change..., ...
change..., missing refer-
ential index: ...it..., ...it


(169) (169) (169-177)

And the farmboy that Causal modeling con- metaphor; metal once was, back in junction: ...and..., cause instructions to use V
Wisconsin—if I ever effect: ...because..., re- variable as the lead (Lwent back, 1 could ferential index: ...those operator and R-operator
take up those things, old things..., ...they..., are V) to negative K
because they were deletion: ...good for 4-tuples maintaining
good. whom?... V/K disassociation.


(170) (170)

Causal modeling conAnd they are not a junction: ...and..., referpart of me anymore... ential index: ...they...,
anymore...


(171) (171)

And the unpleasant- Causal modeling connesses and unhappi- junction: ...and..., misnesses of the past— sing referential index:
leave them in the .the unpleasantnesses,
past, way back In the unhappinesses, ...of the
past. past..., ...them..., ...in

[PAGE 211]

TRANSCRIPT Il / 217

the past..., ...way back
in the past..., embedded
command: ...leave them
..., unspecified verb: ...
leave..., nominaliza-
tions: ...unpleasantnes-
ses..., ...unhappinesses


(172) (172)

And look forward to Causal modeling: ...and
the good days com- ..., presuppositions: ...
ing, the new experl- look forward to..., ...
ences, the new under- good days coming..., ...
standings. ..,
new experiences.
new understandings...,
unspecified verbs:
look forward...,refer-
ential index:...the good
days coming..., ...the
new experiences...,...the
understandings..., nomi-
nalizations: experiences
u, «understandings...


(173) (173)

And be aware that you Causal modeling concan look back at the junction: ...and...,
age of 40 to your lack presupposition: — .,.that
of understanding of you can look..., ...at the
what happiness could age of 40..., ...your lack
be at 40. of understanding..., un-
specified verb: ...aware
...» ınlook back..., ...
lack..., ...be..., referen-
tial index: ...lack of
understanding..., dele-
tion: ...happiness for
whom?..., nominaliza-
tion: ...happiness..., em-
bedded command:
you can look back...


(174) (174)

Just as that time when Causal modeling, impliyou were ten years ed causative: ...just as
old, you could not ..., referential index: ..
possibly understand that time when...,

[PAGE 212]

218 / TRANSCRIPT Il


what happiness of the happiness of the 20's...,
20's were, what the .. happiness of teenage
happiness of teen- ..., presuppositions: ..
age... that time when you...,
...could not possibly
understand..., ... happi-
ness of 20's..., ...happi-
ness of teenage..., un-
specified verbs: ...under-
stand..., embedded com-
mand: ...understand...,
nominalizations: ...hap-
piness..., ...teenage...,
sentence fragment.


(175) (175)

And the broken toys Causal modeling conof your childhood—it junction: ...and..., referreally hurt to lose ential index: ...the brokthem, see them brok- en toys..., ...your childen. hood..., ...it..., presup-
position: ...it really hurt
..., unspecified verb: ...
hurt..., ...see..., embed-
ded command: _...see
them broken...


(176) (176)

When we all grow up, Causal modeling, implihaving lost some ed causative: ...when...,
things that we forget referential index: ...we
about— are..., ...something...,
embedded command: ...
grow up..., forget about
..., unspecified verbs:
«grow... forget...
...lost..., presupposi-
tions: ...lost some things
con... , . forget about...,
deletion: ...forget about
what?


(177) (177)

and if we ever do Causal modeling conremember them, we junction: ...and if...,
will see them differ- presuppositions: ...will
ently than when it see them differently than
happened. ..., unspecified verb: ...

[PAGE 213]

TRANSCRIPT II / 219


remember..., ...happen-
ed..., deletion: ...differ-
ently for whom?..., mis-
sing referential index: ...
them..., ...them..., ...
when it..., embedde
command: ...see them
differently...


(178) (178) (178-183)

And that open win- Causal modeling con- transderivational search
dow, Monde, had one junction: ...and..., (L-operator is V) to premeaning then, and and..., presuppositions: vious negative K 4-tuple
such a pleasant ...had one meaning then (for Monde) maintaining
meaning now: a total- ..., «pleasant meaning anchored positive K (Rly different experi- now..., ...a different ex- operator) variable.
ence, a new learning. perience..., ...a new
learning..., ...referential
index: ...that open win-
dow..., one meaning...,
...A pleasant meaning...,
.. different experience...,
..a new learning...,
nominalization:
meaning..., ...mean-
ing..., ...experience...,
..-learning..., deletion:
.. pleasant for whom?


(179) (179)

That spanking when Missing referential index:
you broke the win- ...that spanking.., ...the
dow—and now you window..., ...a spanking
can look back, see a veep 2 SOMething differSpanking as some- ent..., presupposition:
thing much different ...can look back...see a
than when you receiv- spanking as somethng
ed it. different...than whe...,
unspecified verbs:
look back..., ...see..., ...
received..., causal
modeling conjunction:
...and...

(180) (180)

And you can actually Causal modeling conlook back with plea- junction: ...and..., presure, and recall how a suppositions: ...can look
spanking hurt, how back..., ...with pleasure

[PAGE 214]

220 / TRANSCRIPT Il

you felt tears. ..., - -recall..., ...how a
spanking hurt..., ...
felt tears..., unspecified
verbs: ...look back..., ...
recall..., ...felt..., nomi-
nalization: ...pleasure
..., missing referential
index: ...a spanking...,
...tears..., embedded
command: ...recall...

(181) (181)

Compared to the tears Deletion: ...What comonty proved that you pared to the tears?, ...
were alive, with a good to whom?..., pregood nervous system. supposition: ...tears on-
ly proved..., unspecified
verbs: ...proved..., alive
..., nominalization: ...
system..., missing refer-
ential index: ...the tears
seep «A good nervous
system...


(182) (182)

And it would have Causal modeling conbeen terrible if you junction: ...and..., delelhadn't been able to tions: ...terrible for
feel that spanking— whom/how?...terrible
been terrible if you for whom/how?..., precouldn't have cried. suppositions: ...would
have been terrible..., ...
terrible..., missing refer-
ential index: ...it..., ...
that spanking..., unspec-
ified verbs: ...feel...


(183) (183)

In other words, react- Missing referential ining to the good and dex: ...in other words. ..,
the bad, and dealing ...the good..., ...the bad
with it adequately— u it..., ...the real joy
ets the real joy in ..., «itt life..., deletions:
e. ...real joy for whom/
when? ...adequately for
whom?..., nominaliza-
tion: ...good..., ...bad
... one fOY..., unspecified

[PAGE 215]

TRANSCRIPT II / 221


verbs: ...reacting..., .
dealing...


(184) (184) (184-186)

Now | want both of Presuppositions: ...con- meta-instructions to genyou, in your own tinue to look at anything eralize the V/K pattern
thinking, in your own e... + »ACHieve..., ...your set in 178-183,
understanding, to capable..., unspecified
continue to look at verbs: ...continue, look,
anything you wish, to wish, achieve, capable,
achieve the under- achieving, nominalizastandings you're cap- tions: ...thinking..., unable of achieving. derstandings..., under-
standings, missing refer-
ential index: ...anything
..., embedded com-
mand: ...look..., ...
achieve...


(185) (185)

Monde, you could Missing referential inlook at the little girl dex: ...the little girl...,
chasing the ducks, ...the ducks..., the ducks
and feeding the ducks seep ove the child..., nomibreadcrumbs, the nalizations: ...sense...,
child splashing her „.freedom..., ...sense...,
feet in water — that ...freedom..., deletion:
beautiful sense of _. .beautifulto whom?...
freedom—or you scope ambiguity: ...
could have a beautiful now...

sense of freedom,
now.


(186) (186)

Then you were abie to Implied causative: ...
think about a lot of then..., embedded comthings which you mand: ...think..., undidn't need to. specified verb: ...able...,
..think.., ...need...,
missing referential index:
...@ lot of things..., nom-
inalizations:...things...

(187-196)
(187) (187)
anchors pattern set in
And | know from my Causal modeling con- 178-183 and generalize
own experience, that junction: ...and..., «+ in 184-186 to Arizona.

[PAGE 216]

222 / TRANSCRIPT II


it's wonderful to be and..., unsepcified verb:
able to be in a wheel- ..know..., ...able...,
chair—and | meet nominalizations: ...exnice people... perience..., deletion: ...
wonderful for whom?
...missing referential in-
dex: ...nice people...


(188) (188)

And | think life would Causal modeling conbe very, very bad if | junction: ...and..., uncould not have had specified verb: ...think
the pleasure of meet- ..., nominalization: ...
ing both of you—and pleasure..., ...life...,
I thank you. deletions: ...bad for
whom?, ...thank for
what?...


(189) (189)

You need to keep Embedded command: ...
Arizona as a treasured keep Arizona as a...,
part in atl the learn- presupposition: ...you
ings—as a treasured need..., unspecified
part of your life— verbs: ...need..., ...keep
.... missing referential
index: ...all the learnings
..., deletions: ...a treas-
sured how for whom?
.--, nominalization: ...
learning..., treasure...


(190) (190)

and to use those Causal modeling conlearnings to meet your junction: ...... ...and...,
wishes, your needs, embedded command: ...
your comfort. use those leamings...,
unspecified verbs: ...use
veep oe Meet.., hominali-
zations: ...learnings...,
...Wishes..., ...needs...,
...comfort..., missing
referential index:
those learnings...

[PAGE 217]

TRANSCRIPT II / 223


(191) (191)

And you are comfort- Conjunction: ...and...,
able, are you not, presupposition: ...are
Monde? It’s delightful comfortable..., tag questo be comfortable. tion: ...are you not...,
unspecified verb:
comfortable..., comfort-
able..., deletion: ...de-
lightful to whom?...


(192) (192)

And you are comfort- Conjunction: ...and...,
able, are you not, presupposition:...are
Nick? comfortable..., tag quesN: Yes. tion: ...are you not?...,
unspecified verb:
comfortable...


(193) (193)

E: Now would you Referential index: ...a
ask a question of question..., deletion: ...
me? question about what’...
N: No.


(194) (194)
E: Will you enjoy Embedded command: ...
your thinking? enjoy your thinking...,
N: Yes. unspecified verb: ...en-
joy..., deletion: ...think-
ing about what?...


(195) (195)

E: And will you Causal modeling con-
achieve better junction: ...and..., em-
understandings? bedded command:
N: Yes. achieve better under-
standing..., deletion: ...
better than what? to
whom?..., nominaliza-
tion: ...understandings.

[PAGE 218]

224 / TRANSCRIPT HI


(196)
(196)
E: With less fear and Sentence fragment,
more eagerness? nominalization: ...fear
N: Yes. .... ...€Agerness..., dele-
tions: ...fear of what? ...
more eagerness about?
...presuppositions: ...
less fear, more eagerness


(197) (197) (197-206)

E:It has been a plea- Nominalization: re-orientation to present
sure to work with pleasure..., ...work..., 4-tuple instructions:
both of you. unspecified verb:
work..., deletion:
pleasure for whom?


(198) (198)

And | want to thank Causal modeling conboth of you very much junction: ...and..., delefor working with me. tion: ...working how?
..., unspecified verb: ...
thank..., presupposi-
tion: ...very much...


(199) (199)

It's always a pleasure Deletion: ...pleasure for
to do good work, and whom?..., ...good for
do good work with whom/compared to
good materials. what?..., embedded
command: ...do good
work..., unspecified
verbs: ...good work...,
...good materials...,
nominalizaiton:
pleasure..., ...work...


(200) (200)

it’s a pleasure. Deletion: ...pleasure for
whom? how?..., referen-
tial index: ...its..., nomi-
nalization: ...pleasure,
presupposition: ...rare...

[PAGE 219]

TRANSCRIPT Il / 225


(201) (201)

And now I'm tired, | Embedded command....
think ''ll let you both awaken..., presupposiawaken at your own tion: ... your own rate...,
rate, in your own way. ..your own way...,

nominalization: ...way
u, Tate..,, unspecified
verbs: ...think...,
awaken..., deletion: ...
tired of what?


(202) (202)

Shut your eyes first, Presuppositions: ...first
Monde, and then ..., causal modeling conawaken at your own junction: ...and...
rate, in your own way.


(203) (203)

You both had your Tense change: ...had...,
eyes closed. So now, deletion: ...eyes closed
you can take your wheri?..., implied causaown time and wake tive: ...so now..., ...and
up. ..., presupposition:
can take your..., ...
wake-up..., unspecified
verbs: ...take, wake up


(204) (204)

Take you a while, Sentence fragment, causNick, to put yourself al modeling conjunction:
back together again... ...and,.., referential inAnd that reorientation dex: ...a while..., ...that
to your hands, feeling orientation..., unspecifithem again. ed verb: ...take..., ...put
wa, „back..., ... feeling
..., presupposition: ..
yourself back together
again..., ...feeling them
again...


(205) (205)

And getting yourlegs, Sentence fragment, causyour arms, back to- al modeling conjunction:

[PAGE 220]

226 / TRANSCRIPT II


gether, your head ...and..., unspecified
back on...Getting ac- verbs: ...getting...,
quainted with your back on..., ...getting acbody. quainted...


(206) (206)

I think it’s too com- Unspecified verb:
fortable in here. think..., deletion: ...too
N: Um still in a comfortable to whom?
trance. referential index: ...in
M: You don't want to here..., deletion: ...too
come out. comfortable for whom?
N: Um huh.


(207) (207) (207-211)

E: No, you don't want Embedded commands: metaphor.
to come out of a „want to come out...,
trance. presupposition: ...you
want to..., nominaliza-
tion: ...trance..., un-
specified verb: ...want


(208) (208)

You don't want a Embedded commands:
charming movie to ...want a charming end
end, you don't want a 2... «want... ...like
flower to wilt, but you reality..., unspecified
do like reality. verbs: ...want...,
want..., ...end..., ...like
..., Missing referential
index: ...a charming
movie..., ...a flower...,
nominalization: ...real-
ity..., deletions:
charming to whom?...


(209) (209)

And all | can do is Embedded question: ...
wonder how charming wonder..., unspecified
you will be at 40, 50, verbs; ...wonder..., ...
and 60...| can wonder wonder..., ...find..., ...
at all the new things looking..., ...find...,
you will find at 40, 50, missing referential index:
60; and I'm looking to „all the new things...,
find out how nice ...nice things..., embed-

[PAGE 221]

TRANSCRIPT II / 227


things are at 80. ded command: ...find...


(210) (210)

One of my sons told Missing referential inme, “I will be eternally dex: ...one of my sons
grateful to my grand- seep good old times...,
parents. They taught ...in the past..., ...really
me that, of course, good..., ...they...,
they had good oid they..., them...,
times in the past, but Quotes ..., unspecified
the really good times verbs: ...told..., ...grateare yet ahead of ful..., ...taught..., ...athem.” head..., nominaliza-
tions: ...times..., ...past
..., time...


(211) (211)

The first time learned Missing referential into ride a horse, | dex: ...the first time...,
didn’t know that one ...A house..., ...one day
day Ud ride a jet e... A jet plane..., ...a
plane; I didn't even plane..., unspecified
know there could be a verbs: ...learned..., ...
plane. know..., ...Know.........
presuppositions: ...first
time...even...


(212) (212) (212-213)

Now I'm letting you Embedded commands: re-orientation to present
awaken slowly, be- awaken slowly..., 4-tuple; metaphor.
cause it’s necessary awaken slowly..., ...let
—all people—to the trance..., ...learnings
awaken slowly, and to vee, .»»Set..., deletions: ...
let the trance learn- necessary how for
ings and thinkings whom? ...slowly for
set. whom? ..., referential
index: ...its..., ...all
people..., ...the trance
learnings..., ...thinkings
..., unspecified verbs: ...
awaken..., ...awaken...,
Set...


(213) (213)

Just like plaster of Causal modeling, impliparis takes a little ed causative: ...just...,

[PAGE 222]

228 / TRANSCRIPT II

while to set. And after . .after..., ...then..., emyour learnings get set, bedded commands:
then they will ac- set..., ...get set...,
company you ali the accompany..., unspecifirest of your life. ed verbs: ...takes..., ...
set..., ...set..., accom-
pany..., nominaliza-
tions: ...learnings..., ref-
erential index: ...a little
while..., ...all the rest...,
... your learnings..., pre-
suppositions: all the rest
of your life..., selection-
al restriction.


(214) (214) (214-223)


Now for the rest of Unspecified verbs: ...un- meta-instructions to utithe day, be uncon- concemed..., ...seem..., lize the trance learnings
cerned if you don’t ...touch..., ...touch..., 4-tuples; post-hypnotic
seem to be totally in missing referential index: suggestions.
touch with things. ...things..., presupposiYou will be adequate- tions: ...for the rest of
ly in touch for your the day..., deletion: ...
own welfare and pro- adequately for whom?
tection. .. nominalizations:...
welfare..., ...protection


(215) (215)

But your unconscious Causal modeling, implis going to use up a ed causative: ...but...,
lot of your energy embedded command: ...
sorting over all its use up..., nominalizapast learnings, under- tions: ...unconscious...,
standings, and think- .. .energy..., learnings...,
ing. ‚.understandings...,
thinking..., missing ref-
erential index: ...a lot of
see, « «its past learnings
we, »««thinking..., un-
specified verbs: ...use
up..., sorting...


(216) (216)

And it'll shape it into Causal modeling consomething for you to junction: ...and..., emhave. bedded command:

[PAGE 223]

TRANSCRIPT II / 229


shape it..., missing refer-
ential index: ...it..., ...
it..., ...something..., un-
specified verbs: ...shape
sees oe RAVE...


(217) (217)

That takes a little Deletions: ...takes a little
time. time for what/whom?
..., Missing referential
index: ...that..., ...a lit-
tle time..., nominaliza-
tion: ...time..., unspeci-
fied verb: ...takes..., de-
letion: ...time for what/
whom?...


(218) (218)

And by tomorrow Causal modeling, implimorning, you'll be ed causative: ...and...by
completely awake. .»., presupposition: ...by
tomorrow morning...,
deletion: ...completely
for whom?..., unspecifi-
ed verb: ...awake...


(219) (219)

| want you both have a Unspecified verb:
nice night's sleep, to- want..., ...have..., ...
night—and if you wish..., ...remember...,
wish a pleasant dream embedded command: ...
that you may or may wish a pleasant..., delenot remember. tions: ...nice for whom?
..» ««»pleasant for
whom?..., causal model-
ing, implied causative:
...and if..., missing ref-
erential index: ...a pleas-
ant dream..., nominali-
zation: ...dream...


(220) (220)

And | think your un- Causal modeling conconscious can give junction: ...and..., emyour conscious mind bedded command:

[PAGE 224]

230 / TRANSCRIPT I


one special delight— give..., unspecified
that something you verbs: ...think..., ...give
eat for dinner tonight ..., nominalizations: ...
tastes unusually unconscious..., ...CONgood. scious mind..., ...delight
..., Missing referential
index: ...one special de-
light..., something...un-
usually good..., dele-
tion: ...good for whom?


(221) (221)

It‘ll be your uncon- Nominalizations: ...unscious mind that conscious mind..., unmakes it taste unusu- specified verb: ...makes
ally good. ... embedded com-
mand: ...tastes unusual-
ly good..., missing ref-
erential index: ...it...,
deletion: ...unusually
good for whom?


(222) (222)

And of course your Causal modeling conunconscious may de- junction: ...and..., emcide not the inner; it bedded commands: ...
may decide on the decide..., ...decide on...,
feel of the sheets; it ...feel unusually pleased
may be on something ..., unspecified verbs: ...
you see.; and your decide..., ...decide..., ...
unconscious will see..., ...make..., ...feel
make you fee/ unusu- ..., «pleased...
ally pleased. nominalizations: ...un-
conscious..., ...uncon-
scious..., missing refer-
ential index: ...the din-
ner..., ...the sheets...,
...something..., dele-
tion; ...unusually com-
pared to what? whom?

[PAGE 225]

TRANSCRIPT II / 231


(223) (223)

And now say goodbye Causal modeling conto your unconscious, junction: ...and..., nomand let's talk and res- inalization: ...unconpond to each other at scious..., ...conscious
the conscious level. level..., unspecified
Hi. Hi. verbs: ...respond...,
presupposition: ...say
goodbye to your uncon-
scious..., ...respond...,
...at the conscious level
.., deletion: ...talk
about?...

[PAGE 226]

232 / TRANSCRIPT II


The following is a discussion of the third level of patterning
used by Erickson and describes the systematic way in which
Erickson works to access and anchor the client's past 4-tuples,
making available the resources needed. This discussion in no way
exhausts what is present in Erickson's work, but is to be used to
further aid the hypnotist/communicator in both understanding
Erickson’s work and organizing his or her own experience in
hypnosis.
As was earlier stated, one of the single most important
patterns for the agent of change (psychotherapeutic practitioner of
hypnosis) is the understanding that each of us as human beings has
past learnings and understandings that when organized in a
directed fashion, provides the resources that a client needs to make
the changes he desires.
It is Erickson's use and sequencing of these past 4-tuples that
allows him to effect change in such a profound way. As the client
makes meaning out of the hypnotist's communication, the client
will, in the present, experience the learnings which provide those
resources out of the sum total of the client’s past 4-tuples. These
experiences, (4-tuples) present and past, are then re-arranged in an
effective way for the present and future. The understanding of the
4-tuple of primary experience, the transderivation search
phenomena, anchoring and effective pacing (meeting the client at
his model of the world) will increase the hypnotist's choices
greatly in the context of altered states of communication.As
Erickson himself states:

...in the therapeutic use of hypnosis, one primarily meets the
patient's needs on the terms he himself proposes; and then one
fixates the patient's attention, through adequate respect for and
utilization of his method of presenting his problem, to his own
inner processes of mental functioning. This is accomplished by
casual but obviously earnest and sincere remarks, seemingly
explanatory but intended solely to stimulate a wealth of the
patient's own patterns of psychological functioning so that he
meets his problems by use of his learnings already acquired or that
he will develop as he continues his progress.


Milton H. Erickson, Techniques for Resist-
ant Patients, Haley (ed.), p. 499.

[PAGE 227]

PART Ill

[PAGE 228]

SUMMARY / 237


The preceding transcripts offer a unique opportunity for
understanding not only the elegance of Milton Erickson’s use of
altered states, but they also constitute a complete tracking model
for trance induction and change.
At first the transcripts appear to be very different, Erickson’s
work with Monde is more specific. As in her case he has more
verbal and analogical feedback to utilize and assist her in deep
trance. Nick offers less in the way of verbal and analogic feedback, and correspondingly, Erickson's work is less specific. With
Nick, Erickson utilizes more extensively the general verbal
patterns of nominalization, unspecified verbs, missing referential
index and deletion in his work.
e accessing (L operator) and anchoring of 4-tuples
e polarity pacing (temperature)
e visual kinesthetic disassociation
© metaphor/meta-instructions
e construction of new 4-tuple - creation of a
reference experience
© testing effectiveness of work


In both cases E begins by accessing (L-operator) a past trance
4-tuple,
Monde Nick
1-3 1-2

as both Nick and Monde begin to access (L-operator) and
represent (R-operator) those past 4-tuples, responding to
Erickson's communication, they begin to re-experience (both
R-operator and —R) portions of the past trance 4-tuyples (through
transderivational search L-operator) phenomena. In other words,
portions of the past trance 4-tuples are accessed (L-operator) and
re-experienced (R-operator).

Erickson then instructs both clients to attend (R-operator) to
the kinesthetic variable of the trance 4-tuple.

Monde Nick
15-17 9-18
26 49-50
63

[PAGE 229]

238 / SUMMARY


The second meta-pattern is polarity pacing. When pacing a
client's ongoing experience, the hypnotist is often presented with
inconsistent messages from the client (i.e. the C-operator is no)
regarding the trance experience.
It is possible that Erickson was sensitive to mixed messages
about the hypnotic experience on Nick’s part. One way of
effectively pacing in this situation is to pace both parts being
presented. In this case the temperature polarity pace can
effectively pace the part that desires the trance experience as well
as the part that presents a message of resistance. The temperature
polarity pace works through metaphor much the way that tagquestions (“you are comfortable, are you not?”) pace more
directly both messages being presented by the client.
Here we wish to remind the reader that Erickson's work is
both subtle and complex. That is just to say that E is utilizing “cool
comfort in a hot room” as a very sophisticated polarity pace
overlooks other possible understandings. This attention to the
kinesthetic variable, namely the 4-tuple = ‘comfort’ sets a
precedent for the client, that he/she may extract the overall formal
pattern of, “even though it’s hot you can still be comfortable” =
“when you are uncomfortable, you can have a choice of being
comfortable.” This particular pace of comfort-cool, uncomfortable-hot, is parallel in these transcripts with the problems which
both clients present; that is, it has a direct application to the
problem. Perhaps most importantly it utilizes a piece of the client's
ongoing experiences as a continuous pace.
The third pattern to be extracted is that of disassociation and
utilization of the disassociated states. This involves the hypnotist’s
ability to recognize that the variable of experience that the client
normally uses for (client’s R-Operator) conscious representation to
find a point of overlap with the other variables of the 4-tuples
which are represented outside of conscious (“R). For example,
Erickson instructs Monde to visualize (L-operator) her husband's
experience with arm levitation, and then instructs her to generalize
what those feelings would be like in her experience (representational system overlap); thereby eliciting arm levitation.
(27-28) In Monde's case Erickson uses the visual variable as
lead to re-experiencing other portions of a 4-tuple. In each instance
of re-vivication of a pleasant experience, Erickson has Monde,
first visualize it, and then add the kinesthetic portion of the
4-tuple, the feelings attached to the pleasant 4-tuple. (81-89,

[PAGE 230]

SUMMARY / 239


89-92). Erickson then suggests that Monde recall an unpleasant
4-tuple, again using a visual lead, however, he suggests that she
maintain the kinesthetic variable of comfort. (97-101).
With Nick, however, Erickson ‘utilizes Nick's R-system which
is kinesthetic and leads him to a point of overlap, whereby he adds
the visual portion of the 4-tuple. (43-48) When Erickson works
with Nick, he is more general in his hypnotic communication; that
is, he does not explicitly ask Nick to recall any particular 4-tuple,
but suggests that he maintain the kinesthetic variable (comfort),
and visualize any experiences he wishes while holding the K
variable constant, maintain K (40-46) (49-50) (53-59).
Metaphor and meta-instruction are the fourth area to be
considered. In both transcripts Erickson suggests, to the clients, a
new understanding, a new way to experience the world. He does
this by offering suggestions directly through metaphor, and
through meta-instructions, or & way in which the client may utilize
the trance learnings and past 4-tuples with more understanding.
This precedent is established early with both clients

Monde Nick
83-8 83-94
93-96 97-109
174-175 115

to ensure that the meta-instructions are accepted by the client and
also to prove to the client that they do have a choice. lt is
important to demonstrate to the clients that they have the
resources to create the choice they want — thus the need to
establish a reference experience. The following is an example of
the creation of a new reference experience.

Erickson consistently has Monde visualize a past pleasant
4-tuple and then add the kinesthetic variable. Then he instructs her
to visualize an unpleasant 4-tuple and hold the kinesthetic variable
(of the 1st 4-tuple) constant. Erickson then proves to Monde that
she can-have control by having her recall an unpleasant 4-tuple
using a visual lead, adding the appropriate unpleasant 4-tuple,
then to replace the unpleasant kinesthetic sensations with pleasant
kinesthetic sensations which have previously been anchored to a
piece of Monde's behavior (eye blink). This serves as a reference
experience which Monde can utilize at another time.

[PAGE 231]

240 / SUMMARY


Monde
116-117
123-131


When Erickson works directly with Nick, he uses a piece of Nick’s
behavior (breathing) as an illustration and reference experience of
how Nick can exercise control over his behavior. As Erickson
states, this is something that Nick could notice (namely the
absence of loud breathing on Nick's part). Thus the establishing of
a reference 4-tuple allows the client a 4-tuple from which they may
generalize, and it gives the hypnotist a way in which he/she may
check the effectiveness of their work with the client. That is to say
that by giving the client a reference 4-tuple which utilizes portions
of their own behavior, (eye blink, loud breathing) the hypnotist
can literally anchor the client control (consciously or unconsciously) over the new choice. In both cases Erickson does just
this. Erickson suggests that Monde practice the self-anchor
(“blinking her eyes”) to banish discomfort.
The self-anchor of eye blinking, on one level ties the process
to a portion of the client’s (Monde) ongoing experience, on another
level the opening and closing of her eyes to exercise a new choice
of comfort may be a metaphor for beginning to really look at her
problems.
With Nick, however, Erickson points out his ability to
control his breathing as a reference structure rather early in the
transcript, and suggests that he maintain his comfort while visualizing different 4-tuples. Finally, he asks Nick directly if he will
utilize the new learnings and elicits a direct response from Nick. It
is important to note here that Erickson offers suggestions for
amnesia throughout both transcripts, thus it is important to
understand the means by which only important and useful
portions of the trance experience are brought into the conscious
state; bridging the gap of experience. This can be understood by
having the client exercise the new choice both in the altered state
and the waking state. It is in this way that Erickson may check the
effectiveness of his work, without forcing the new learnings into
the consciousness of the client. Erickson does this by suggesting to
Monde that she will experience discomfort (immobile hand,
warmth) when she awakens from trance, then Erickson, by use of

[PAGE 232]

SUMMARY / 241


a behavioral presupposition (“which hand has the longer life
line?”) allows her to exercise the new choice in controlling the
discomfort.
In the preceding section we presented three levels of patterns,
the linguistic patterns that constitute the basic foundations of
Milton Erickson's use of language in hypnosis, the second level
patterns which Erickson uses to achieve a desired level of trance
and the desired outcome of suggested phenomenon, and third the
level of patterning which illustrates the sequencing and
manipulation of past experience (4-tuples), and the incorporation
and utilization of the client’s ongoing experience to build a
reference structure to assist the client in attaining a new choice.

[PAGE 233]

Bibliography


I, General
Bach, E. Syntactic Theory. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, Inc., 1974.
Bach-y-Rita, P. Brain Mechanisms in Sensory Substitution.
New York: Academic Press, 1972.
Bandler, R., and Grinder, J. The Structure of Magic I. Palo
Alto, Calif.: Science and Behavior Books, 1975.
Bandler, R., Grinder, J., and Satir, V. Changing with Families,
Volume I, Palo Alto: Science and Behavior Books, Inc.,
1976.
Bever, T.G. “The Cognitive Basis of Linguistic Structure,” in
J. Hayes (ed.), Cognition and the Developments of
Language. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1970.
Chomsky, N. Syntactic Structures. Mouton, The Hague, 1957.
Chomsky, N. Language and Mind. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, Inc., 1968.
Dimond, S., and Beaumont, K. Hemisphere Function in the
Human Brain. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1974.
Dimond, S. The Double Brain. London: Churchill Livingstone,
1972.
Eccles, J. Brain and Conscious Experience. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1966.
Fillmore, C., “The Case for Case,” in E. Bach and R. Harms
(eds.), Universals in Linguistic Theory. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, 1968.
Gardner, H. The Shattered Mind, Knopf, 1975.

[PAGE 234]

244 / BIBLIOGRAPHY


Gazzainga, M. The Bisected Brain. New York: Appleton
Century Croft, 1974.
Greene, G. “How to Get People to Do Things With Words,” in
Papers From the 8th Regional Meeting of the Chicago
Linguistic Society. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1970.
Grinder, J. On Deletion Phenomena in English. Mouton, The
Hague, 1974.
Grinder, J. and Bandler, R. The Structure of Magic II, Palo
Alto: Science and Behavior Books, Inc., 1976.
Grinder, J., Bandler, R. and Cameron, L, Neuro Linguistic
Programming I, (in preparation).
Grinder, J., and Elgin, S. A Guide to Transformational Gram-
mar. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1973.
Gruber, J. “Studies in Lexical Relations.” Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, MIT, 1965.
Haley,*, J. (ed.) Advanced Techniques of Hypnosis and
Therapy. New York: Grune and Stratton, 1967.
Haley, J. Uncommon Therapy. New York: Grune and
Stratton.
Horn, L. “A Presuppositional Analysis of Only and Even,” in
Papers From the 5th Regional Meeting of the Chicago
Linguistic Society. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1969.
Jacobs, R., and Rosenbaum, P. English Transformational
Grammar. Waltham, Mass.: Ginn/Blaisdell, 1968.
Jeffress, J.A. Cerebral Mechanisms in Behavior. New York:
Hafner Co., 1967.
Kartunnen, L. “Remarks on Presuppositions,” at the Texas
Conference on Performances, Conversational Implicature
and Presuppositions, March 1973, mimeograph.
Katz, J. Semantic Theory. New York: Harper and Row, 1972.
Lakoff, G. Linguistics and Natural Logic. Ann Arbor: Univer-
sity Michigan, 1970.
Langacker, R. Language and Its Structure. New York: Har-
court Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 1967.
Levy, J. “Psychobiological Implications of Bilateral Asym-
metry,” article in Hemisphere Function in the Human Brain.
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1974.
Lyons, J. Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
McCawley, J. “Lexical Insertion in a Transformational Gram-
mar,” in Papers From the 4th Regional Meeting of the Chi-

[PAGE 235]

BIBLIOGRAPHY / 245


cago Linguistic Society. Chicago: University of Chicago,
1968.
Miller, G.A., “The Magic Number 7 # 2” in the American
Psychologist, 1956.
Plath, W., and Bever, T. Specification and Utilization of a
Transformational Grammar. Bedford, Mass.: Air Force
Cambridge Research Laboratories, July 1968.
Polya, G. Patterns of Plausible Inference. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton Univ. Press, 1954.
Postal, P. “On the Derivaton of Pseudo-Adjectives,” paper
delivered to the 44th Annual Meeting of the LSA, 1969.
Postal, P. “On the Surface Verb Remind,” in Linguistic
Inquiry. (1;1:37-120) 1970.
Ross, J.R. “On Declarative Sentences,” in R. Jacobs and P.
Rosenbaum, Readings in English Transformational Gram-
mar. Waltham, Mass.: Ginn/Blaisdell, 1970.
Sapir, E. The Selected Writing of Edward Sapir. Berkeley:
University of California Press, D. Mandelbaum(ed.), 1963.
Searle, J. Speech Acts. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1969.
Weizenhoffer, A. General Techniques of Hypnotism. New
York: Grune and Stratton, 1957.
Whorf, B. “Grammatical Categories,” in J.E. Carroll (ed.),
Language, Thought and Reality. New York: John Wiley and:
Sons, 1956. |
IL Modeling/Formal Systems/Epistemology
Ashby, W.R. An Introduction to Cybernetics. Chapman and
Hall, Ltd., and University Paperbacks, 1956.
Bateson; G. Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballan-
tine Books, 1972.
Boyd, D. Introduction to Systems Analysis. (in press) 1975.
Carnap, R. The Logical Syntax of Language. Totowa, New
Jersey: Littlefield, Adams and Company, 1959.
Copi, I. Introduction to Logic. New York: Macmillan, 1961.
Herzberger, H. “The Logical Consistency of Language,” in
Harvard Educational Review, 35:469-480, 1965.
Hume, D. Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Korzybski, A. Science and Sanity. Lakeville, Conn.: The Inter-
national Non-Aristotelian Library Publishing Company, 4th
Edition, 1933.

[PAGE 236]

246 / BIBLIOGRAPHY


Miller, G. A.; Galanter, E.; and Pribram, K. Plans and the
Structure of Behavior. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, Inc., 1960.
Newell, A.; and Simon, H. A. Human Problem Solving. Engle-
wood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1972.
Pribram, K. Language of the Brain. Englewood Cliffs, New Jer-
sey: Prentice-Hall, 1971.
Russell, B. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London,
England: George Allen and Unwin, Ltd., 2nd Edition, 1921.
Schank, R.; and Colby, K. Computer Models of Thought and
Language. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman and Company,
1973.
Tarski, A. Introduction to Logic. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1941.
Vaihinger, H. The Philosophy of “As If.” London, England:
Routledge, Kegan and Paul, Ltd., 1924.

1. References labeled “(Milton H. Erickson) 1967” refer to Haley
(ed.), 1967.

[PAGE 237]

WARNING TO THE READER


Neuro Linguistic Programming (NLP) represents a significant advance in the
development of human choice. It places at the discretion of the skilled and balanced practitioner options for living with quality which were previously assigned
variously to fate, chance, genetics, accidents and divine influence. 1t is important to me to explicate at least partially what I intend by the descriptive phrase,
skilled and balanced.


The skill issue points to the requirement in the mastery of any interesting human
skill set for a commitment to practice, the personal discipline on the part of the
would-be NLP practitioner to arrange his or her own context for exploring,
learning and ultimately mastering of the actual body of patterning called NLP.
Success at this task identifies a learner, and the result a technician.

The balanced issue refers to two requirements, first, the leamer’s ability to integrate the skill set (mastered by the technician) into each and every area of their
life, personal as well as professional. Secondly, once this integration of the technical skill set has occurred, the individual is faced with the awesome responsibility of exercising these choices with some wisdom. At this point, the caterpillar
bursts the confinement of the cocoon, the technician transforms herself/himself
into an artist.


All the above is a somewhat circuitous way of cautioning the would-be NLP
practitioner. The world at the moment seems rather overflowing with people
purporting to offer training in NLP. It is here in selecting a mentor that you, the
reader, may begin to exercise one of the most crucial abilities associated with
artistry in the practice of NLP—namely, that of assessing the congruency of the
purported trainer. If your intuitions caution you, if you detect a discrepancy
between the verbal presentation of such a person and their actual behavior and
performance, keep moving and looking for an appropriate model.


If you are seriously interested in having access to quality training or business
consulting applications which rest firmly on the foundation of NLP which 1
intended when I co-created the discipline, I invite you to contact me at:


John Grinder
QUANTUM LEAP
PO Box 67359
Scotts Valley, CA 95067-7359
TEL) 408-457-0529
FAX) 408-457-2834
