[PAGE 001]

Patterns of the Hypnotic
Techniques of Milton H.
Erickson, M.D.


Vol. I
Richard Bandler and
John Grinder

[PAGE 002]

We dedicate this book
with the highest

reverence

to

Ghost O.T.

a little
snow in Summer

and
Mazda

(the car for

people who can hear)

[PAGE 003]

Table of Contents Processes..,,,.,.,.-.- canta
PREFACE... 0... c cece ccc cence eee eeeeennne eens Vil Transderivational Phenomena. . rn „..,217
AACKNOWLEDGMENTS. ...............-. x1 Ambigulty. ... ..ooooooooo eee 233
GGUIDE TO VOLUME I of Patterns of Erickson's Lesser Included Structures. ..... pee gg ge eee ge 2937
Work 1 Derived Meanings,......... nn ,.., 241
Summary of Part IlT .......................... 247
PART I EPILOGUE. .... 0... 0. ns 253
Identification of Patterns of Erickson's Hypnotic Work.

APPENDIX
Introduction: The Map Is Not the Territory... ......... 7
Syntactic Environments for Identifying Natural
Preview of Patterns... .. 0.0.0...
ccc eee en 15
Language Presuppositions in English...... sone
Dn ., 257
The Interspersal Hypnotic Technique for Symptom
BIBLIOGRAPHY. ......o.ococococuccocccocon o. 263
Correction and Pain Control.
. A ©)
Basic Trance Induction, with Commentary. . .. 31
A Special Inquiry with Aldous Huxley into the Nature and
Character of Various States of Consciousness, with
CoOMMentaly......o..0ooooconnnnnnnnno ee ee 99

PARTI
Familiarization with Patterns of Erickson's Hypnotic Work. .

Introduction. zoneen 129

PART II (continued)
Pacıng, Distraction and Utilization of the Dominant
Hemisphere. ........2222220eees een nn 137
Accessing the Non-Dominant Hemisphere. ... .. 179
Conclusion to Part Io... cece eee ees 201

PART III
Construction of the Patterns of Erickson's Hypnotic Work...
Dg eg a 2322229 205
Introduction...,,...,.-.+s5.y+000- . 207
Construction and Use of Linguistic Causal Modeling

[PAGE 004]

important role, both negative and positive, in the process of discovery itself. By

Guide to pushing a precise but inadequate formulation to an unacceptable conclusion, we
can often expose the exact source of this inadequacy and, consequently, gain a
deeper understanding of the linguistic data. More positively, a formalized


Volume I of
theory may automatically provide solutions for many problems other than those
for which it was explicitly designed.


Patterns of
This volume represents our effort to perform this same service for the
field of hypnosis.
When Erickson recognized this skill, he expressed the hope that this
volume would be constructed so that other practitioners of hypnosis would have

Erickson's Work available to them his powerful tools and techniques. It is the authors’ intention
in this first volume to present to you some of the patterns of Erickson's behavior
in hypnosis. We intend to give you, in an easily learnable, step-bystep manner,
Milton Erickson is internationally acclaimed as the an explicit model which will make these skills available to you in your own
leading practitioner of medical hypnosis. He has written more work. This book has three stages or levels of modeling, each represented by a
separate part.
than a hundred professional articles on hypnosis and has taught
and practiced hypnosis since the 1920's. He, more than any other Part I contains several of Erickson's articles, exciting examples of his
human being in this field, has been able both to explore and to own work. We will present a parallel commentary that will identify the patterns
demonstrate the vast potentials that hypnosis has to offer human- in his behavior. The patterns we will identify do not, by any means, exhaust
ity. His ability baffles the scientific mind, and his accomplish- what is present in Erickson's work. This volume is designed only to begin this
ments, typically. are either viewed as miracles or denounced as process, and, at the same time, to present the most essential elements of
Erickson's language patterns.
impossibilities, although first-hand experience presents him as
an undeniable reality, a striking contrast to what most people In Part II we will take these patterns and sort them into natural
believe is possible for the mind to accomplish. Furthermore, few groupings. Hopefully, this will provide you with an overall way of both
of his students have learned to exercise the skills in hypnosis understanding Erickson's work and organizing your own experience in
that Milton Erickson uses so easily. The behavior Milton hypnosis. Our purpose is to familiarize you with these patterns, and to show
Erickson demonstrates while both inducing and utilizing examples in which they occur in
Erickson's work. This will be accomplished by excerpting small
hypnotic states of consciousness is extremely complex. Yet he is
very systematic; that is, his behavior has distinctive patterns.
portions of various published articles about his work, most of them of a
Our skill is in building explicit models of complex transcriptual nature.

human behavior. What this means is that we build maps of these Part III of this volume is a step-by-step, explicit presentation of the
complex patterns of behavior and these maps then allow other patterns identified in Parts I and II. This Part is intended to give you the skills
people to learn and use these behavior patterns. We quote Noam necessary to construct each pattern through an understanding of its formal
Chomsky's remarks! concerning his initial formulation of a characteristics. Our belief is that in this way the patterns of Erickson's behavior
model for modern transformationallinguistics.. . . forms part of will be made available to you for use in your own work.
an attempt to construct a formalized general theory of linguistic We strongly recommend that you read this volume carefully
structure and to explore the foundations of such a theory. The and that you spend some time experimenting with each pattern. This book is
search for rigorous formulation in linguistics has a much more designed primarily as a training manual, not as a novel. Careful use and re-use
will reap the best rewards for you.
serious motivation than mere concern for logical niceties or the
desire to purify wellestablished methods of linguistic analysis.
FOOTNOTE
Precisely constructed models for linguistic structure can play an
1. Syntactic Structures, Mouton & Co., The Hague, 1957, p. 5.

[PAGE 005]

PATTERNS

OF ERICKSON'S

PART] HYPNOTIC WORK


IDENTIFICATI

ON

OF

[PAGE 006]

play "Lightnin'," in which, by the utterance of the single word no at various


Preface times, he conveyed at least sixteen different meanings.
These meanings included an emphatic No, a subtle Yes, an implied
promise of Not yet, an amused Don't be ridiculous, and even the exquisite
negative Not even if all bellfreezes over! Altered tone of voice can constitute an
actual vocabulary of transformation of verbal communication, as can body
An attack of anterior poliomyelitis in 1919, shortly language.
after my graduation from high school, rendered me almost
totally paralyzed for several months, but with my vision, hearing Then, I was introduced to experimental hypnosis by Clark L. Hull,
and thinking unimpaired. Since I was quarantined at home on and I became aware of the possibilities both of decreasing the number of foci of
the farm, there was little diversion available. Fortunately, I had attention and of selecting and maneuvering specific foci of attention. This led to
always been interested in human behavior, and there was that of the combining of my awarenesses of the complexities of communication with
my parents and eight siblings, and also that of the practical nurse my understandings of hypnosis, for experimental and psychotherapeutic
who was taking care of me, available for observation. My purposes.

inability to move tended to _ restrict me to the Although this book by Richard Bandler and John Grinder, to which I
intercommunications of those about me. Although I already am contributing this Preface, is far from being a complete description of my
knewa little about body language and other forms of non-verbal methodologies, as they so clearly state it is a much better explanation of how I
communication, I was amazed to discover the frequent, and, to work than I, myself, can give. I know what I do, but to explain how I do it is
me, often startling contradictions between the verbal and the much too difficult for me.
non-verbal communications within a single interchange. This A simple example of this may be cited from the experience of my
aroused so much of my interest that I intensified my daughter, Kristina, as a medical student. She happened to pick up a paper by
observations at every opportunity. Ernest Rossi and myself, on the double bind, and, after reading it, amusedly
The discovery that "double takes" were perceptions at commented, "So that's how I do it!" Dr. Rossi, who was present, immediately
two different levels of understanding, often based upon totally asked, "So that's how you do what?" She explained, "Every patient has the right
different experiential associations, opened a new field of to refuse permission for a rectal and hernial examination, and many patients do.
observation. Then, when I discovered that a "triple take" could But when I have reached that part of the physical examination’ I tell my
occur, I began mentally rehearsing the phrasing of a single patients, sympathetically, that I know they are tired of having me peer into their
communication to cause differing perceptions, even eyes, and peak into their ears and up their noses, and poking and thumping here
contradictory in character, at differing levels of understanding. and there, but that, as soon as I complete the rectal and hernial examinations,
These efforts led to the recognition of many other factors they can say good-bye to me. And they always wait patiently to say that goodgoverning communication such as tonalities, time values, bye."
sequences of presentation, near and remote associations, inherent
contradictions, omissions, distortions, redundancies, over- and While I would like still further analyses of the complexities of
under-emphases, directness and indirectness, ambiguities, communication for hypnotic purposes, which would require much more than
relevancies and irrelevancies - to name a few. this book by Bandler and Grinder can encompass, I would also like an analysis
Also, it became apparent that there were multiple levels of how and why carefully structured communications can elicit such extensive
of perception and response, not all of which were necessarily at and effective patient responses, often not actually requested. Unquestionably,
the usual or conscious level of awareness but were at levels of such additional studies will eventually be made. I look forward to Volume II in
understanding not recognized by the self, often popularly this series, by Richard Bandler and John Grinder.
described as "instinctive" or "intuitive."
Perhaps the best simple example is the instance of It has been a pleasure and a privilege to write the Preface to this book.
Frank Bacon's achievement during his starring role in the stage I say this, not because it centers around my hypnotic techniques, but because
long overdue is the fulfillment of the need to recognize that meaningful

[PAGE 007]

communication should replace repetitious verbigerations, direct
suggestions, and authoritarian commands.


Minen m. Brickson, moo
1201 Fast Hayward
Acknowledgments
Avenue
Phoenix,
Arizona 85020


We gratefully thank Milton H. Erickson, M.D., for
permission to quote his articles in this volume and the American Society
of Clinical Hypnosis which holds the original copyright on much of the
quoted material.

We also acknowledge the greatest debt to Jeanne Nixon and
The Penguin People, Artists and Typographers, of Santa Clara,
California, for the design and skillful typography of this book.

We would also like to thank Ernest Rossi for providing us with
tapes and manuscript material.

[PAGE 008]

in our experience of sensory data. For example, we can fantasize a green cow,


Introduction:
even though we have never experienced one with our senses. We can distort
our experience and plan the future by imagining that it is now. This modeling
process can be an asset or a liability, depending upon how it is used.


The Map Is Not the
The third process of modeling is generalization. This is the process
by which one element of our model of the world comes to represent an entire
category of which it is only an example. This allows us to know that when we
read a book, by moving our eyes from left to right, we will be able to extract

Territory the content. When we are confronted with a door just like any other door, even
though we have not seen this particular door before, we make the assumption it
will open by the same process we have used before. Generalizations in our
In the authors' experience, people who use hypnosis
model of the world allow us to operate more efficiently from context to
for medical, dental, Of psychotherapeutic purposes seem more
context. Generalization also allows us to keep recoding our experiences at
than any other single group to understand that we, as human
higher levels of patterning. This makes possible the advances in knowledge and
beings, do not operate behaviorally directly upon the world, but
technology - in all areas of human functioning.
rather we operate through a map or model (a created
To this date, the most thoroughly studied and best understood of the
representation) of what we believe the world to be. A thorough
human. representational systems (models) is natural language.
understanding of how people in general, and each client in
Transformational grammar is explicit, formal, and the most complete model of
particular, create a representation of the world in which they live
human language systems. Transformational grammarians have extracted some
will yield the practitioner of hypnosis many advantages. Among
of the patterns of this representational system which are common to all
these will be greater speed in trance induction, more success
languages. Therefore, transformational grammar is a MetaModel; that is, a
with a greater number of subjects, and deeper trances. For
model of a model, or a model of language. Transformational grammarians have
additional study of the processes by which people create models
built an explicit representation of the intuitions which people demonstrate
of the world, we recommend The Structure of Magic I and IT. 1
when communicating and understanding natural language. For example, each
For our purposes here, we wish now to provide you with only a
sentence of every natural language has two distinct representations: the
basic model of the processes by which people create models of
representation of the way it actually sounds (or, if written, by the way it
the world.
actually appears), called the Surface Structure, and the representation of its
meaning which is called the Deep Structure. When a person utters the sentence:
First, the models that we as humans create will differ
from the world of reality in three major ways. Some parts of our
The windows was broken
experience will be deleted, not represented in our model. This is
both a necessary and sometimes impoverishing aspect of our
the Surface Structure is the representation of the actual sounds made
modeling processes. If we tried to represent every piece of
by the person speaking or, in the case of a written representation, the words
sensory input, we would be overwhelmed with data. However,
written out above. In addition to this representation’ this sentence is associated
when we fail to represent an important or vital aspect, the results
with another representation which is the meaning it has - Deep Structure. In
can be devastating. In any event, we do delete parts of our
this case, the Deep Structure can be represented as:
experience when creating models of the world. These deletions,
and all of the processes of modeling, go on all the time and, for
PAST (BREAK [someone, window, with something])
the most part, without our conscious awareness.
The second way in which our model of the world will
This Deep Structure representation is designed to capture the intuitions which
be different from the world itself is through distortions.
each of us have as native speakers of English when we hear the Surface
Distortion is a modeling process which allows us to make shifts
Structure presented above. We understand that:

[PAGE 009]

derivation deep structure
(a) Some event occurred in the past;
(b) The event was a complex event;
(c) It consisted of the following parts: transformation 1.

2. derivation
66

(1) An action, break, which occurred
between:
a. The agent - some
person or thing doing the
66
N... )
breaking, here represented by surface structure
someone, and

must make this important distinction in order to understand the unconscious
b. The object - some
processing of language that occurs in hypnosis.)
person or thing being broken,
Transformational linguists, therefore, have taken an incredibly complex area of
here represented by the
window, and human behavior and built a formal model of it which explicitly represents the
c. The instrument - the rules of behavior which are intuitively demonstrated, although not consciously
thing used to do the breaking, understood, by native speakers of that language.
here represented by with The authors (Bandler/Grinder) have used the approach of formalizing
something. intuitions to build an explicit, formal model of the language exchange in
Notice that, even though not all of the parts of the psychotherapy. What we did was to create a formal representation of the
Deep Structure represented appear in the Surface Structure (in intuitions which effective therapists from every school of psychotherapy use
this case the agent and the instrument are not represented in the in their work, although they are not necessarily conscious of it. (This MetaSurface Structure), the native speaker of English has that model of therapy is fully explained in The Structure of Magic 1.)
information available in his understanding of the sentence. The
We used our formalization techniques to explore and understand the other
statement The window was broken implies to native speakers
representational systems used by human beings to organize and create models
that not only was the window broken but someone or something
of their experience. These kinesthetic, visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory
had to break the window with something. The ways in which
Surface Structures can differ from their associated Deep maps of experience were then used as a basis to expand our model of therapy.
Structure meanings is the research domain of transformational The results were both fascinating and useful.
linguists. They have postulated a series of formal mapping We found, first of all, that most people have a most highly valued
operations called transformations which precisely specify how representational system, one that they use more than any other to organize
Deep and Surface Structures may differ. The entire process their experience, and that this most highly valued system can be identified
which links a Deep Structure to its Surface Structure(s) is called quickly by listening to the predicates (adjectives, adverbs, verbs) used in
derivation (see page 10). anyone's speech. For example, a person with a most highly valued
representational system which is visual will describe his experience with
Explicit, formal models of each Surface Structure- predicates which presuppose a visual system such as: / see what you are
Deep Structure relationship can be made on the above model.
saying, clearly, looking at this work will show you how to improve your work,
(You
Imagine how this appears to be dull reading.
People whose most highly valued representational system is kinesthetic
will use predicates which presuppose kinesthetic representations. For
example, J want you firmly to grasp this concept; I feel you can overcome

[PAGE 010]

some hard problems; Can you get in touch with, and get a patterns. Realizing the special skills we have to create formal representations
handle on, what this means. of complex human hehavior, he has made available to us his writings and
A person whose primary representational system is auditory video and audio tapes, in the hope that the formal model of his work which
will use predicates which presuppose auditory representations. follows in this book will make it possible for more of us to share his skills,
For example, he will say, Sounds interesting to me; I will talk to and, thus, to spur greater interest in research and clinical use of hypnosis.
you later; I will be hearing from him soon; so in other words we The strategy we have employed in this book is to take each of Erickson's
will all get together and be sounding boards for these ideas. techniques apart piece by piece. First we extracted the small components. For
We also found that those therapists and hypnotists who instance, his interspersal technique has a series of special uses of language;
were~ when these components, which include use of presupposition, imbedded
most effective in their work had a systematic, though not always commands and sentence fragments, are put together with special use of voice
conscious, way of utilizing a client's most highly valued tempo and tonality, a larger pattern called interspersal results. We have chosen
representational system. Understanding how a client organizes a series of articles which represent a wide range of Erickson's work with
his experience in terms of these representational systems has hypnosis. We hope the result will be both educational and useful to you in your
great rewards for both the psychotherapist and the practitioner own specific area of work. The focus of this first Volume will be to give you
of hypnosis. We make a distinction in our formalization of these the language skills at the first level of patterning used so effectively by
patterns of behavior between input channels, representational Erickson.
systems, and output channels. A person can hear (input) words, Our strategy has three steps: First, to identify these patterns in the context
make a picture (representational system), and express it by of Erickson's work. Second, to familiarize you with each pattern, its form and
pounding his fist (output channel). (The formal model of this use. And, third, to give you formaliza tions that will enable you to construct and
aspect of behavior is the substance of The Structure ofMagic II, utilize these patterns in your own work.
which you should read if you wish further study.) In the past three decades, a great deal has been learned about how human
It is enough to say at this point that each of us as human beings function in regard to language, behavior, and consciousness. The fields
beings creates models of the world which differ from the world. of linguistics and neurology, have made substantial progress in understanding
Each of us creates a model of the world which is different from human behavior. There is, however, much to be learned; the processes at work
every other person's model of the world. Furthermore, formal in the organism called a human being constitute an as yet uncharted universe of
models - Meta-models - can be built which represent the complexity. We intend in this volume to take some of what is known about
patterns of modeling which are at work when we as humans these fields and apply it to the study of hypnosis in a way that will help you to
create these maps. Meta-models can be built which represent the organize your experience to better understand the work of Milton Erickson and
rules, whether conscious or unconscious, governing how the phenomenon of hypnotism. One of the major contributions of neurology
therapists and hypnotists work with these modeling principles. that helps us to understand hypnotic behavior is the study of split-brain
Milton Erickson's work with hypnosis is in one such area of patients.” Observations regarding hemispheric differences made of split-brain
complex human behavior. His ability to both induce and to patients, and brain-damaged patients (Gardner) reveal that the two cerebral
utilize hypnosis is extremely effective. Unfortunately, few hemispheres of the brain in humans serve different functions. Erickson's
people have been able to learn this skill. Even more tragic is the behavior in hypnosis seems to demonstrate an intuitive understanding of these
fact that the lack of formal understanding of hypnosis and its differences.
induction has resulted in a diminishing of interest, research, and The field of linguistics offers us a vast resource for understanding how
practice of this profoundly useful therapeutic tool. The authors' humans process complex segments of language at non-conscious levels.’ The
ability to understand and represent the patterns of Erickson's research in these two fields raises the long overdue question: What is an
skill has made it possible for us to learn and to use those unconscious mind? We, as yet, have no complete answer to this question;


10

[PAGE 011]

however, we do believe that when Erickson uses the term
Preview of Patterns
unconscious mind he is referring to more than just some term left
over from the Freudian foundations of psychology. We believe
In the remaining portion of Part I of this volume, we will present examples
he is referring partially to the functioning of the dominant
of Erickson's work in trance induction and suggestion. As we stated previously,
cerebral hemisphere that occurs below the level of awareness,
we will focus on simply identifying the patterns in his work. The latter parts of
and also to the functioning of the non-dominant cerebral
this volume concern themselves with the formalization and construction of
hemisphere. He is probably referring to more than these two
these patterns, thus making them available for you in your work. If we first
aspects of mental processing, but we are sure that his use of this
present some overview of these patterns, it will assist you in attempting to
term includes these two functions. His overall strategy while
understand the complex use to which Erickson puts them.
conducting trance inductions appears to have these three
In all trance induction work, the hypnotist must be sensitive to the
dimensions.
particular way in which the client organizes his experience - that is, to the
client's model of the world and the modeling processes which the client uses to
(1) Pacing and distraction of the dominant (language)
construct that model. The hypnotist's ability to identify and utilize the client's
hemisphere;
model and the client's modeling processes will determine to a large extent his
(2) Utilization of the dominant hemisphere, language proc-
ability to successfully pace the client. The notion of pacing is central to any
essing which occurs below the level of awareness;
discussion of successful trance induction and trance suggestion. Here we
(3) Accessing of the non-dominant hemisphere.
restrict ourselves to verbal pacing. A hypnotist
has successfully paced a client verbally when the hypnotist's verbalizations are
Further readings in these areas are presented in the bibliog-
accepted by the client as an accurate description of the client's ongoing
raphy for the interested reader.
experience.
It is our intention in the rest of Part I to help you to identify
In verbal pacing, there are two general categories of descrip tion which will
how Erickson operates in a way that accomplishes and utilizes
be effective:
these three strategies for trance induction. A more explicit
analysis will be presented in Part II.
(1)Descriptions of the client's ongoing. Observable experience;
(2) Description of the client's ongoing, non- observable experience.

The first category of verbal description depends primarily on the hypnotist's
ability to make acute visual and auditory distinctions as he observes and
listens to the client and to incorporate these distinctions into his ongoing
description of the client's behavior. As mentioned in the commentary on the
Huxley article, at the end of Part I, in standard inductions the hypnotist will
frequently use descriptions such as:


... breathing in and out...... hand lifting, lifting. , .


where these descriptions, in fact, are timed so that they are accurate descriptions
of the client's experience - that is, uttered as the client is, in fact, breathing in and
out, as the client's hand is, in fact, lifting. In this type of pacing there is no
substitute for the hypnotist's ability to make refined visual and auditory distinc-

11

[PAGE 012]

tions. We mention here that while Erickson's ability to make these OOOO
refined visual and auditory distinctions is phenomenal and he
skillfully incorporates the distinctions he makes into his ongoing client’s output hypnotist’s
input
descriptions, this is not the only use that he makes of these
channel channel
distinctions. In the process of pacing, the hypnotist is making


himself into a sophisticated bio-feedback mechanism. He may do
this primarily verbally. In addition, however, and dramatically
client’s input
effective both from our observations of Erickson and in our own channel
work, the hypnotist may use his own body posture and move-

NL
hypnotist’s
ments, his own tonality and tempo as pacing mechanisms. More output
specifically, Erickson frequently adopts the client's tonality, syn- channel
tax and tempo of speech, will adjust his body position, breathing
rate and gestures to match the client's. Thus, the client feels his We will treat this complex type of pacing at length in Volume II of Patterns;
own breathing, the rising and falling of his chest, and simulta- here we focus on the verbal dimensions of Erickson's work.
neously sees Erickson's body moving with the same rhythmic This first type of pacing, then, involves the hypnotist's ability to verbally
motions. Erickson extends these principles in every way. He not match the client's ongoing experience. It includes both the obvious - for
only matches his breathing to that of the client, but will also example:
match the tempo of his voice to the client's breathing or pulse rate
by watching the client's veins expand and contract. He will use ...asyou sit there, listening to the sound of my voice. ..
(1) words and phrases he has heard the client use and voice
inflections used tonally by the client. F[c, in essence, and the less obvious types of observable behavior pacing. For example, in the
makes all his own output channels a feedback following discussion of a hand levitation with Jay Haley (H) and John
mechanism that will match his client's subjective Weakland (W),
experience on both conscious and unconscious levels.
Rarely are clients aware of the complex ways in which W: .../'m not sure whether you Here Erickson gives instruc tions
Erickson is pacing them. This lack of awareness on the took no response as a in the induction being
part of the client seems to be an essential ingredient in response, or the tiniest discussed for the client's hands
rapid, effective trance induction. The result of this response and said, "It ‚s to lift. He does this at the time
complex type of pacing is a complete biofeedback loop lifting." There were a the client is breathing in. If
for the client. The client's outputs and the corresponding number of times there when your hands are on your thighs
experience he has of his body and his auditory output is you said it when I couldn't and you breathe in, you will
matched by Erickson's output: quite detect whether have the sensation that your
anything was happening or hands are lifting. His directions
not. verbally match what he
E: There was one thing that knows will be the client's
happened. Put your hand on experience. This is another
your thigh, take a deep example of pacing.
breath. What happened to
your hand?


12

[PAGE 013]

It lifts! constitute a successful link between the client's ongoing behavior and what the
You time the inspiration. client experiences next. Erickson's use of these linkage principles is an excellent
And they haven't got an example of his ability to employ the client's own modeling principles in pacing
opportunity to deny it. . . . and leading the client into new and _ medically, dentally, or
Later on I thought I would psychotherapeutically beneficial directions. Particularly in the case of the
emphasize that, by taking stronger forms of linkage, Implied Causatives and Cause-Effect statements, the
every other inspiration to say important issue is not logic but the modeling principles by which the client
organizes his experience. Specifically, since clients accept Implied Causatives
and Cause-Effect as principles in organizing their experiences, Erickson is
In pacing the client's ongoing experience, the hypnotist's ob- simply making use of these modeling principles to achieve the trance goals.
jective is. to so successfully pace that he may begin to lead the The second type of pacing statements are descriptions of the client's
client's experience. In other words, once the client has accepted ongoing, non-observable experience. This may strike the reader as something of
(usually unconsciously) the hypnotist's description as an accurate a paradox. How is it possible accurately to describe someone else's experience
account of his ongoing experience, the line between the hypno- unless that person's experience is observable? Here we encounter Erickson's
tist's description of the client's actual behavior and what the exquisite sense of language use. He makes extensive use of the linguistic
client will experience next becomes blurred. Typically, Erickson modeling principles to present the client with a series of statements which are
will make a series of pacing statements which are immediately vague and ambiguous yet, to the untrained ear, sound quite specific. Erickson
verifiable by the client and link these to a statement which is a may say, for example:
description of the behavior which he desires to elicit from the
client. The strength of these links will vary. The weakest linkage . . .and you may be aware of a certain sensation. . .
is Simple Conjunction - the use of the word and as in*
The client sitting there, listening to the sound of Erickson's voice, certainly is
... you are sitting there, listening to the sound of my experiencing some sensation, and as he hears Erickson say the phrase a certain
voice and relaxing more and more. . . sensation, he understands the phrase to refer to one of his present sensations,
thereby, the statement is an accurate description of the client's ongoing, nonA somewhat stronger link is that which we call the Implied observable experience. The phrase a certain sensation fails to pick out a
Causative, shown in sentences such as: specific sensation, thereby leaving the client the freedom to attach it to some
portion of his ongoing experience. Phrases which fail to pick out specific
. as you sit there, listening to the sound of my voice, portions of the listener's experience are said to have no referential index. Thus,
you will relax more and more. .. by using phrases which fail to have referential indices, Erickson is able to
successfully pace the client. There are a number of linguistic modeling
The strongest form of the linkage occurs with what we call principles which Erickson uses systematically in his work which allow him to
Cause-Effect (semantic ill-formedness; see Magic I, Chapters 3 pace and lead non-observable behavior. The following is a brief overview of
and 4): some of these.
Erickson often uses a technique which is closely related to the lack-of-
. Sitting there, listening to the sound of my voice, will referentialindex technique. For example, he may say:
make you relax more and more. ..
... the tomato plant can feel good. ..
The important feature of these types of linkages is not whether
the logic of the statement is valid, but simply whether they For many native speakers of English, this sentence is not well formed. They
13

[PAGE 014]

typically balk at accepting the claim that plants feel anything. SENSE (someone sensing, someone/something being sensed)
Rather, in their model of the world, only animals and humans
feel things; to claim that a tomato plant can feel something is to That is, the noun sensation is the result of the linguistic process of
violate what linguists call a selectional restriction. When the nominalization - the transformation of a predicate sense into a noun. In the
client hears the sentence with such a selectional restriction process of this transformation, the information of who is doing the sensing and
violation, the burden of constructing some other meaning for this who or what is being sensed has disappeared. Therefore, the referential indices
communication falls upon him. The most frequent outcome of of the sensor and the person/thing being sensed are gone, and the resulting
his resulting attempt to make sense of such a sentence is that he nominalization is maximally available for interpretation by the listener as a
comes to understand (unconsciously) a sentence such as: statement which is applicable to his ongoing experience.
Predicates of natural language systems differ greatly as to their specificity.
... you (the client) can feel good. . . For example, the predicates:


One of the most powerful of these linguistic modeling tech- touch. .. kiss

niques is deletion, the case in which a portion of the meaning of
the sentence (the Deep Structure) has no representation in are successively more specified. The predicate touch simply indicates that some
Surface Structure, that is, in the actual sentence spoken to the people/objects have made physical contact, while the predicate kiss adds an
client. Erickson may, for example, say: additional piece of information, namely, that the person initiating contact made
contact with his lips. The predicate kiss is still, however, unspecified as to
...and continue to wonder. ..and really. .. where on the person or object the contact (kiss) was made. Erickson exercises
his linguistic skills in pacing a client's non-observable experience by selecting
The predicate wonder is a word which cescribes the process of verbs which are relatively unspecified, thereby maximizing the likelihood that
someone's wondering about something. However, as it appears the statement that he makes will fit the client's ongoing experience. Predicates
in this Surface Structure or sentence, who is doing the wondering such as:
and what that unmentioned person is wondering is not specified;
those portions of the meaning have been deleted. This leaves the wonder, think, feel, sense, know, experience, understand, become
information which is missing to be filled in by the listener.6 aware of, remember
A linguistic process closely related to the lack of referential
index and deletion is the phenomenon called nominalization. occur frequently in his pacing and leading statements. These are relatively
unspecified predicates. In addition, many of these predicates are predicates
Nominalization is the representation of a process word - a predt which simply by their occurrence call the client's attention to some portion of
cate - by an event word - a noun. his own experience, thereby successfully both pacing and directing his ongoing
experience, as in the example of the phrase a certain sensation presented
For example, Erickson may say: previously.
Erickson frequently employs this class of unspecified predicates with the
...acertain sensation. . . technique of mind reading. Mind-reading statements are statements in which
one person claims to have knowledge of the thoughts a feelings of another
The word sensation is a noun in its use in this phrase, yet it is person without specifying the process by which he came to have that
derived from a predicate which has more information associated information. In one sense, this entire discussion of the way in which Erickson
with it, specifically: paces and then leads the client's non-observable behavior is a discussion of his
mind-reading ability. An example of this technique 1s:
14

[PAGE 015]

Furthermore, the clause that you are deeply in trance itself contains another
. . 1 know that you are wondering. . .
presuppositional device - the use of an adverb, deeply. By using the adverb (a
Deep Structure predicate) within the clause, the remainder of the clause is
Here Erickson is claiming to have knowledge of the internal, presupposed. If Erickson says to a client:
non-observable experience of the client without specifying the
process by which he has secured that information. ... Are you deeply in trance? ...
As trance induction proceeds, the amount of pacing as
opposed to leading that the hypnotist does shifts dramatically. the issue is whether the client is deeply in trance, not whether the client is in
Trance induction and suggestion to the client in trance are typi- trance - that much is presupposed. Natural languages contain a large number of
cally a mixture of pacing and leading. We review briefly some of devices for the communication of presupposition. Thus, in the case of the first
the techniques Erickson uses which typically occur more fre- example:
quently as leading statements than as pacing statements. In
leading the client's experience, Erickson characteristically does . . wonder whether you are aware that you are deeply in trance. . .
not instruct the client directly, rather he makes skillful use of a
number of natural language modeling principles. For example, Erickson compounds the presuppositions, making it very difficult for the client
rather than instruct the client to sit down in a chair, he might say: to challenge the truth of the statement you are in trance.
Another common pattern in Erickson's work is the use of conversational
... yes, and I wonder whether you have noticed the chair postulates. Rather than directly instruct the client to place his hands on his
that you will soon find yourself comfortably sitting in... thighs, Erickson, typically, will say:


Here he is using the principle of presupposition. In natural lan- Can you place your hands on your thighs?
guage systems, when a relative clause - that you will soon find
yourself comfortably sitting in - is attached to a noun phrase -the This communication has the form of a question, a question to which the
chair - in order for the sentence in which it appears to make any response which is literally appropriate is either yes or no. However, this form of
sense, the listener must accept as accurate the description given yes/no questions typically carry with it the force of the command closely related
in the relative clause. Presuppositions arc the linguistic to it,namely, put your hands on your thighs. By using the indirect
equivalent of what is more commonly called assumption, basic communication, Erickson bypasses altogether the issue of resistance and
organizing principles without which the information being pre- control, leaving the client to respond as he chooses.
sented makes no sense. Another example of the typical use of Erickson make extensive use of a very powerful form of language
presuppositions by Erickson is: patterning which is closely related to this last one, the pattern of lesser included
structures. Erickson may, as an example, say to a client:
... ! wonder whether you are aware that you are deeply
in trance. . . ... I knew a man once who really understood how to feel good about. . .

Here Erickson uses the predicate aware. This is a factive Notice that the portion of Erickson's communication in bold type itself is
predicate - that is, a predicate which presupposes the truth of the identical with the command fee/ good. As another, slightly different example,
clause which follows it. In order to make sense out of Erickson's Erickson may say:
communication, the client must accept the clause which follows
the predicate aware as true, namely, that you are deeply in . . | wonder whether you are completely comfortable. . .
trance.

15

[PAGE 016]

Here the lesser included structure is the indirect question, Are process of hypnotic work.
you completely comfortable. However, since the question is a This completes the overview of some of the patterns which occur
lesser portion of a statement, there is no direct request on frequently in Erickson's trance work. We present now one of Erickson's articles
Erickson's part for a reply. Characteristically, the client does which includes trance work. First, we present the article in its entirety; then we
make a response, covertly responding to the communication as a will extract lines of the induction and suggestion which illustrate each of the
question. Lesser included structures are a very powerful way of patterns which we have presented. We wish to emphasize that there are many
directing the client's experience and building up response examples of these patterns in the article; we will extract only enough examples
potential. This technique becomes even more powerful when to allow the reader to recognize these patterns as Erickson's. In addition, we are
combined with the technique of analogical marking. aware that Erickson uses other patterns in his trance work in this article which
Analogical marking is the use of non-linguistic modes of we will, for the moment, ignore; the presentation here is not exhaustive.
communication to identify and sort the linguistic communication
into separate message units. Erickson will, for example, shift his
tonality (an analogical mark) for the portions of the sentence in
bold type: The Interspersal Hypnotic Technique for
. . knew a man who really understood how to feel good Symptom Correction and Pain Control’
about...
Innumerable Times this author has been asked to commit to print in detail
Since clients are rarely conscious of such analogical shifts (and, the hypnotic technique he had employed to alleviate intolerable pain or to
if conscious of such shifts, they are very unlikely to associate correct various other problems. The verbal replies made to these many requests
them with the simultaneously presented verbal material), the have never seemed to be adequate since they were invariably prefaced by the
result of Erickson's communication is the double communication earnest assertion that the technique in itself serves no other purpose than that of
- the story Erickson is telling to the conscious mind and the securing and fixating the patient's attention, creating in him a receptive and
command feel good to the unconscious mind. Erickson uses responsive mental state, and thereby enabling him to benefit from unrealized or
visual as well as auditory cues to analogically mark his verbal only partially realized potentials for behavior of various types. With this
communication, fragmenting them into separate message units. achieved by the hypnotic technique, there is then the opportunity to proffer
We have presented a brief and sketchy overview of some of suggestions and instructions serving to aid and to direct the patient in achieving
the patterns employed by Erickson in his work. There are several the desired goal or goals. In other words, the hypnotic technique serves only to
additional effects of this type of communication which are induce a favorable setting in which to instruct the patient in a more
important in understanding the powerful effect which Erickson advantageous use of his own potentials of behavior.
has in his work. By communicating indirectly, he avoids the Since the hypnotic technique is primarily a means to an end while therapy
issue of resistence to a large extent. Furthermore, he leaves the derives from the guidance of the patient's behavioral capacities, it follows that,
client the maximum freedom to choose (on the unconscious within limits, the same hypnotic technique can be utilized for patients with
level) to what portions of the communication he will respond. widely diverse problems. To illustrate, two ~instances will be cited in which the
Communicating in this way also engages the client at the same technique was employed, once for a patient with a distressing neurotic
unconscious level of communication while simultaneously problem and once for a patient suffering from intolerable pain from terminal
occupying the client's conscious mind in a way which prevents 1t malignant disease. The technique is one that the author has employed on the
from intruding unhelpfully in the process of trance induction and illiterate subject and upon the college graduate, in experimental situations and
suggestion. Finally, the client is able to participate more actively for clinical purposes. Often it has been used to secure, to fixate, and to hold a
and creatively (again at the unconscious level of behavior) in the
16

[PAGE 017]

difficult patient's attention and to distract him from creating containing three pairs of trousers and he stated that he had visited a lavatory
difficulties that would impede therapy. It is a technique before leaving for the author's office, another on the way and that he had visited
employing ideas that are clear, comprehensible, but which by the office lavatory before entering the office and that he expected to interrupt
their patent irrelevance to the patient-physician relationship and the interview with the author by at least one other such visit.
situation distract the patient. Thereby the patient is prevented He related that he had consulted more than 100 physicians and well-known
from intruding unhelpfully into a situation which he cannot clinics. He had been cystoscoped more than 40 times, had had innumerable x
understand and for which he is seeking help. At the same time, a ray pictures taken and _ countless tests, some of which were
readiness to understand and to respond is created within the electroencephalograms and electrocardiograms. Always he was assured that his
patient. Thus, a favorable setting is evolved for the elicitation of bladder was normal; many times he was offered the suggestion to return after a
needful and helpful behavioral potentialities not previously used, month or two for further study; and "too many times" he was told that "it's all in
or not fully used or perhaps misused by the patient. your head"; that he had no problem at all, that he "should get busy doing
The first instance to be cited will be given without any something instead of being retired, and to stop pestering doctors and being an
account of the hypnotic technique employed. Instead, there will old crock." All of this had made him feellike committing suicide.
be given the helpful instructions, suggestions, and guiding ideas He had described his problem to a number of writers of syndicated medical
which enabled the patient to achieve his therapeutic goal and columns in newspapers, several of whom offered him in his stamped, selfwhich were interspersed among the ideas constituting the addressed envelope a pontifical platitudinous dissertation upon his problem
hypnotic technique. These therapeutic ideas will not be cited as stressing it as one of obscure organic origin. In all of his searching, not once had
repetitiously as they were verbalized to the patient for the reason it been suggested that he seek psychiatric aid.
that they are more easily comprehended in cold print than when On his own initiative, after reading two of the misleading, misinforming and
uttered as a part of a stream of utterances. Yet, these few essentially fraudulent books on "do-it-yourself hypnosis," he did seek the aid of
repeated suggestions in the hypnotic situation served to meet the stage hypnotists, in all three in number. Each offered him the usual
patient's needs adequately. blandishments, reassurances, and promises common to that type of shady
medical practice and each failed completely in repeated attempts at inducing a
The patient was a 62-year-old retired farmer with only an hypnotic trance. Each charged an exorbitant fee (as judged by a standard
eighth-grade education, but decidedly intelligent and well-read. medical fee, and especially in relation to the lack of benefit received).
He actually possessed a delightful, charming, out-going As a result of all this mistreatment, the medical no better than that of the
personality, but he was most unhappy, filled with resentment, charlatans and actually less forgivable, he had become bitter, disillusioned,
bitterness, hostility, suspicion and despair. Approximately two resentful and openly hostile, and he was seriously considering suicide. A gas
years previously for some unknown or forgotten reason station attendant suggested that he see a psychiatrist and recommended the
(regarded by the author as unimportant and as having no bearing author on the basis of a Sunday newspaper article. This accounted for his visit to
upon the problem of therapy) he had developed a urinary the author.
frequency that was most distressing to him. Approximately every Having completed his narrative, he leaned back in his chair, folded his
half hour he felt a compelling urge to urinate, an urge that was arms, and challengingly said, "Now psychiatrize and hypnotize me and cure thi
painful, that he could not control, and which would result in a bladder of mine."
wetting of his trousers if he did not yield to it. This urge was During the narration of the patient's story, the author had listened with
constantly present day and night. It interfered with his sleep, his every appearance of rapt attention except for a minor idling with his hands,
eating, his social adjustments and compelled him to keep within thereby shifting the position of objects on his desk. This idling included a
close reach of a lavatory and to carry a briefcase contaming turning of the face of the desk clock away from the patient. As he listened to the
several pairs of trousers for use when he was "caught short." He patient's bitter account of his experiences, the author was busy speculating upon
explained that he had brought into the office a briefcase possible therapeutic approaches to a patient so obviously unhappy, so resentful
17

[PAGE 018]

toward medical care and physicians, and so challenging in like 50 minutes, 60 minutes, just minutes. . . . anybody that can wait half an
attitude. He certainly did not appear to be likely to be receptive hour can wait an hour... . I know it... . you are learning. . . . not bad to learn. .
and responsive to anything the author might do or say. As the . . in fact, good. . . . come to think of it, you have had to wait when somebody
author puzzled over this problem there came to mind the problem got there ahead of you... . you made it too. .. . can again. .. . and again... . all
of pain control for a patient suffering greatly in a terminal state of you want to... . hour and 5 minutes. . . . hour and 5 1/2 minutes. . . . what's the
malignant disease. That patient had constituted a comparable difference. . . . or even 6 1/2 minutes. .. . make it 10 1/2, hour and 10 1/2
instance where a hypnotherapeutic approach had been most minutes. ... one minute, 2 minutes, one hour, 2 hours, what's the difference. .. .
difficult, and yet, success had been achieved. Both patients had in you got half a century or better of practice in waiting behind you. .... you can
common the experience of growing plants for a livelihood, both use all that... . why not use it... . you can do it... . probably surprise you a
were hostile and resentful, and both were contemptuous of lot... . won't even think of it... . why not surprise yourself at home. . . . good
hypnosis. Hence, when the patient issued his challenge of idea. . . . nothing better than a surprise . . . . an unexpected surprise .... how
"psychiatrize and hypnotize me," the author, with no further ado, long can you hold out. . . . that's the surprise. . . . longer than you even thought. .
launched into the same technique employed with that other .. lots longer. . . . might as well begin. . . . nice feeling to begin. . . . to keep on.
patient to achieve a hypnotherapeutic state in which helpful ... Say, why don't you just forget what I've been talking about and just keep it
suggestions, instructions, and directions could be offered with in the back of your mind. Good place for it - can't lose. Never mind the tomato
reasonable expectation that they would be accepted and acted plant - just what was important about your bladder pretty good, feel fine, nice
upon responsively in accord with the patient's actual needs and surprise - say, why don't you start feeling rested, refreshed right now, wider
behavioral potentials. awake than you were earlier this morning (this last statement is, to the patient,
The only differences for the two patients were that the an indirect, emphatic, definitive instruction to arouse from his trance). Then, (as
interwoven therapeutic material for the one patient pertained to a dismissal but no recognizable as such consciously by the patient) why don't
bladder function and duration of time. For the other patient, the you take a nice leisurely walk home, thinking about nothing (an amnesia
interwoven therapeutic instructions pertained to body comfort, to instruction for both the trance and his problem, and also a confusion measure to
sleep, to appetite, to the enjoyment of the family, to an absence obscure the fact that he had already spent 1 1/2 hours in the office)? Pll be able
of any need for medication and to the continued enjoyment of to see you at 10:00 a.m. a week from today (furthering his conscious illusion,
time without concern about the morrow. resulting from his amnesia, that nothing yet had been done except to give him an
The actual verbal therapy offered, interspersed as it was in appointment).
the ideation of the technique itself, was as follows, with the
interspersing denoted by dots. A week later he appeared and launched into an excited account of arriving
You know, we could think of your bladder needing home and turning on the television with an immediate firm intention of
emptying every 15 minutes instead of every half hour. . . . Not delaying urination as long as possible. He watched a two-hour movie and drank
difficult to think that... . A watch can run slow. . . . or fast... . two glasses of water during the commercials. He decided to extend the time
be wrong even a minute. ... even two, five minutes. . . . or think another hour and suddenly discovered that he had so much bladder distension
of bladder every half hour. .. . like you've been doing. .. . maybe that he had to visit the lavatory. He looked at his watch and discovered that he
it was 35,40 minutes sometimes. . . . like to make it an hour... . had waited four hours. The patient leaned back in his chair, beaming happily at
what's the difference. .. . 35, 36 minutes, 41, 42, 45 minutes... . the author, obviously expecting praise. Almost immediately he leaned forward
not much difference. . . . not important difference. . . . 45,46,47 with a startled look and declared in amazement, "It all comes back to me now. I
minutes. ... all the same. . . . lots of times you maybe had to wait never give it a thought till just now. I plumb forgot the whole thing. Say, you
a second or two. .. . felt like an hour or two... . you made it... . must have hypnotized me. You were doing a lot of talking about growing a
you can again... .47 minutes, 50 minutes, what's the difference. . tomato plant and I was trying to get the point of it and the next thing I knew I
. . stop to think, no great difference, nothing important. . . . just was walking home. Come to think of it, I must of been in your office over an

18

[PAGE 019]

hour and it took an hour to walk home. It wasn't no four hours I maintenance can be done most effectively. To illustrate from everyday life: A
held back, it was over six hours at least. Come to think of it, that double task assignment is usually more effective than the separate assignment
ain't all. That was a week ago that happened. NowI recollect I of the same two tasks. For example, a mother may say, "Johnny, as you put
ain't had a bit of trouble all week - slept fine - no getting up. away your bicycle just step over and close the garage door." This has the sound
Funny how a man can get up in the morning, his mind all set on of a single task, one aspect of which favors the execution of another aspect, and
keeping an appointment to tell something, and forget a whole thus there is the effect of making the task seem easier. To ask that the bicycle
week has went by. Say, when I told you to psychiatrize and be put away and then to ask that the garage door be closed has every sound of
hypnotize me, you sure took it serious. I'm right grateful to you. being two separate, not to be combined, tasks. To the separate tasks, a refusal
How much do I owe you?" can be given easily to one or the other task or to both. But a refusal when the
Essentially, the case was completed and the emainder of the tasks are combined into a single task means what? That he will not put away the
hour was spent in social small talk with a view of detecting any bicycle? That he will not step over to the garage? That he will not dose the
possible doubts or uncertainties in the patient. There were none, garage door?
nor, in the months that have passed, have there occurred any. The very extent of the effort needed to identify what one is refusing in itself
is a deterrent to refusal. Nor can a refusal of the "whole thing" be offered
The above case report allows the reader to understand in part comfortably. Hence Johnny may perform the combined task unwillingly but
how, during a technique of suggestions for trance induction and may prefer to do so rather than to analyze the situation. To the single tasks he
trance maintenance, hypnotherapeutic suggestions can be inter- can easily say "later" to each. But to the combined task, he cannot say, "later"
spersed for a specific goal. I n the author's experience, such an since, if he puts away the bicycle "later," he must "immediately" step over to
interspersing of therapeutic suggestions among the suggestions the garage and "immediately" close the door. This is specious reasoning, but it
for trance maintenance may often render the therapeutic is the "emotional reasoning" that is common in daily life, and daily living is not
suggestions much more effective. The patient hears them, an exercise in logic. As a common practice the author says to a patient, "As you
understands them, but before he can take issue with them or sit down in the chair, just go into a trance." The patient is surely going to sit
question them in any way, his attention is captured by the trance down in the chair. But going into a trance is made contingent upon sitting
maintenance suggestions. And these in turn are but a down, hence, a trance state develops from what the patient was most certainly
continuance of the trance induction suggestions. Thus, there is going to do. By combining psychotherapeutic, amnestic and posthypnotic
given to the therapeutic suggestion an aura of significance and suggestions with those suggestions used first to induce a trance and then to
effectiveness deriving from the already effective induction and maintain that trance constitutes an effective measure in securing desired results.
maintenance suggestions. Then again the same therapeutic Contingency values are decidedly effective. As a further illustration, more than
suggestions can be repeated in this interspersed fashion, perhaps once a patient who has developed a trance upon simply sitting down has said to
repeated many times, until the therapist feels confident that the the author, "I didn't intend to go into a trance today." I n reply the author has
patient has absorbed the therapeutic suggestions adequately. stated, "Then perhaps you would like to awaken from the trance and hence, as
Then the therapist can progress to another aspect of therapy you understand that you can go back into a trance when you need to, you will
using the same interspersal technique. awaken. Thus, the "awakening" is made contingent upon "understanding,"
The above report does not indicate the number of repetitions thereby insuring further trances through association by contingency.
for each of the therapeutic suggestions for the reason that the With this explanation of rationale, the problem of the second patient will be
number must vary with each set of ideas and understandings presented after a few preliminary statements. These are that the author was
conveyed and with each patient and each therapeutic problem. reared on a farm, enjoyed and still enjoys growing plants, and has read with
Additionally such interspersal of suggestions for amnesia and interest about the processes of seed germination ami plant growth.
posthypnotic suggestions among the suggestions for trance

19

[PAGE 020]

The first patient was a retired farmer. The second, who will inspecting Joe, it was noted that much of the side of his face and neck was
be called "Joe" for convenience, was a florist. He began his missing because of surgery, ulceration, maceration and necrosis. A tracheotomy
career as a boy by peddling flowers, saving his pennies, buying had been performed on Joe and he could not talk. He communicated by pencil
more flowers to peddle, etc. Soon he was able to buy a small and paper, many pads of which were ready at hand. The information was given
parcel of land on which to grow more flowers with loving care that every 4 hours Joe had been receiving narcotics (1/4 grain of morphine or
while he enjoyed their beauty which he wanted to share with 100 milligrams of Demerol) and heavy sedation with barbituates. He slept little.
others, and in turn, to get more land and to grow more flowers, Special nurses were constantly at hand. Yet Joe was constantly hopping out of
etc. Eventually he became the leading florist in a large city. Joe bed, writing innumerable notes, some pertaining to his business, some to his
literally loved every aspect of his business, was intensely devoted family, but many of them were expressive of complaints and demands for
to it but he was also a good husband, a good father, a good friend additional help. Severe pain distressed him continuously and he could not
and a highly respected and valued member of the community. understand why the doctors could not handle their business as efficiently and as
Then one fateful September a surgeon removed a growth
competently as he did his floral business. His situation enraged him because it
from the side of Joe's face, being careful not to disfigure Joe's
constituted failure in his eyes. Success worked for and fully merited had always
face too much. The pathologist reported the growth to be a
been a governing principle in his life. When things went wrong with his
malignancy.
business, he made certain to correct them. Why did not the doctors do the same?
Radical therapy was then instituted but it was promptly
The doctors had medicine for pain so why was he allowed to suffer such
recognized as "too late."
intolerable pain?
Joe was in formed that he had about a month left to live.
Joe's reaction was, to say the least, unhappy and distressed. I n
After the introduction, Joe wrote, "What you want?" This constituted an
addition he was experiencing much pain, in fact, extremely
excellent opening and the author began his technique of trance induction and
severe pain.
pain relief. This will not be given in its entirety since a large percentage of
At the end of the second week in October, a relative of Joe's
the statements made were repeated, not necessarily in succession but
urgently requested the author to employ hypnosis on Joe for pan
frequently by referring back to a previous remark and then repeating a
relief since narcotics were proving of little value. In view of the
paragraph or two.
prognosis that had been given for Joe, the author agreed
reluctantly to see him, stipulating that all medication be
Another preliminary statement needed is that the author was most dubious
discontinued at 4:00 a.m. of the day of the author's arrival. To
about achieving any kind of success with Joe since, in addition to his physical
this the physicians in charge of Joe at the hospital courteously
condition, there were definite evidences of toxic reactions to excessive
agreed.
medication. Despite the author's unfavorable view of possibilities, there was
Shortly before the author was introduced to Joe, he was
one thing of which he could be confident. He could keep his doubts to himself
informed that Joe disliked even the mention of the word
and he could let Joe know by manner, tone of voice, by everything said that the
hypnosis. Also, one of Joe's children, a resident in psychiatry at a
author was genuinely interested in him, was genuinely desirous of helping him.
well-known clinic, did not believe in hypnosis and had
If even that little could be communicated to Joe, it should be of some comfort,
apparently been confirmed in this disbelief by the psychiatric
however small, to Joe and to the family members and to the nurses within
staff of the clinic, none of whom is known to have had any first-
listening distance in the side room.
hand knowledge of hypnosis. This resident would be present and
the inference was that Joe knew of that disbelief.
The author began:
The author was introduced to Joe who acknowledged the
Joe, I would like to talk to you. I know you are a florist, that you grow
introduction in a most courteous and friendly fashion. It is
flowers, and I grew up on a farm in Wisconsin and I liked growing
doubtful if Joe really knew why the author was there. Upon

20

[PAGE 021]

flowers. I still do. So I would like to have you take a seat getting better for that little tomato plant that is adding yet another leaf
in that easy chair as I talk to you. I'm going to say a lot of and still another and a branch and it is growing comfortably in all
things to you but it won't be about flowers because you directions.
know more than I do about flowers. That isn't what you
want. (Much of the above by this time had been repeated many times,
(The reader will note that italics will be used to denote sometimes just phrases, sometimes sentences. Care was taken to vary the
interspersed hypnotic suggestions which may be syllables, wording and also to repeat the hypnotic suggestions. Quite some time
words, phrases or sentences uttered with a slightly different after the author had begun, Joe's wife came tiptoeing into the room
intonation.) carrying a sheet of paper on which was written the question, "When are
Now as I talk and I can do so comfortably, I wish that you going to start the hypnosis?" The author failed to cooperate with her
you will listen to me comfortably as I talk about a by looking at the paper and it was necessary for her to thrust the sheet of
tomato plant. That is an odd thing to talk about. It makes paper in front of the author and therefore in front of Joe. The author was
one curious. Why talk about a tomato plant? One puts a continuing his description of the tomato plant uninterruptedly and Joe's
tomato seed in the ground. One can feel hope that it will wife, as she looked at Joe, saw that he was not seeing her, did not know
grow into a tomato plant that will bring satisfaction by that she was there, that he was in a somnambulistic trance. She withdrew
the fruit it has. The seed soaks up water, not very much at once.)
difficulty in doing that because of the rains that bring And soon the tomato plant will have a bud form somewhere, on one
peace and comfort and the joy of growing to flowers and branch or another, but it makes no difference because all the branches,
tomatoes. That little seed, Joe, slowly swells, sends out a the whole tomato plant will soon have those nice little buds - I wonder if
little rootlet with cilia on it. Now you may not know the tomato plant can, Joe, feel really feel a kind of comfort. You know,
what cilia are, but cilia are things that work to help the Joe, a plant is a wonderful thing, and it is so nice, so pleasing just to be
tomato seed grow, to push up above the ground as a able to think about a plant as if it were a man. Would such a plant have
sprouting plant, and you can listen to me Joe so I will nice feelings, a sense of comfort as the tiny little tomatoes begin to form,
keep on talking and you can keep on listening, so tiny, yet so full of promise to give you the desire to eat a luscious
wondering, just wondering what you can really learn, tomato, sin ripened, it's so nice to have food in one's stomach, that
and here is your pencil and your pad but speaking of the wonderful feeling a child, a thirsty child, has and can want a drink, Joe,
tomato plant, it grows so slowly. You cannot see it grow, is that the way the tomato plant feels when the rain falls and washes
you cannot hear it grow, but grow it does - the first little everything so that all feels well (pause) You know, Joe, a tomato plant
leaflike things on the stalk, the fine little hairs on the just flourishes each day just a day at a time. | like to think the tomato
stem, those hairs are on the leaves too like the cilia on plant can know the fullness of comfort each day. You know, Joe, just one
the roots, they must make the tomato plant feel very day at a time for the tomato plant. That's the way for all tomato plants.
good, very comfortable if you can think of a plant as
feeling and then, you can't see it growing, you can't feel (Joe suddenly came out of the trance, appeared disoriented, hopped upon
it growing but another leaf appears on that little tomato the bed, waved his arms, and his behavior was highly suggestive of the sudden
stalk and then another. Maybe, and this is talking like a surges of toxicity one sees in patients who have reacted unfavorably to
child, maybe the tomato plant does feel comfortable and barbiturates. Joe did not seem to hear or see the author until he hopped off the
peaceful as it grows. Each day it grows and grows and bed and had walked toward the author. A firm grip was taken on Joe's arm and
grows, it's so comfortable Joe to watch a plant grow and then immediately loosened. The nurse was summoned. She mopped perspiration
not see its growth not feel it but just know that all is from his forehead, changed his surgical dressings, and gave him, by tube, some


21

[PAGE 022]

ice water. Joe then let the author lead him back to his chair. After During the lunch time, Joe was first restful and then slowly restless,
a pretense by the author of being curious about Joe's forearm, Joe another toxic episode occurred, as reported by the nurse. By the time the author
seized his pencil and paper and wrote, "Talk, talk.) returned Joe was waiting impatiently for him. Joe wanted to communicate by
Oh yes, Joe, I grew up on a farm, I think a tomato seed is writing notes. Some were illegible because of his extreme impatience in
a wonderful thing, think, Joe, think in that little seed writing. He would irritatedly rewrite them. A relative helped the author to read
there does sleep so restfully, so comfortably a beautiful these notes. They concerned things about Joe, his past history, his business, his
plant yet to be grown that will bear such interesting family and "last week terrible," "yesterday was terrible." There were no
leaves and branches. The leaves, the branches look so complaints, no demands, but there were some requests for information about
beautiful, that beautiful, rich color, you can really feel the author. After a fashion a satisfying conversation was had with him as was
happy \ooking at a tomato seed, thinking about the judged by an increasing loss of his restlessness. When it was suggested that he
wonderful plant it contains asleep, resting, comfortable, cease walking around and sit in the chair used earlier, he did so readily and
Joe. I'm soon going to leave for lunch and I'll be back looked expectantly at the author.
and I will talk some more. You know, Joe, I could talk to you some more about the tomato plant
and ifI did you would probably go to sle ep, in fact, a good sound sleep.
The above is a summary to indicate the ease with which
hypnotherapeutic suggestions can be included in the trance (This opening statement has every earmark of being no more than a casual
induction and trance maintenance suggestions which are commonplace utterance. If the patient responds hypnotically, as Joe promptly
important additionally as a vehicle for the transmission of did, all is well. If the patient does not respond, all you have said was just a
therapy. Of particular significance is Joe's own request that commonplace remark, not at all noteworthy. Had Joe not gone into a trance
the author "talk." Despite his toxic state, spasmodically immediately, there could have been a variation such as: "But instead, let's talk
evident, Joe was definitely accessible. Moreover he learned about the tomato flower. You have seen movies of flowers slowly, slowly
rapidly despite the absurdly amateurish rhapsody the author opening, giving one a sense of peace, a sense of comfort as you watch the
offered about a tomato seed and plant. Joe had no real
unfolding. So beautiful, so restful to watch. One can feel such infinite comfort
interest in pointless endless remarks about a tomato plant.
watching such a movie.")
Joe wanted freedom from pain, he wanted comfort, rest, It does not seem to the author that more needs to be said about the
sleep. This was what was uppermost in Joe's mind, foremost technique of trance induction and maintenance and the interspersal of
in his emotional desires, and he would have a compelling therapeutic suggestions. Another illustration will be given later in this paper.
need to try to find something of value to him m the author's Joe's response that afternoon was excellent despite several intervening
babbling. That desired value was there, so spoken that Joe episodes of toxic behavior and several periods where the author deliberately
could literally receive it without realizing it. Joe's arousal interrupted his work to judge more adequately the degree and amount of Joe's
from the trance was only some minutes after the author had learning.
said so seemingly innocuously, "want a drink, Joe." Nor was Upon departure that evening, the author was cordially shaken by [the] hand
the re-induction of the trance difficult, achieved by two brief by Joe, whose toxic state was much lessened. Joe had no complaints, he did not
phrases, "think Joe think" and "sleep so restfully, so seem to have distressing pain, and he seemed to be pleased and happy.

comfortably" imbedded in a rather meaningless sequence of Relatives were concerned about post-hypnotic suggestions but they were

ideas. But what Joe wanted and needed was in that otherwise reassured that such had been given. This had been done most gently in
describing so much in detail and repetition the growth of the tomato plant and
meaningless narration, and he promptly accepted it.
then, with careful emphasis, "You know Joe," "Know the fullness of comfort
each day," and "You know, Joe, just one day at a time. "

22

[PAGE 023]

About a month later around the middle of November, the pleasantly vivified for him by such a simple statement as,
author was requested to see Joe again. Upon arriving at Joe's I talked about a tomato plant then and it almost seems as if I could be
home, he was told a rather regrettable but not actually unhappy talking about a tomato plant right now. It is so enjoyable to talk about a
story. Joe had continued his excellent response after the author's seed, a plant.
departure on that first occasion, but hospital gossip had spread Thus there was, clinically speaking, a re-creation of all of the favorable aspects
the story of Joe's hypnosis and interns, residents, and staff men of that original interview.
came in to take advantage of Joe's capacity to be a good subject. Joe was most insistent on supervising the author's luncheon that day, which
They made all the errors possible for uninformed amateurs with was a steak barbecued under Joe's watchful eye in the back yard beside the
superstitious misconceptions of hypnosis. Their behavior swimming pool. It was a happy gathering of four people thoroughly enjoying
infuriated Joe who knew that the author had done none of the being together, Joe being obviously most happy.
offensive things they were doing. This was a fortunate realization After luncheon, Joe proudly displayed the innumerable plants, many of
since it permitted Joe to keep all the benefits acquired from the them rare, that he had personally planted in the large back yard. Joe's wife
author without letting his hostilities toward hypnosis interfere. furnished the Latin and common names for the plants and Joe was particularly
pleased when the author recognized and commented on some rare plant. Nor
After several days of annoyance, Joe left the hospital and went was this a pretense of interest, since the author is still interested in growing
home, keeping one nurse in constant attendance, but her duties plants. Joe regarded this interest in common to be a bond of friendship.
were relatively few. During the afternoon, Joe sat down voluntarily, his very manner making
During that month at home he had actually gained weight evident that the author was free to do whatever he wished. A long monologue by
and strength. Rarely did a surge of pain occur and when it did it the author ensued in which were included psychotherapeutic suggestions of
could be controlled either with aspirin or with 25 milligrams of continued ease, comfort, freedom from pain, enjoyment of family, good
Demerol. Joe was very happy to be with his family and there was appetite, and a continuing pleased interest in all surroundings. All of these and
considerable fruitful activity about which the author is not fully other similar suggestions were interspersed unnoticeably among the author's
informed. many remarks. These covered a multitude of topics to preclude Joe from
Joe's greeting to the author on the second visit was one of analyzing or recognizing the interspersing of suggestions. Also, for adequate
obvious pleasure. However, the author noted that Joe was disgu ise, the author needed a variety of topics. Whether or not such care was
keeping a wary eye on him, hence, great care was taken to be needed in view of the good rapport is a debatable question, but the author
completely casual and to avoid any hand movement that could be preferred to take no risks.
remotely misconstrued as a "hypnotic pass" such as the hospital Medically, the malignancy was continuing to progress, but despite this fact,
staff had employed. Joe was in much better physical condition than he had been a month previously.
Framed pictures painted by a highly talented member of his When the author took his departure, Joe invited him to return again.
family were proudly displayed. There was much casual Joe knew that the author was going on a lecture trip in late November and
conversation about Joe's improvement and his weight gain and early December. Quite unexpected by the author, a long distance telephone call
the author was repeatedly hard pushed to find simple replies to was received just before the author's departure on this trip. The call was from
conceal pertinent suggestions. Joe did volunteer to sit down and Joe's wife who stated, "Joe is on the extension line and wants to say ‘hello' to
let the author talk to him. Although the author was wholly casual you, so listen." Two brief puffs of air were heard. Joe had held the telephone
in manner, the situation was thought to be difficult to handle mouthpiece over his tracheotomy tube and had exhaled forcibly twice to
without arousing Joe's suspicions. Perhaps this was an unfounded simulate "hello." His wife stated that both she and Joe extended their best
concern but the author wished to be most careful. Finally the wishes for the trip and a casual conversation of friends ensued with Joe's wife
measure was employed of reminiscing about "our visit last reading Joe's written notes.
October." Joe did not realize how easily this visit could be A Christmas greeting card was received from Joe and his family. In a

23

[PAGE 024]

separate letter Joe's wife said that "the hypnosis is doing well, but The question arose of whether or not much of the verbigeration might be a
Joe's condition is failing." Early in January Joe was weak but disguise for concealed meanings, fragmented and dispersed among the total
comfortable. Finally, in his wife's words, "Joe died quietly utterances. This led to the question of how could the author himself produce a
January 21." series of incoherencies in which he could conceal in a fragmented form a
The author is well aware that the prediction of the duration of meaningful message. Or could he use the incoherencies of a patient and
life for any patient suffered from a fatal illness is most intersperse among them in a somewhat orderly fashion a _ fragmented
questionable. Joe's physical condition in October did not promise meaningful communication that would be difficult to recognize? This
very much. The symptom amelioration, abatement and actual speculation gave rise to many hours of intense labor spent fitting into a patient's
abolishment effected by hypnosis, and the freedom of Joe's body verbatim, apparently meaningless, utterances a meaningful message that could
from potent medications, conducive only of unawareness, not be detected by the author's colleagues when no clue of any sort was given to
unquestionably increaseed his span of life while at the same time them. Previous efforts at producing original incoherencies by the author
permitting an actual brief physical betterment in general. This disclosed a definite and recognizable personal pattern indicating that the author
was attested clearly by his improved condition at home and his was not sufficiently disturbed mentally to produce a bonafide stream of
gain in weight. That Joe lived until that latter part of January incoherent verbigerations.
despite the extensiveness of his mahgrant disease undoubtedly When a meaning was interspersed in a patient's productions successfully,
attests to the vigor with which Joe undertook to live the the author discovered that his past hypnotic experimentation with hypnotic
remainder of his life as enjoyably as possible, a vigor expressive techniques greatly influenced the kind of message which he was likely to
of the manner in which he had lived his life and built his intersperse in a patient's verbigerations. Out of this labor came the following
business. experimental and therapeutic work.


To clarify still further this matter of the technique of the One of the more recently hired secretaries objected strongly to being
interspersal of therapeutic suggestions among trance induction hypnotized. She suffered regularly upon the onset of menstruation from severe
and trance maintenance suggestions, it might be well to report migrainous headaches lasting 3 to 4 or even more hours. She had been
the author's original experimental work done while he was on the examined repeatedly by the medical service with no helpful findings. She
Research Service of the Worcester State Hospital in Worcester, usually retired to the lounge and "slept off the headache," a process usually
Massachusetts, in the early 1930's. taking 3 or more hours. On one such occasion, she had been purposely rather
The Research Service was concerned with the study of the insistently forced to take dictation by the author instead of being allowed to
numerous problems of schizophrenia and the possibilities of retire to the lounge. Rather resentfully she began her task but within 15 minutes
solving some of them. To the author, the psychological she interrupted the author to explain that her headache was gone. She attributed
manifestations were of paramount interest. For example, just this to her anger at being forced to take dictation. Later, on another such
what did a stream of disconnected, rapidly uttered incoherencies occasion, she volunteered to take certain dictation which all of the secretaries
mean? Certainly, in some manner, such a stream of utterances tried to avoid because of the difficulties it presented. Her headache grew worse
must be most meaningful to the patient in some way. Competent
and she decided that the happy instance with the author was merely a fortuitous
secretaries from time to time had recorded verbatim various
happenstance. Subsequently she had another severe headache. She was again
examples of such disturbed utterances for the author's perusal
insistently requested by the author to take some dictation. The previous happy
and study. The author himself managed to record adequately
result occurred within ten minutes. Upon the occurrence of another headache,
similar such productions by patients who spoke slowly. Careful
she volunteered to take dictation from the author. Again it served to relieve her
study of these verbal productions, it was thought, might lead to
headache. She then experimentally tested the benefits of dictation from other
various speculative ideas that, in turn, might prove of value in
physicians. For some unknown reason, her headaches only worsened. She
understanding something about schizophrenia.
returned from one of these useless attempts to the author and asked him to
24

[PAGE 025]

dictate. She was told he had nothing on hand to dictate but that statement of the complaint was necessary and they then knew that the therapist
he could redictate previously dictated material. Her headache understood. Their intense desire for therapy was not only a conscious but an
was relieved within 8 minutes. Later her request for dictation for unconscious desire also, as judged clinically, but more importantly, as
headache relief was met by some routine dictation. It failed to evidenced by the results obtained.
have any effect. One should also give recognition to the readiness with which one's
She came again, not too hopefully since she thought she had unconscious mind picks up clues and information. For example, one may
"worn-out the dictation remedy." Again she was given dictation dislike someone at first sight and not become consciously aware of the obvious
with a relief of her distress in about 9 minutes. She was so elated and apparent reasons for such dislike for weeks, months, even a year or more.
that she kept a copy of the transcript so that she could ask others Yet finally the reasons for the dislike become apparent to the conscious mind. A
to dictate "that successful dictation" to relieve her leadaches. common example is the ready hostility frequently shown by a normal
Unfortunately, nobody seemed to have the "right voice" as did heterosexual person toward a homosexual person without any conscious

the author. Always, a posthypnotic suggestion was casually realization of why.

given that there would be no falling asleep while transcribing. Respectful awareness of the capacity of the patient's unconscious mind to
She did not suspect, nor did anybody else, what had really perceive meaningfulness of the therapist's own unconscious behavior is a

been done. The author had made comprehensive notes of the governing principle in psychotherapy. There should also be a ready and full
incoherent verbigeration of a psychotic patient. He had also had respect for the patient's unconscious mind to perceive fully the intentionally
various secretaries make verbatim records of patient's incoherent obscured meaningful therapeutic instructions offered them. The clinical and
utterances. He had then systematically interspersed therapeutic experimental material cited above is based upon the author's awareness that the

suggestions among the incoherencies with that secretary in mind. patient's unconscious mind is listening and understanding much better than is
When this was found to be successful, the incoherent utterances possible for his conscious mind.

of another patient were utilized in a similar fashion. This was It was intended to publish this experimental work, of which only the author
also a successful effort. As a control measure, routine dictation was aware. But sober thought and awareness of the insecure status of hypnosis

and the dictation of "undoctored incoherencies" were tried. in general, coupled with that secretary's strong objection to being hypnotizedThese had no effect upon her headaches. Nor did the use by she did not mind losing her headaches by "taking dictation" from the author-all
others of "doctored" material have an effect since it had to be suggested the inadvisability of publication.
read aloud with some degree of expressive awareness to be A second secretary, employed by the hospital when this experimental work

effective. was nearing completion, always suffered from disabling dysmenorrhea. The
"headache secretary" suggested to this girl that she take dictation from the
The question now arises, why did these two patients and author as a possible relief measure. Most willingly the author obliged, using
those patients used experimentally respond therapeutically? This "doctored" patient verbigeration. It was effective.
answer can be given simply as follows: They knew very well Concerned about what might happen to hypnotic research if his superiors
why they were seeking therapy; they were desirous of benefiting; were to learn of what was taking place, the author carefully failed with this
they came in a receptive state ready to respond at the first second secretary and then again succeeded. She volunteered to be a hypnotic
opportunity, except for the first experimental patient. But she subject and hypnosis, not "dictation," was then used to meet her personal needs.
was eager to be freed from her headache, and wished the time She also served repeatedly as a subject for various frankly acknowledged and
being spent taking dictation could be time spent getting over her "approved" hypnotic experiments and the author kept his counsel in certain
headache. Essentially, then, all of the patients were in a frame of other experimental studies.
mind to receive therapy. How many times does a patient need to Now that hypnosis has come to be an acceptable scientific modality of
state his complaint? Only that number of times requisite for the investigative and therapeutic endeavor and there has developed a much greater
therapist to understand. For all of these patients, only one awareness of semantics, this material, so long relegated to the shelf of
25

[PAGE 026]

unpublished work, can safely be published I liked growing flowers = D
I still do = E
Summary
Each of these five statements is accurate for the client without any question.
Two case histories and a brief account of experimental work Now Erickson linkes these statements to behavior which he wants to elicit from
are presented in detail to demonstrate the effective procedure of the client with the Implied Causative connective so in the sentence:
interspersing psychotherapeutic suggestions among those employed to induce and to maintain a hypnotic trance. The patients So I would like to have you take a seat in that easy chair as I talk to
treated suffered respectively from neurotic manifestations and you.

the pain of terminal malignant disease.
The general form of this series, then is:

We will now consider in more detail how Erickson
so I would like to have you take a seat in
constructs this interspersal technique and also extract more of his
A, B, C, D, E, that easy chair as I talk to you
language patterns for inducing hypnosis and giving suggestions.
A more basic induction will be presented later, for now we will
examine Erickson's account of his experience with Joe for its Notice, in addition, that the last statement itself includes an Implied
unique quality of having little co-operation on the part of the Causative which links an immediately verifiable statement to a piece of
client other than trying to understand Erickson's speaking to him. behavior which Erickson wishes to elicit from Joe:
We will see how a story of a tomato plant can evolve into an
effective and sorely needed series of suggestions for the relief of as I would like to have you take a seat in
I talk to you that easy chair
pain.
Erickson begins by pacing the client's experiences.
Describing what he knows to be true about the client, he also Next, note that the behavior which Erickson wishes to elicit from Joe is not
picks a subject of interest to the client to get his attention. This requested directly but rather that Erickson uses a conversational postulate,
has more than just the advantage of getting the client to listen; it thereby avoiding the direct command take a seat in that easy chair as he says:
also is a part of the client's experience in which he has a great
investment of himself. Erickson wants the client to be able to ... 1 would like to have you take a seat in that easy chair. . .
take the contents of the story and generalize the referential index
I'm going to say a lot of things to you but it won't be about flowers
to himself. He at one point even said to Joe:
because you know more than I do about
flowers. That isn't what you want.
It is so pleasing just to be able to think about a plant as if
it were a man.
Here Erickson uses a series of patterns:

Joe's affection for plants will make it easier for Joe to select his
...A lot of things... No referential index on things.
own referential index as a relevant substitute for tomato plant.
Here Erickson begins with a series of pacing statements: ... It won't be about flowers No referential index on it.

I know you are a florist = A Because you know more than Mind-reading (you know),
I do about flowers Cause-Effect (because).
That you like to grow flowers = B
I grew up on a farm in Wisconsin = C
26

[PAGE 027]

That isn't what you want Mind-reading (that isn't . . odd thing. . . to talk Deletion (odd for whom? talk
what you want). Erickson about... to whom?).
repeats Joe's word
(previously written out) ... makes one... Cause-Effect (... makes... ).
what you want.
.one.." one..., one... Lack of referential index.
In addition, Erickson uses a meta-communication
(communication about communication) technique closely . . feel hope. . . will bring Analogical marking of lesser
related to the selectional restriction violation technique satisfaction included structures.
mentioned previously. Here Erickson comments directly about . . Satisfaction. . . Nominalization with accompanying
his intended communication with Joe. He says that he is going deletions and lack of referential
to talk to Joe but not about flowers. As the communication indices.
develops, however, Erickson superficially talks about a tomato
plant - in fact, employing the selectional restriction violation The seed soaks up water, not very much difficulty in doing that because
technique. Here Erickson is directly warning Joe that he wants of the rains that bring peace and comfort and
Joe to find some other referential index for the communication the joy of~ growing to flowers and tomatoes.
about tomato plants.
... difficulty. .. peace... Nominalization with accompanying
Now as I talk and I can do so comfortably, I wish that comfort. . . joy... deletions and lack of referential indices.
you will listen to me comfortably as 1 talk about a
tomato plant. doing. . . bring. . . Unspecified verbs.

.aS...... as Implied Causatives. ... because... Cause-Effect link.


... comfortably. . . listen to Analogical marking, peace... comfort... joy... Selectional restriction violation
me comfortably.... lesser included structure to flowers and tomato plants

... 1] wish that you will... Use of ungrammatical In addition, here Erickson's earlier meta-communication... it won't be about
sentence structure
flowers is relevant, since he earlier warned Joe that he wouldn't be talking about
alerting Joe for special
flowers and here he is, in fact, talking about flowers, the burden of constructing
message... wish... will
a meaning for this communication falling upon Joe.
instead of ... wish...
would. ..
That little seed, Joe, slowly swells, sends out a little rootlet with cilia
on it. Now you may not know what cilia are, but cilia are things that
That is an odd thing to talk about. It makes one curious.
work to help the tomato seed grow, to push up above the ground as a
Why talk about a tomato plant? One puts a tomato seed
sprouting plant, and you can listen to me Joe so 1 will keep on talking
in the ground. One can feel hope that it will grow into a
and you can keep on listening, wondering, just wondering what you can
tomato plant that will bring satisfaction by the fruit it
really learn.
has.

. . seed... rootlet. . cilia All nouns whose _ referential
27

[PAGE 028]

. . tomato seed. . . sprouting index has already been
plant... dis qualified by
Erickson's
earlier meta-
communication. Basic Trance Induction with Commentary

... keep on listening. . . Presupposition that Joe has This now should begin to give you an idea of the level of complexity of
been listening. language Erickson employs to create an induction or to give suggestions.
Erickson's ability to utilize language in this complex way is the result of
... know... wonder. .. Unspecified verbs. experience and creativity plus his courageous belief in people's ability to learn
learn...
the things they need to know. However, although Erickson himself can generate
... wondering what you can Lesser included structure these language patterns spontaneously, he des not know consciously their
really learn. . . (the question - What can
formal characteristics. As Erickson has stated:
you really learn?).
The Structure of Magic I by Richard Bandler and John Grinder
is a delightful simplification of the infinite complexities of the
..and...and...so... Links - simple conjunctions,
language I use with my patients. In reading this book, I learned
as... Implied Causatives.
a great deal about the things that I've done without knowing
about them.
... things that work. . . Lack of referential index.

The induction that follows was taped in the author's (Grinder) presence, and
... you can listen to me... Conversational postulates.
is presented verbatim, with commentary on the right.
you can really learn. . .

(1) Will you uncross your Erickson begins induction
. . and here is your pencil and your pad but speaking of
legs? with a conversational postulate.
the tomato plant, it grows so slowly. You cannot see it
grow, you cannot hear it grow, but grow it does - the first
(2) Con!... Will you uncross your legs (a
little leaflike things on the stalk, the fine little hairs on
conversational postulate), as
the stem, those hairs are on the leaves too like the cilia on
described previously is a question form
the roots, they must make the tomato plant feel very
of one of the presuppositions of the
good,. ..
command, "uncross your legs." This
move begins the process of having the
... and here is your pencil and Pacing statement.
client operate patterns which aren't
your pad...
ordinarily conscious, at the same time
getting her in a position for a trance
... but speaking of the Deletion (who's speaking to
induction as she has begun already to
tomato. . . whom?).
respond to his suggestion on a waking
level.
. . . they must make the
tomato plant feel very violation
(3) And sit with your hands And links this conversational
good...

28

[PAGE 029]

just like this postulate to his next com moves where?) and the nominalization
mand which is also not need.
expressed as a command
but a continuance of the (9) You really don't have to Presupposition of remainder
preceding pattern of pay attention to me of sentence when really occurs,
conversational postulate. because. . . nominalization attention,
Here there is an addt and the beginning of a Cause Effect
tional ambiguity (scope) statement (because), don't have to pay
of whether it's will you attention has the conversational postulate
sit... or simply sit... "don't pay attention.”

(4) And look at anyone spot Continuing the same (10) Your unconscious mind Presupposes that the client's
there process of will hear me unconscious mind exists and
conversational postulate can hear Erickson speaking, _ lesser
here. included structure hear me.
(5) And do not touch
it (11) And it will understand Deletion (understand what?),
lesser included structure (understand),
(6) And, yes, just keep Just keep looking, presupposes unspecified verb (understand).
looking at that spot that nothing else is required
of the client. At the same (12) Really don't even need to Use of words even and really,
time "and" connects this pay attention to me remainder of communication
statement in a casual way to presupposed. Ungrammatical sentence,
all that has preceded. conversational postulate, lesser included
Furthermore, the predicate structure (pay attention), nominalization
keep in the phrase keep need.
looking presupposes that the (13) And while you have been Pacing statement linked to
client has been looking. sitting there previous statements by and and Implied
(7) Now there is no need to Conversational postulate Causative while.
talk with theforce of the
command "don't talk" in addition (14) You've been doing the Lack of referential index
to the deletion (who talks about same thing (thing), deletion (same as what
what to whom?) and the nom- for whom?), unspecified predicate doing.
inalization need with its ac-
companying deletions and lack (15) That you did when you Deletion (did what?), Implied
of referential indices.
first went to school Causative when, age
regression
(8) No need to move Ungrammatical
suggestion, both mentioning the earlier
sequence of
period of the clients life and the
words, deletions (who
statement that the client is doing the same

29

[PAGE 030]

thing now. accessing, age regression sugges
tion, deletion (for whom?).
(16) When you first saw the Nominalizations task and writ
task of writing ing with accompanying (23) And while you were Non-dominant hemisphere ac
deletions and lack of masten'ng those problems cessing, mind-reading, nomi
referential indices, age - you were forming nalization problems with
regression suggestion when mental images that stay accompanying deletions and
as well as Implied with you for the rest of lack of referential indices.
Causative. your life


(17) The letters of the The predicate saw in (16) plus (24) But you didn't know it Suggests amnesia.
alphabet the reference to the letters of then
the alphabet are powerful
accessing of the non- (25) And while you've been Pacing statement, Implied
dominant hemisphere sitting there Causative (while).
techniques.
(26) The same thing has been All of the above descriptions
(18) It seemed like an Deletions (seemed to whom, happening to you now are taking place at this moment:
impossible task impossible to whom?), nomi that happened to you regression, amnesia,
nalization task. then forming mental images, learn ing,
the same thing has no referential index
(19) And how do you Lesser included structure (recognize and could be anything - this allows the
recognize a "b" a "b," question asked client to choose. While more likely
with no pause, allowing responding to all the above to some
client to respond degree, Erickson's phrasing of this
overtly. sentence also made it an imbedded
command, the same thing is happening
(20) How is it different from a Deletion (different for to you NOWWWWWWWW - that hap-
"d" whom?), children have exactly pened to you then. Marking in such a
this difficulty - thus, age way that tonally implies "do it."
regression suggestion.


(21) And numbers Also stored in nondominant (27) Your respiration is changed This is pacing, Erickson
hemisphere, has watched his client
ungrammatical fragment. (28) Your blood pressure is changed closely and is
» describing the change
(22) Is a 6 an upside down 9 Ungrammatical fragments, (29) Your heartbeat is changed he has seen, reinforcing
...9 is an upside down 6 non-dominant hemisphere by feedback and also
(30) Your eyelids reflex is changed presupposing that 1t had

30

[PAGE 031]

already occurred. postulate.


(31) And you've got a mental Mind-reading, conjunction and (38) And one of those is the Lack of referential index
image, a visual image of linking mind-reading pacing understanding you can go those, presupposition (one),
that spot and now you statement and desired be back nominalization (understand
can Close your eyes havior, ungrammatical (two ing), lesser included structure,
NOWWWW occurrences of now), conversational postulate.
conversational postulate,
lesser included structure, (39) Then perhaps you might Implied Causative then, lesser
unspecified verb (got), have the experience included structure, analogical
analogical marking marking, nominalization (experience ),
Nowwww.
(40) ,., Ofnot knowing Lesser included structure (the
(32) And now you can enjoy Conjunction link and, lesser which one ofyour hands question which one ofyour
the comfort ofgoing ever included structure, is going to lift first hands. . .), presupposition
deeper into the trance conversational postulate, which one ofyour hands. . . presupposes
presupposition, nominalizations. that one of your hands. . ., presupposition
first presupposes that one hand will lift
(33) And I want you to enjoy Lack of referential index (it) and asks which will be first.
every moment of it presupposition (every
moment), lesser included struc-
ture, analogical marking.


(34) . ., And I don't need to Deletion (talk to you about
talk to you what?).


(35) You can have a lot of Lesser included structure, con
pleasure versational postulate, nominal
ization (pleasure) with
accompanying deletions and
lack or referential indices,
presupposition (a lot of).


(36) In becoming aware of the Presupposition (aware is a fac
comforts tive predicate), nominalization
comforts, unspecified predicate,
analogical marking.


(37) You can have within Lesser included structure, un
yourself specified verb, conversational
31

[PAGE 032]

A Special Inquiry with Aldous represents the world. In the use of hypnosis in medical or dental contexts, the
doctor must assist each client in achieving an altered state of consciousness
Huxley into the Nature and which will allow him to experience the world in a way radically different from

Character of Various States of that of his normal state of consciousness, in order that otherwise difficult
surgical procedures may proceed and the patient be properly cared for. Common
Consciousness, with Commentary to each of these contexts is the client's increased ability to control portions of his
experience normally represented as outside his control (e.g., the ability to recall
The patient's behavior is a part of the problem memories of events from the distant past, to dissassociate severe pain, etc.). The
brought into the office; it constitutes the client, with the assistance of the hypnotist, literally achieves domination over
personal environment within which the therapy portions of his nervous system usually considered beyond conscious control - he
must take effect; it may constitute the dominant can succeed in gaining phenomenal command over the ongoing process of his
force in the local patient-doctor relationship. direct experience of the world, his modeling process.
Since whatever the patient brings into the One of the most highly valued skills in western European culture is the
office is in some way both part of him and part experience which we call creativity or the creative act. Although there is little
of his problem, the patient should be viewed agreement about the nature of this experience, the investigators of creativity,
with a sympathetic eye appraising the totality typically, have characterized it as a state of altered consciousness. In studies of
which confronts the therapist. many of the world's most famous mathematicians, for example, the com-
Milton H. Erickson, The Use of mentators as well as the mathematicians themselves have noticed that their
Symptoms as an Integral Part of discoveries and inventions often come to them in the form of dreams, of sudden
Hypnotherapy insights into the solution to a problem which they are not working on
consciously.*
Milton Erickson is generally recognized as the leading practi- In this first article, Erickson is working jointly with Aldous Huxley
tioner of medical hypnosis and the use of hypnosis in the psycho- exploring the "various states of psychological awareness." Huxley, of course, is
therapeutic context. He has consistently urged over the years of recognized as one of the most creative individuals in recent western European
his continuing research into the nature of hypnosis and the history. In this context, we see Erickson's systematic behavior in assisting
working of the human mind in altered states of consciousness, Huxley to achieve altered states of consciousness with a sensitivity to Huxley's
that hypnotists, psychotherapists, medical doctors and dentists powerful creative resources. The principles of communication which allow
develop a refined ability to identify and meet the special needs Erickson to act so effectively in a psychotherapeutic encounter occur with
and requirements which their clients bring with them to the clarity in this special situation in which the impressive resources of a highly
specific context. Erickson realizes that full communication creative individual are being explored with him. It is in this article, perhaps, that
between two people at both the conscious and the unconscious the potential which hypnosis offers as a tool both for research into highly
levels can occur when there is a sensitivity to the other person's valued altered states of consciousness and for the exploration of extending the
model of the world. In the therapeutic context, for example, the limits of human experience displays itself most clearly. Not only are Erickson's
therapist assumes the responsibility of both making contact and potent techniques available as a technique to assist in the changing of portions
assisting the client to learn the skills of communication necessary of an individual's normal model of the world in a way which is narrowly
to allow any change in his behavior which he needs. Often this therapeutic or medically or dentally weful, but they also provide a complete
may require that the therapist be skilled in teaching the client to approach to the mapping of portions of human potential not normally
develop a new way of representing his experience - literally experienced - portions of human potential which we may call creative acts.
teaching the client to have new choices behaviorally (either
consciously or unconsciously or both) about the way he
32

[PAGE 033]

A Special Inquiry with Aldous Huxley into the Nature and and of the fact that each of us had, by the nature of the situation, made
Character of Various States of Consciousness’ separate notations bearing upon each other.
Our plan was to leave these notebooks with Huxley since his
Introduction phenomenal memory, often appearing to be total recall, and his superior
Over a period of nearly a year much time was spent by Aldous literary ability would permit a more satisfactory writing of a joint article
Huxley and by the author, each planning separately for a joint inquiry based upon our discussions and experimentations of that day's work.
into various states of psychological awareness. Special inquiries, possible However, I did abstract from my notebook certain pages bearing notations
methods of experimental approach and investigations and various upon Huxley's behavior at times when he, as an experimental subject, was
questions to be propounded were listed by each of us in our respective unable to make comprehensive notations on himself, although postloose-leaf notebooks. The purpose was to prepare a general background experimentally he could and did do so, though less completely than I had. It
for the proposed joint study with this general background reflecting the was proposed that, from these certain special pages, I was to endeavor to
thinking of both of us uninfluenced by the other. It was hoped in this way develop an article which could be incorporated later in the longer study that
to secure the widest possible coverage of ideas by such separate outlines Huxley was to write. Accordingly, I abstracted a certain number of pages
prepared from the markedly different backgrounds of understanding that intending to secure still more at a later date. These pages that I did remove
the two of us possessed. Huxley rapidly copied into his own notebook to be sure of the completeness
Early in 1950 we met in Huxley's home in Los Angeles, there to of his own data.
Unfortunately, a California brush fire sometime later destroyed
spend an intensive day appraising the ideas recorded in our separate
Huxley's home, his extensive library containing many rare volumes and
notebooks and to engage in any experimental inquiries that seemed
manuscripts, besides numerous other treasures to say nothing of the
feasible. I was particularly interested in Huxley's approach to
manuscripts upon which Huxley was currently working as well as the
psychological problems, his method of thinking and his own unique use
respective notebooks of our special joint
of his unconscious mind which we had discussed only briefly sometime
study. As a result, the entire subject matter of our project was
previously. Huxley was particularly interested in hypnosis and previous
dropped as a topic too painful to discuss, but Huxley's recent death led to
exceedingly brief work with him had demonstrated his excellent
my perusal of these relatively few pages I had abstracted from my notebook.
competence as a deep somnambulistic subject.
Examination of them suggested the possibility of presenting to the reader a
It was realized that this meeting would be a preliminary or pilot
small but informative part of that day's work. I n this regard, the reader must
study, and this was discussed by both of us. Hence we planned to make it
bear in mind that the quotations attributed to Huxley are not necessarily
as comprehensive and inclusive as possible without undue emphasis upon
verbatim, since his more extensive utterances were noted in abbreviated
completion of anyone particular item. Once the day's work had been
form. However, in the essence of their meaning, they are correct and they
evaluated, plans could then be made for future meetings and specific
are expressive of Huxley as I knew him. It is also to be borne in mind that
studies. Additionally, we each had our individual purposes, Aldous
Huxley had read my notations on the occasion of our joint study and had
having in mind future literary work, while my interest related to future
approved them.
psychological experimentation in the field of hypnosis.
The day's work began at 8:00 a.m. and remained uninterrupted until
Project Initiations
6:00 p.m. with some considerable review of our notebooks the next day
The project began with Huxley reviewing concepts and definitions of
to establish their general agreement, to remove any lack of clarity of
conscious awareness, primarily his and in part those of others, followed by
meaning caused by the abbreviated notations we had entered into them
a discussion with me of his understandings of hypnotic states of awareness.
during the previous day's work and to correct any oversights. On the
The purpose was to insure that we were both in accord or clear in our
whole we found that our notebooks were reasonably in agreement but
divergences of understanding, thus to make possible a more reliable
that naturally certain of our entries were reflective of our special interests
inquiry into the subject matter of our interest.

33

[PAGE 034]

There followed then a review in extensive detail of various of his marshaling his thoughts and putting into order the thinking that would enter
psychedelic experiences with mescaline, later to be recorded in this into his writing later that day.
book. As still another illustrative incident, Huxley cited an occasion when his
Huxley then proceeded with a detailed description of his very special wife returned home from a brief absence, found the door locked as was
practice of what he, for want of a better and less awkward term which he customary, had entered the house and discovered in plain view a special
had not yet settled upon, called "Deep Reflection." He described this state delivery letter on a hallway table reserved for mail, special messages, etc.
(the author's description is not complete since there seemed to be no good She had found Huxley sitting quietly in his special chair, obviously in a state
reason except interest for making full notations of his description) of of deep thought. Later that day she had inquired about the time of arrival of
Deep Reflection as one marked by physical relaxation with bowed head the special delivery letter only to learn that he had obviously no recollection
and closed eyes, a profound progressive psychological withdrawal from of receiving any letter. Yet both knew that the mailman had undoubtedly
externalities but without any actual loss of physical realities nor any rung the doorbell, that Huxley had heard the bell, had interrupted whatever
amnesias or loss of orientation, a "setting aside" of everything not he was doing, had gone to the door, opened it, received the letter, closed the
pertinent, and then a state of complete mental absorption in matters of door, placed the letter in its proper place and returned to the chair where she
interest to him. Yet, in that state of complete withdrawal and mental had found him.
absorption, Huxley stated that he was free to pick up a fresh pencil to Both of these two special events had occurred fairly recently. He
replace a dulled one to make "automatically" notations on his thoughts recalled them only as incidents related to him by his wife but with no feeling
and to do all this without a recognizable realization on his part of what that those accounts constituted a description of actual meaningful physical
physical act he was performing. It was as if the physical act were "not an behavior on his part. So far as he knew, he could only deduce that he must
integral part of my thinking." In no way did such physical activity seem have been in a state of Deep Reflection when they occurred.
to impinge upon, to slow, or to impede "the train of thought so His wife subsequently confirmed the assumption that his behavior had
exclusively occupying my interest. It is associated but completely been completely "automatic, like a machine moving precisely and
peripheral activity. . . . I might say activity barely contiguous to the accurately. It is a delightful pleasure to see him get a book out of the
periphery." To illustrate further, Huxley cited an instance of another type bookcase, sit down again, open the book slowly, pick up his reading glass,
of physical activity. He recalled having been in a state of Deep Reflection read a little, and then lay the book and glass aside. Then some time later,
one day when his wife was shopping. He did not recall what thoughts or maybe a few days, he will notice the book and ask about it. The man just
ideas he was examining but he did recall that, when his wife returned that never remembers what he does nor what he thinks about when he sits in that
day, she had asked him if he had made a note of the special message she chair. All of a sudden, you just find him in his study working very hard."
had given him over the telephone. He had been bewildered by her I n other words, while in a state of Deep Reflection and seemingly
inquiry, could not recall anything about answering the telephone as his totally withdrawn from external realities, the integrity of the task being done
wife asserted, but together they found the special message recorded on a in that mental state was touched by external stimuli, but some peripheral
pad beside the telephone which was placed within comfortable reaching part of awareness made it possible for him to receive external stimuli, to
distance from the chair in which he liked to &velop Deep Reflection. respond meaningfully to them but with no apparent recording of any
Both he and his wife reached the conclusion that he had been in a state of memory of either the stimulus or his meaningful and adequate response.
Deep Reflection at the time of the telephone call, had lifted the receiver Inquiry of his wife later had disclosed that when she was at home, Aldous in
and had said to her as usual, "I say there, hello," had listened to the a state of Deep Reflection paid no attention to the telephone which might be
message, had recorded it, all without any subsequent recollections of the beside him or the doorbell. "He simply depends completely on me, but I can
experience. He recalled merely that he had been working on a manuscript call out to him that I'll be away and he never fails to hear the telephone or
that afternoon, one that had been absorbing all of his interest. He the doorbell. "
explained that it was quite common for him to initiate a day's work by Huxley explained that he believed he could develop a state of Deep
entering a state of Deep Reflection as a preliminary process of Reflection in about five minutes but that in doing so he "simply cast aside all

34

[PAGE 035]

anchors" of any type of awareness. Just what he meant and sensed he understanding that he would respond to any "significant stimulus." Without
could not describe. "It is a subjective experience quite" in which he informing him of my intentions, I asked him to "arouse" (this term is my
apparently achieved a state of "orderly mental arrangement" permitting an own) when three taps of a pencil on a chair were given in close succession.
orderly free flowing of his thoughts as he wrote. This was his final He entered the state of reflection readily and, after a brief wait, I tapped the
explanation. He had never considered any analysis of exactly what his table with a pencil in varying fashions at distinct but irregular intervals.
"Deep Reflection" was nor did he feel that he could analyze it, but he Thus, I tapped once, paused, then twice in rapid succession, paused, tapped
offered to attempt t as an experimental investigation for the day. It was once, paused, tapped four times in rapid succession, paused, then five times
promptly learned that, as he began to absorb himself in his thoughts to in rapid succession. Numerous variations were tried but with an avoidance of
achieve a state of Deep Reflection, he did indeed "cast off all anchors" the agreed-upon signal. A chair was knocked over with a crash while four

and appeared to be completely out of touch with everything. On this taps were given. Not until the specified three taps were given did he make

attempt to experience subjectively and to remember the processes of any response. His arousal occurred slowly with an almost immediate

entering into Deep Reflection, he developed the state within five minutes response to the signal. Huxley was questioned about his subjective

and emerged from it within two as closely as I could determine. His experiences. He explained simply that they had been the same as previously

comment was, "I say, I'm deucedly sorry. I suddenly found myself all with one exception, namely that several times he had a vague sensation that
"something was coming," but he knew not what. He had no awareness of
prepared to work with nothing to do and I realized I had better come out
what had been done.
of it." That was all the information he could offer. For the next attempt, a
signal to be given by me was agreed upon as a signal for him to "come
out of it." A secondary attempt was made as easily as the first. Huxley sat Huxley is already quite experienced in the ability to enter and leave
altered states of consciousness. Notice that in the discussion of the state
quietly for some minutes and the agreed-upon signal was given. Huxley's
account was, "I found myself just waiting for something. I did not know which Huxley calls Deep Reflection both Huxley and Erickson distinguish

what. It was just a 'something' that I seemed to feel would come in what his experience of normal state of consciousness from this special state with

seemed to be a timeless, spaceless void. I say, that's the first time I noted descriptions such as:

that feeling. Always I've had some thinking to do. But this time I seemed
As if the physical act were not an integral part of my
to have no work in hand. I was just completely disinterested, indifferent,
thinking. ..
just waiting for something and then I felt a need to come out of it. I say,
did you give me this signal?"
In no way did such physical activity seem to impinge. . .
Inquiry disclosed that he had no apparent memory of the stimulus
being given. He had had only the "feeling" that it was time to "come out
of it." Recalled them only as incidents related to him by his wife but with
nofeeling. . .
Several more repetitions yielded similar results. A sense of timeless,
spaceless void, a placid, comfortable awaiting for an undefined
"something" and a comfortable need to return to ordinary conscious Automatic, like a machine moving precisely and accurately. . .

awareness constituted the understandings achieved. Huxley summarized
Simply cast aside all anchors. . .
his findings briefly as "a total absence of everything on the way there and
on the way back and an expected meaningless something for which one
To be completely out of touch with everything. . .
awaits in a state of Nirvana since there is nothing more to do." He
asserted his intention to make a later intensive study of this practice he
found so useful in his writing. One of the patterns which connects each of these descriptions is that in
Further experiments were done after Huxley had explained that he each the normal state of consciousness and Huxley's experience of the
could enter the state of Deep Reflection with the simple undefined altered state of consciousness are distinguished by the reduction or complete

35

[PAGE 036]

absence of kinesthetic sensations. If you examine the normalstate Milton Erickson, Utilization Techniques,
descriptions by Huxley of his normabstate experience of the world p.36.
throughout the article, you will find a definite preference on Huxley's part
for kinesthetic predicates - that is, verbs, adjectives and adverbs which Precisely this same formal pattern occurs in what psychotherapists call the
are based on (or presuppose) a kinesthetic representational system. In enactment technique. In an enactment the client is asked to recall in its
other words, Huxley's most highly valued representational system is entirety the kinesthetic, visual, auditory, and other sensations which are
kinesthetic. Since the kinesthetic representational system is Huxley's connected with some experience which is the basis of a block to desired
most highly valued one, the altered state of consciousness - Deep growth and change in his behavior. In this way the past is made present and
Reflection - is characterized as differing from the primary by a reduction the client, by reexperiencing this event, comes to have new choices in his
or absence of body sensations. behavior (see Magic I, Chapter 6, and Magic II, Part I, for a detailed
There are two additional patterns which recur in Erickson's work and discussion of the enactment technique).
also occur in this portion of the article. First Huxley's wife states that Note that Huxley's choice of a particular physical location ("that chair")
"The man (Huxley) just never remembers. . . when he sits in that chair." and the accompanying kinesthetic sensation associated with it are congruent
One of the fastest ways of assisting a person who has achieved an altered with the fact that Huxley's most highly valued representational system is
state of consciousness, whether hypnosis, Deep Reflection, or other kinesthetic. Erickson systematically selects cues or signals from the client's
states, in re-entering that state is through a full recall of their experience most highly valued representational system fo assist the client in entering or
at the time when they achieved that altered state of consciousness. For ex reentering trance states. Thus, while the kinesthetic cues are quite effective
ample, it is a standard Erickson technique to have the client who with Huxley, with a highly visual client a fantasized image of some
wishes to re-enter a trance state to re-create the experience which he had experience would he more appropriate.
on some previous occasion. Huxley, who has trained himself to enter
Deep Reflection rapidly, uses one of the most powerful of these recall Another variation of the rehearsal technique is that of
techniques - kinesthetic recall. In other words, by seating himself in "that having the subject visualize himself carrying out some
chair," he accelerates his process of entering an altered state of hypnotic task and then adding to the visualization other
consciousness as in that chair he had repeatedly entered that state, and forms of imagery such as auditory, kinesthetic, etc.
the physical act of seating himself in "that chair" places him in touch Milton Erickson, Deep Hypnosis and its Induction, p. 29
with the familiar kinesthetic sensations of sitting in "that chair" - a
powerful set of kinesthetic cues associated with the altered state. The He, thereby, uses the person's most highly developed representational
recovery of re-experiencing of kinesthetic sensations associated with system to lead and gain access to the other representational systems
former altered states of consciousness is one of a set of techniques which available.
Erickson characteristically employs to insure satisfactory future trances. Second, Erickson arranges an "arousal" signal with Huxley without
informing him of his full intentions. Here Erickson is demonstrating several
The procedure is to get the subject to recall from the important points. He chooses a signal which is in a different modality
beginning in a reasonably orderly, detailed manner the (auditory) from Huxley's most highly valued representational system
events of a previous successful hypnotic trance. As the (kinesthetic). Erickson typically arranges signals or cues for post-hypnotic
subject does this, repetitions of his statements are behavior in modalities other than the other person's most highly valued
offered and helpful questions are asked. As he becomes
representational system. This allows him to bypass the modality and
absorbed in this task, the subject revivifies the previous
representational system most frequently connected with conscious mind
trance state, usually regressing subjectively to that
activity and to communicate more directly with the unconscious portions of
previous situation and developing a special rapport with
the person's mind. Erickson then proceeds to test the effectiveness of the cue
the operator.
by creating a number of signals in the same modality (auditory - sequences
36

[PAGE 037]

of pencil taps other than the arranged signal, the crash of a chair Erickson He was aroused easily and comfortably at the designated signal.
causes to fall, etc.). His subjective report was simply that he had "lost" himself in a "sea of
Huxley's ability not to respond to these auditory signals demonstrates the color," of "sensing," "feeling," "being" color, of being "quite utterly involved
depth of Deep Reflection. Erickson, in arranging the cue for arousal with in it with no identity of your own, you know." Then suddenly he had
Huxley, does not give Huxley specific directions not to respond to experienced a process of losing that color in a "meaningless void," only to
auditory stimulation other than the cue. open his eyes and to realize that he had "come out of it."
Rather, he makes the positive statement that Huxley will arouse to a He remembered the agreed upon stimulus but did not recall if it had
specific signal. The way in which Huxley is to respond or not to respond been given. "I can only deduce it was given from the fact that I'm out of it,"
to other auditory signals is left ambiguous, thereby allowing Huxley to and indirect questioning disclosed no memories of the other physical stimuli
utilize his own vast resources in determining his behavior. This is an administered. Neither was there an absent-minded looking at nor rubbing of
excellent example of Erickson's consistent pattern of limiting the person the backs of his hands.
he is working with as little as possible, consistent with the demands of This same procedure in relation to color was repeated but to it was
the context. By making a positive suggestion about a specific signal, added, as he seemed to be reaching the state of Deep Reflection, a repeated,
Erickson allows Huxley maximum freedom to respond or not as he insistent urging that, upon arousal, he discuss a certain book which was
(Huxley) decides. carefully placed in full view. The results were comparable to the preceding
In trance induction, the inexperienced hypnotist often findings. He became
tries to direct or bend the subject's behavior to fit his "lost," . . . "quite utterly involved in it," . . . "one can sense it but not
conception of how a subject "should" behave. There describe it," ... "I say, it's an utterly amazing, fascinating state of finding
should be a constant minimalization of the role of the yourself a pleasant part of an endless vista of color that is soft and gentle and
hypnotist and a constant enlargement of the subject's yielding and all-absorbing. Utterly extraordinary, most extraordinary." He
role. had no recollection of my verbal insistences nor of the other physical
Milton Erickson, Deep Hypnosis and its stimuli. He remembered the agreed-upon signal but did not know if it had
Induction, p. 18 been given. He found himself only in a position of assuming that it had been
given since he was again in a state of ordinary awareness. The presence of
In this way Erickson makes use of the full resources which the person he the book meant nothing to him. One added statement was that entering a

is working with has available. state of Deep Reflection by absorbing himself in a sense of color was, in a
fashion, comparable to, but not identical with, his psychedelic experiences.

Further experimentation was done in which he was asked to enter
Deep Reflection and to sense color, a prearranged signal for arousing In this portion of the article Erickson is presenting an important
being that of a handshake of his right hand. He complied readily and description of the process of assisting Huxley in shifting to a
when I judged that he was fully absorbed in his state of reflection, I shook representational system other than the one primarily associated with his
his left hand vigorously, then followed this with a hard pinching of the normal state of awareness - in this case, visual. The experience of color,
back of both hands that left deep fingernail markings. Huxley made no which Erickson requests Huxley "sense" as he re-enters Deep Reflection, is

response to th is physical stimulation, although his eyes were watched for an experience which is usually based on a visual representational system.

possible eyeball movements under the lids and his respiratory and pulse Erickson's chore of words here again show his refined sense of the use of

rates were checked for any changes. However, after about a minute he language and his principle of allowing the person he is working with

slowly drew his arms back along the arms of the chair where he had maximum freedom to respond. Erickson states, ". .. was asked to enter Deep

placed them before beginning his reflection state. They moved slowly Reflection and to sense color." Notice, not to see color but to sense color.

about an inch and then all movement ceased. Huxley, in fact, responds creatively with expressions such as:


37

[PAGE 038]

When he aroused, he had a vague recollection of having reviewed a
... Lost himself in a "sea of color"... . previous psychedelic experience but what he had experienced then or on the
immediate occasion he could not recall. Nor did he recall speaking aloud nor

Of sensing, feeling being color. . . making notations. When shown these, he found that they were so poorly
written that they could not be read. I read mine to him without eliciting any
An endless vista of color that is soft and gentle and yielding. . . memory traces.


Here Huxley's choice of predicates in these descriptions shows that he is Huxley's choice of predicates while in Deep Reflection reveal a
complete shift to the visual representational system:
in a transition state between his primary representational system -
kinesthetic (lost, feeling, soft, gentle, yielding) - and the representational
I overlooked that
system for the experience indirectly requested by Erickson - visual (e.g.,
... how different it appears
color, vista, color). Again, by allowing Huxley a maximum flexibility in
having this experience, Erickson uses Huxley's resources more fully than
I must look. ..
would be possible if he (Erickson) were more directive. Huxley is here,
by his use of mixed predicates, demonstrating a phenomenon often
In Erickson's inductions as well as in our own trance induction work, we
associated with creative activity - synesthesia, cross modality
notice a consistent pattern of the emergence of the visual representational
experiences. That these neural circuits are, in fact, available as the basis
system as primary as the client achieves more and more depth of hypnosis.
for this behavior has been established (see Magic II, Part III, and Bach-y-
One fascinating explanation of this pattern is that in a hypnotic induction the
Rit work referenced in the Bibliography).
hypnotist is attempting to communicate with the client's unconscious mind.
One of the ways in which the two cerebral hemispheres of humans differ is
As a final inquiry, Huxley was asked to enter the reflection state for
in their language and visual functions. In general, the hemisphere which has
the purpose of recalling the telephone call and the speciakdelivery letter
the language faculty is less developed with respect to making visual
incidents. His comment was that such a project should be "quite fruitful."
distinctions:
Despite repeated efforts, he would "come out of it" explaining, "There I
Each side of the brain is able to perform and chooses to
found myself without anything to do so I came out of it." His memories
perform a certain set of cognitive tasks which the other side
were limited to the accounts given to him by his wife and all details were
finds difficult, distasteful or both. In considering the nature
associated with her and not with any inner feelings of experience on h is
of the two sets of functions, it appears that they may be
part.
logically incompatible. The right (non-language, in most of
A final effort was made to discover whether or not Huxley could
the population) hemisphere synthesizes over space. The left
include another person in his state of Deep Reflection. This idea
(language, in most of the population) analyzes over time.
interested him at once and it was suggested that he enter the reflection
The right hemisphere notes visual similarities to the
state to review some of his psychedelic experiences. This he did in a most
exclusion of conceptual similarities. The left hemisphere
intriguing fashion. As the reflection state developed, Huxley, in an utterly
does the opposite. The right hemisphere perceives form, the
detached, dissociated fashion, began making fragmentary remarks,
left hemisphere, detail. The right hemisphere codes sensory
chiefly in the form of self-addressed comments. Thus he would say,
input in terms of images, the left hemisphere in terms of
making fragmentary notes with a pencil and paper quickly supplied to
linguistic descriptions. . . . This descrip tion of hemispheric
him, "most extraordinary. . . I overlooked that... How? .. . Strange I
behavior suggests that the Gestalt Laws of Perceptual
should have forgotten that (making a notation) . . . fascinating how
Organization pertain only to the mute hemisphere.
different it appears. . . I must look... ."
Jerre Levy, Psychobiological Implications of
38

[PAGE 039]

Bilateral Assymetry in Hemispheric Function in left foot, the left hand, or fingers of the left hand are moved,
the Human Brain, Dimond and Beaumont, p. impulses have been sent from the right half of the brain;
167. when the individual looks to the left, the impulses (or
connections) again go to the right half of the brain; and
In a more recent review of cerebral assymetry, Gardiner impulses conveying information from the left ear tend to go
to, or "favor," the right half of the brain. This principle of
(1975) comments:
contralateral (" opposite-side") representation applies
. . that each half of the brain controls the movements of the opposite
equally well to the right limbs of the body; functioning of
part of the body. When I he
the right hand or leg, and other organs on that side, is
controlled by the left half of the brain.
Gardiner, 1975, The Shattered Mind, p. 351.


If, when Erickson refers to "the unconscious part of the mind," he is
referring to the mute or non-dominant hemisphere, then the pattern of
emergence of the visual representational system which we have noted in
Erickson's work as well as our own is understandable. There are several
other patterns which we have noticed in our work which support this
interpretation.
First, in doing double inductions (trance inductions in which each of the
authors is speaking to the client simultaneously), the style of speech which
each of us uses varies by the ear into which we are speaking. Specifically, if
John is speaking into the ear which transmits information to the languge
hemisphere, he will speak in a style of syntax which is complex, using
ambiguity, for example, as a key technique, while Richard speaks to the
mute hemisphere in a style of syntax which is maximally simple - a style of
syntax which is not well-formed adu/t English but is well-formed baby
English. (We discuss this in more detail later.) Double trance inductions are
more rapid and the depth of trance more profound when we make this
hemispheric distinction than when we do not.
Secondly, one of the more reliable indications that a client is entering a
satisfactory state of trance is the coordinated appearance of movements of
the side of the body controlled by the non-dominant hemisphere.
Third, in the course of our therapeutic work, we have developed a
number of techniques to assist clients in rapidly developing representational
systems other than their most highly valued one.

Many times, in the course of teaching a client who has a most highly valued
representational system other than visual, we have noticed the client making
a distinction between "imaging a picture" and "seeing a picture." In the first
case, the client, typically, reports vague, relatively unfocused, schematized

39

[PAGE 040]

and unstable vis ual images, while in the second case, the images have the existence, but I do it solely to let those realizations, the thinking, the
focused, stable, full, rich, vivid properties of direct visual input. In every understandings, the memories seep into the work I'm planning to do without
case to date, the experience of "Imaging a picture" has associated with it a my conscious awareness of them. Fascinating. . . never stopped to realize
verbal, internal dialogue, while the vivid visualization has no internal that my Deep Reflection always preceded a period of intensive work wherein
verbal dialogue associated with it. Apparently, the first case is one in I was completely absorbed. . . . I say, no wonder I have an amnesia."
which the client is constructing a picture using his language system as the Later when we were examining each other's notebooks, Huxley
lead system, while the second is a direct accessing of pictures residing in manifested intense amazement and bewilderment at what I had recorded
the non-dominant hemisphere. Thus, one way which we have developed about the physical stimuli and for which he had no memory of any sort. He
to assist the client in coming to have the ability to visualize vividly is to knew that he had gone into Deep Reflection repeatedly at my request, had
teach him to shut down his internal verbal dialogue. Very often his first been both pleased and amazed at his subjective feelings of being lost in an
experiences with shutting down his internal dialogue leads to what all-absorbing sea of color, had sensed a certain timelessness, spacelessness
appears to us to be trance behavior. and had experienced a comfortable feeling of something meaningful about to
Fourth, in different places in Erickson's work, he makes very
happen. He reread my notations repeatedly in an endeavor to develop some
effective use of melodies as part of his induction. Melodies are stored in kind of a feeling of at least a vague memory of subjective awareness of the
the non-dominant hemisphere.
various physical stimuli I had given him. He also looked at the backs of his
Fifth, in the context of therapy one of the most effective techniques
hands to see the pinch marks but they had vanished. His final comment was,
of assisting a client in changing his model of the world is the Guided
"... extraordinary, most extraordinary, I say, utterly fascinating."
Fantasy (see Magic I, Chapter 6, and Magic II, Part I, for a detailed
When we agreed that, at least for the while, further inquiry
presentation) in which the client is typically asked to close his eyes and
into Deep Reflection might be postponed until later, Huxley declared
visualize a particular experience which will then assist him in changing.
again that his sudden realization of how much he had used it and how little
Our initial interest in hypnosis springs from our realization that our
he knew about it made him resolve to investigate much further into his "Deep
clients’ behavior during a Guided Fantasy was indistinguishable from
Reflection." The manner and means by which he achieved it, how it
descriptions of patients in medium and deep trance states. Next, and
constituted a form of preparation for absorbing himself in his writing and in
again in the therapeutic context, specifically when working with
what way it caused him to lose unnecessary contact with reality were all
polarities - polarities are the expression of two conflicting models of
problems of much interest to him.
behavior which the client has (see Magic II, Part III) - we have noted that
Huxley then suggested that an investigation be made of hypnotic states
one of the most immediate and effective ways of assisting the client in
of awareness by employing him as a subject. He asked permission to be
fully expressing and integrating his polarities is to insure that one of the
allowed to interrupt his trance states at will for purposes of discussion. This
polarities is using a visual representational system and the other either a
was in full accord with my own wishes.
kinesthetic or an auditory representational system. ''
He asked that first a light trance be induced, perhaps repeatedly, to
Finally, we have observed that clients executing post-hypnotic
permit an exploration of his subjective experiences. Since he had briefly been
suggestions often shift the predicates which they normally use to visual
a somnambulistic subject previously, he was carefully assured that this fact
predicates as they re-enter the trance state to execute the post-hypnotie
could serve to make him feel confident in arresting his trance states at any
suggestions.
level he wished. He did not recognize this as a simple, direct hypnotic
suggestion. In reading my notebook later I was much amused at how easily
A repetition yielded similar results with one exception. This was an
he had accepted an obvious suggestion without recognizing its character at
amazed expression of complete astonishment by Huxley suddenly
the time.
declaring, "I say, Milton, this is quite utterly amazing, most
He found several repetitions of the light trance interesting but "too
extraordinary. I use Deep Reflection to summon my memories, to put into
easily conceptualized." It is, he explained, "a simple withdrawal of interest
order all of my thinking, to explore the range, the extent of my mental

40

[PAGE 041]

from the outside to the inside." That is, one gives less and less attention the trance even though Huxley was fully cognizant of what was being said
to externalities and directs more and more attention to inner subjective and why. Similar results have been obtained with other highly intelligent
sensations. Externalities become increasingly fainter and more obscure, subjects.
inner subjective feelings more satisfying until a state of balance exists. In In experimenting with medium deep trances, Huxley, like other subjects
this state of balance, he had the feeling that, with motivation, he could with whom I have worked, experienced much more difficulty in reacting to
"reach out and seize upon reality,” that there is a definite retention of a and maintaining a fairly constant trance level. He found that he had a
grasp upon external reality but with no motivation to deal with it. Neither subjective need to go deeper in the trance and an intellectual need to stay at
did he feel a desire to deepen the trance. No particular change in this state the medium level. The result was that he found himself repeatedly "reaching
of balance seemed necessary and he noted that a feeling of contentment out for awareness" of his environment and this would initiate a light trance.
and relaxation accompanied it. He wondered if others experienced the He would then direct his attention to subjective comfort and find himself
same subjective reactions. developing a deep trance. Finally, after repeated experiments, he was given
Huxley requested that the light trance be induced by a great variety of both post-hypnotic and direct hypnotic suggestion to remain in a medium
techniques, some of them non-verbal. The results in each instance, deep trance. This he found he could do with very little concern then. He
Huxley felt strongly, were dependent entirely upon his mental set. He described the medium trance as primarily characterized by a most pleasing
found that he could accept "drifting along" (my phrase) in a light trance, subjective sense of comfort and a vague, dim, faulty awareness that there was
receptive of suggestions involving primarily responses at a subjective an external reality for which he felt a need for considerable motivation to be
level only. He found that an effort to behave in a direct relationship to the able to examine it. However, if he attempted to examine even a single item of
physical environment taxed his efforts and made him desire either to reality for its intrinsic value, the trance would immediately become
arouse from the trance or to go still deeper. He also, on his own initiative, increasingly lighter. On the other hand, when he examined an item of
set up his own problems to test his trance states. Thus, before entering the external reality for subjective values, for example, the soft comfort of the
light trance he would privately resolve to discuss a certain topic, relevant chair cushions as contrasted to the intrinsic quiet of the room, the trance
or irrelevant, with me at the earliest possible time or even at a fairly became deeper. But both light and deep trances were characterized by a need
remote time. I n such instances, Huxley found such unexpressed desires to sense external reality in some manner, not necessarily clearly but
deleterious to the maintenance of the trance. Similarly, any effort to nevertheless to retain some recognizable awareness of it.
include an item of reality not pertinent to his sense of subjective For both types of trance, experiments were carried out to discover what
satisfaction lessened the trance. hypnotic phenomena could be elicited in both light and medium deep trances.
At all times there persisted a "dim but ready" awareness that one This same experiment has been done with other good subjects and also with
could alter the state of awareness at will. Huxley, like others with whom I subjects who consistently developed only a light trance and with those who
have done similar studies, felt an intense desire to explore his sense of consistently did not seem to be able to go further than the medium trance. In
subjective comfort and satisfaction but immediately realized that this all such studies, the findings were the same, the most important seeming to
would lead to a deeper trance state. be the need of light and medium deep hypnotic subjects to retain at least
When Huxley was asked to formulate understandings of the means he some grasp upon external reality and to orient their trance state as a state
could employ by which he could avoid going into more than a light apart from external reality but with the orientation to such reality, however
trance, he stated that he did this by setting a given length of time during tenuous in character, sensed as available for immediate utilization by the
which he would remain in a light trance. This had the effect of making subject.
him more strongly aware that at any moment he could "reach out and Another item which Huxley discovered by his own efforts unguided by
seize external reality" and that his sense of subjective comfort and ease me and of which I was fully aware through work with other subjects, was
decreased. Discussion of this and repeated experimentation disclosed that that the phenomena of deep hypnosis can be developed in both the light and
carefully worded suggestions serving to emphasize the availability of the medium trance. Huxley, having observed deep hypnosis, wondered about
external reality and to enhance subjective comfort could serve to deepen the possibility of developing hallucinatory phenomena in the light trance. He

4]

[PAGE 042]

attempted this by the measure of enjoying his subjective state of physical felt that vivid memories were playing too large a part. Hence he deliberately
comfort and adding to it an additional subjective quality, namely, a decided to visualize a flower but the thought occurred to him that, even as a
pleasant gustatory sensation. He found it quite easy to hallucinate vividly sense of movement played a part in auditory hallucinations, he might employ
various taste sensations while wondering vaguely what I would think if I a similar measure to develop a visual hallucination. At the moment, so he
knew what he was doing. He was not aware of his increased swallowing recalled after arousing from the trance and while discussing his experience,
when he did this. From gustatory sensations he branched out to olfactory he wondered if I had ever built up hallucinations in my subjects by
hallucinations both pleasant and unpleasant. He did not realize that he combining various sensory fields of experience. I told him that that was a
betrayed this by the flaring of his nostrils. His thinking at the time, so he standard procedure for me.
subsequently explained, was that he had the "feeling" that hallucinations He proceeded with this visual hallucination by "feeling" his head turn
of a completely "inner type of process," that is, occurring within the body from side to side and up and down to follow a barely visible, questionably
itself, would be easier than those in which the hallucination appeared to visible, rhythmically moving object. Very shortly the object became
be external to the body. From olfactory hallucinations he progressed to increasingly more visible until he saw a giant rose, possibly three feet in
kinesthetic, proprioceptive and, finally, tactile sensations. In the diameter. This he did not expect and thus he was certain at once that it was
kinesthetic hallucinatory sensation experience he hallucinated taking a not a vivified memory but a satisfactory hallucination. With this realization
long walk but remaining constantly aware that I was present in some came the realization that he might very well add to the hallucination by
vaguely sensed room. Momentarily he would forget about me and his adding olfactory hallucinations of an intense "unroselike" sickeningly sweet
hallucinated walking would become most vivid. He recognized this as an odor. This effort was also most successful. After experimenting with various
indication of the momentary develo pment of a deeper trance state which hallucinations, Huxley aroused from his trance and discussed extensively
he felt obligated to remember to report to me during the discussion after
what he had accomplished. He was pleased to learn that his experimental
his arousal. He was not aware of respiratory and pulse changes during the findings without any coaching or suggestions from me were in good accord
hallucinatory walk.
with planned experimental findings with other subjects.
When he first tried for visual and auditory hallucnations, he found
them much more difficult and the effort tended to lighten and to abolish
Here we find Erickson presenting one of the clearest examples
his trance state. He finally reasoned that if he could hallucinate rhythmical
movements of his body, he could then "attach" an auditory hallucination
of the systematic understanding and use of representational systems.
to this hallucinated body sensation. The measure proved most successful
Huxley is interested in determining whether he can experience hallucinatory
and again he caught himself wondering if I could hear the music. His phenomena in both light and medium trance. Huxley himself is behaving
breathing rate changed and slight movements of his head were observed.
consistently with the principles mentioned above. First, being in a
From simple music he proceeded to a hallucination of opera singing and
light/medium trance, his initial behavior is still in large part conscious - he
then finally a mumbling of words which eventually seemed to become my correspondingly utilizes his most highly valued representational system,
voice questioning him about Deep Reflection. I could not recognize what kinesthetic, as the lead representational system to assist himself in
was occurring. developing hallucinations in the other representational systems.
From this he proceeded to visual hallucinations. An attempt to open
his eyes nearly aroused him from his trance state. Thereafter he kept his ... Enjoying his subjective state of physical comfort and adding to
eyes closed for both light and medium deep trance activities. His first it.
visual hallucination was a vivid flooding of his mind with an intense
sense of pastel colors of changing hues and with a wavelike motion. He an additional subjective quality, namely, a pleasant gustatory
related this experience to his Deep Reflection experiences with me and sensation.
also to his previous psychedelic experiences. He did not consider this
experience sufficiently valid for his purposes of the moment because he
42

[PAGE 043]

... From gustatory sensations he branched out to olfactory This experience with Mary Lou shows the use of Meta-Tactic III. The
hallucinations. . . therapist notices a sudden shift in a client's behavior. Making use of the
representational system in which this sudden shift occurs as a basis from
From olfactory hallucinations he progressed to kinesthetic, which to build a more complete reference structure (see Chapter 6, Magic I),
proprioceptive and finally tactile sensations. the therapist finds a point of overlap between the representational system in
which the shift took place and the representational system which the theraFurther, Huxley spontaneously arrives at a technique which we have pist chooses to add. In this case, since the initial representational system was
formalized in the context of assisting people in developing additional auditory (specifically, the voice of another person), the therapist had the
maps or representational systems for organizing their experience - client form a visual image of the mouth which was creating that voice. Once
specifically, using a lead representational system to develop another a portion of the new representational system is tied to the initial
representational system by finding a point of overlap or intersection representational system, the therapist can work with he client to fully
between the two. develop the new representational system. The consequence of this Meta-
Tactic is dramatically to expand the client's representation of the experience
Mary Lou, a woman in her middle 40's, was working in a Therapist which is causing her difficulty. This expanded representation allows the
Training Group. In the process of expressing her difficulties, the client an expanded model of the world and, from this, more choices in
therapist noticed that each time that she expressed some comment which coping in her life.
was critical of her own behavior, Mary Lou's voice quality (tonality) Huxley is systematically applying Meta-Tactic III to assist himself in
changed. She literally spoke with a different voice. The therapist then developing hallucinations in representational systems other than his primary
asked Mary Lou to repeat a number of the critical remarks. As she did, ones, as the description indicates:
the therapist asked her to be aware of her voice. As she finished
repeating the critical remarks, the therapist leaned forward and asked her . reasoned that if he could hallucinate rhythmic
whose voice that was. She replied at once that it was her father's voice. movements of his body he could then "attach" an auditory
At this point the therapist asked her to close her eyes and to hear that hallucination to this hallucinated body sensation . . . even
same voice inside her head. She was able to do this easily. Next, the as a sense of movement played a part in auditory
therapist instructed her as she listened to her father's voice to see her hallucinations, he might employ a similar measure to
father's mouth moving, the lips forming the words. As she accomplished develop a visual hallucination.
this, she was then instructed to see the remainder of her father's face.
The therapist continued to work with Mary Lou, using her father's voice Equally remarkable, in our opinion, is Erickson's finely developed
to lead her in constructing a full visual representation which matched the ability to make visual distinctions and to understand, with a minimum of
voice she continued to hear inside her head. Once the visual and cues, the experience which Huxley is having:
auditory representations were coordinated, the therapist used the
material as a basis for an enactment in which Mary Lou played both ... hallucinate vividly various taste sensations while wondering
herself and her father. vaguely what I would think if I knew what he was doing. He was
Thus, in this final phase, all three of the representational systems were not aware of his increased swallowing when he did this. . .
brought into play - auditory, visual and kinesthetic. The enactment branched out to olfactory hallucinations. .. . He did not realize that
technique, based on using an auditory representation initially and then he betrayed this by the flaring of his nostrils.
adding the other representational systems (visual and kinesthetic) to it -
that is, Meta-Tactic III - enabled Mary Lou to confront and overcome Erickson's ability to identify and understand the meaning of the detailed
some formerly severe blocks to her further growth. movements of Huxley's body leaves no doubt about his (Erickson's) explicit
understanding of the use and power of representational systems as an

[PAGE 044]

organizing principle in human experience. As he states: of completing the paragraph mentally, beginning the next, then turning back
mentally to the preceding paragraph and then "making a guess." When
.. . he [Huxley] wondered if I had ever built up hallucinations in restricted to the same length of time he had employed in the light trance, he
my subjects by combining various sensory fields of experience. I failed in each instance. When allowed to take whatever length of time he
told him that that was a standard procedure for me. wished, he could reach an accuracy of about 40 percent, but the books had to
be ones more recently read than those used for the light trance state.
This discussion raised the question of anesthesia, amnesia,
dissociation, depersonalization, regression, time distortion, hypermnesia Here, again, we find behavior supporting the pattern discussed
(an item difficult to test with Huxley because of his phenomenal previously. In the light trance state, Huxley has access to functions which
memory) and an exploration of past repressed events. are localized in the non-dominant hemisphere:
Of these, Huxley found that anesthesia, amnesia, time distortion, and
hypermnesia were possible in the light trance. The other phenomena ... The page number "flashed" (a visual predicate) into his mind in
were conducive to the development of 11 deep trance with any earnest the light trance state.
effort to achieve them.
The anesthesia he developed in the light trance was most effective However, when the same task is attempted in the waking state or the
for selected parts of the body. When generalized anesthesia from the normal state of awareness - in Huxley's case, in the state in which the
neck down was attempted, Huxley found himself "slipping" into a deep kinesthetic representational system is dominant - no visual images are
trance. available:
The amnesia, like the anesthesia, was effective when selective in
character. Any effort to have a total amnesia resulted in a progression ... In the waking state he had to follow a mechanical
toward a deep trance. procedure of completing the paragraph mentally, beginning
Time distortion was easily possible and Huxley offered the statement the next, then...
that he was not certain but that he felt strongly that he had long employed
time distortion in Deep Reflection, although his first formal introduction I Notice that, in general, Huxley is unable to match his performance in the
to the concept had been through me. light trance state when in the waking state. The task, of course, is one of
Hypermnesia, so difficult to test because of his extreme capacity to visual recall - a function of the non-dominant hemisphere.
recall past events, was tested upon my suggestion by asking him in the
light trance state to state promptly upon request on what page of various Huxley then proceeded to duplicate in the medium trance all that he
of his books certain paragraphs could be found. At the first request, had done in the light trance. He accomplished similar tasks much more
Huxley aroused from the light trance and explained, "Really now, easily but constantly experienced a feeling of "slipping" into a deeper trance.
Milton, I can't do that. I can with effort recite most of that book, but the Huxley and I discussed this hypnotic behavior of his at very
page number for a paragraph is not exactly cricket." Nevertheless, he considerable length with Huxley making most of the notations since only he
went back into a light trance, the name of the volume was given, a few could record his own subjective experience in relation to the topics
lines of a paragraph were read aloud to him, whereupon he was to give discussed. For this reason the discussion here is limited.
the page number on which it appeared. He succeeded in definitely better We then turned to the question of deep hypnosis. Huxley developed
than 65 percent in an amazingly prompt fashion. Upon awakening from easily a profound somnambulistic trance in which he was completely
the light trance, he was instructed to remain in the state of conscious disoriented spontaneously for time and place. He was able to open his eyes
awareness and to execute the same task. To his immense astonishment he but described his field of vision as being a "well of light" which included me,
found that, while the page number "flashed" into his mind in the light the chair in which I sat, himself and his chair. He remarked at once upon the
trance state, in the waking state he had to follow a methodical procedure remarkable spontaneous restriction of his vision, and disclosed an awareness

44

[PAGE 045]

that, for some reason unknown to him, he was obligated to "explain away. Later the same inquiry was made in a casual indifferent fashion, "Tell
things" to me. Careful questioning disclosed him to have an amnesia me now what is that just about 15 feet in front of you?" He replied, despite
about what had been done previously, nor did he have any awareness of his previous answer, "A table." "Anything else?" "Yes." "What else?" "A
our joint venture. His feeling that he must explain things became a casual book." (This was nearer to him than was the vase.) "Anything else?" "Yes."
willingness as soon as he verbalized it. One of his first statements was, "Tell me now." "A vase." "Anything else?" "Yes." "Tell me now." "A spot."
"Really, you know, I can't understand my situation or why you are here, "Anything else?" "No."
wherever that may be, but I must explain things to you." He was assured
that I understood the situation and that I was interested in receiving any Now Huxley has fully entered the deep trance state. One of the more
explanation he wished to give me and told that I might make requests of interesting differences in the linguistic behavior of subjects in profound
him. Most casually, indifferently he acceded, but it was obvious that he somnambulistic trances as opposed to either normal states of consciousness
was enjoying a state of physical comfort in a contented, passive manner. or behavior during trance induction in the light and medium states of trance
He answered questions simply and briefly, giving literally and occurs here. In states of consciousness associated with hypnosis other than
precisely no more and no less than the literal significance of the question deep somnambulistic trance and in normal states of awareness, people will
implied. In other words, he showed the same precise literalness found in respond to certain sentences which are in the form of questions as though
other subjects, perhaps more so because of his knowledge of semantics. they were commands. For example, the typical response of an adult speaker
He was asked, "What is to my right?" His answer was simply, "I of English to questions such as:
don't know." "Why?" "I haven't looked." "Will you do so?" "Yes."
"Now!" "How far do you want me to look?" This was not an unexpected Can you place your hands on your thighs? Are your hands on your
inquiry since I have encountered it innumerable times. Huxley was simply thighs?
manifesting a characteristic phenomenon of the deep somnambulistic
trance in which visual awareness is restricted in some inexplicable is to respond as though they had been given the command:
manner to those items pertinent to the trance situation. For each chair,
couch, footstool I wished him to see, specific instructions were required. Place your hands on your thighs!
As Huxley explained later, "I had to look around until gradually it [the
specified object] slowly came into view, not all at once, but slowly as if it Specifically, the typical response for the person to whom the questions are
were materializing. I really believe that I felt completely at ease without a directed 1s to place their hands on their thighs. Within the transformational
trace of wonderment as I watched things materialize. I accepted linguistics model of language these phenomena are known as conversational
everything as a matter of course.” Similar explanations have been postulates (see Lakoff and Gordon, 1973, for example, for a formal
received from hundreds of subjects. Yet experience has taught me the treatment). Essentially, the process works as follows: If I desire to have you
importance of my assumption of the role of a purely passive inquirer, one perform some act but I do not wish to order you directly to perform it, I may
who asks a question solely to receive an answer regardless of its content. select anyone of the presuppositions of the command which I want you to
An intonation of interest in the meaning of the answer is likely to induce carry out, and ask you that presupposition in the form of a yes-no question.

the subject to respond as if he had been given instructions concerning (See Magic !, Chapters 3 and 4 and Appendix B, and also Appendix of this
what answer to give. In therapeutic work I use intonations to influence Volume, for a presentation of the formal notion of presupposition.)

more adequate personal responses by the patient. Specifically, one of the presuppositions of the command:

With Huxley I tested this by enthusiastically asking, "What, tell me
Place your hands on your thighs
now, is that which is just about 15 feet in front of you?" The correct
answer should have been, "A table." Instead, the answer received was" A
table with a book and a vase on it." Both the book and the vase were on is that you are able, you can, place your hands on your thighs. Since this is a
presupposition of the command, by simply asking you whether or not you
the table but on the far sde of the table and hence more than 15 feet
45

[PAGE 046]

are able to do it, I communicate the command "politely" in the form of a and Huxley responds neither by immediately listing what items are located
question. there nor by looking to see what is located there but rather:


Command Presupposition I don't know


Place your hands on You can place your hands
As Erickson comments, this ability of the subject in a profound
your thighs! on your thighs. somnambulistic trance to respond to the literal Deep Structure meaning of
the sentence is an excellent indicator that the subject is in deep trance. Thus,
by the principle of one excellent test for the depth of trance in many subjects will be their
conversational postulates ability not to respond to the additional meaning given by the conversational
postulates. An examination of Erickson's induction techniques reveals a
Can you place your Place your hands on your consistent use of conversational postulates during trance induction. This is
hands on your thighs? thighs! consistent with his usual emphasis on a permissive rather than an
authoritarian approach to induction. By using yes-no question forms to
Developing the linguistic terminology further, we have the notions of communicate commands, he bypasses the issue of control and resistance as
Surface Structure - the actual form that the sentence which is spoken has he gives no direct commands to the client. Furthermore, consistent with his
- and Deep Structure - the representation of the meaning which the emphasis on the importance of distinguishing between trance induction and
Surface Structure has. What makes these types of sentences peculiar is behavior in the trance state, this linguistic distinction is useful in
that they have an effect different from the effect that the meaning of the determining where in the process the client is at a given point in time. In
Deep Structure represents. In other words, the recovery of the literal Deep addition, notice that the behavior of the subject in ignoring the conversaStructure from the Surface Structure is the normal process by which we tional postulate when in deep trance is totally congruent with his experience
understand another person's communication. However, in these particular at a previous point in his life history, namely, childhood. This technique,
cases, we have an additional step in the recovery of meaning. then, supports the tendency in subjects who enter deep trance to experience
Specifically, if the literal Deep Structure meaning is a yes-no question age regression.
form of a presupposition of a command, then we understand the force of Notice that when Huxley enters deep trance, he becomes able to make
the communication to be that command rather than the literal question visual distinctions which he normally has no choice about. Erickson states
meaning of the Deep Structure. that this is "a characteristic phenomenon of the deep somnambulistic trance."
Similarly, when one person asks another the question: What is to my This becomes understandable in the context of the remarks made previously
right? the typical response is either an immediate list of the items located regarding cerebral assymetry.
to the right of the questioner, in the event that the person responding
knows what is there, or the person responding will look to see what is This literalness and this peculiar restriction of awareness to those items
located there in the event he didn't yet know. However, there are two of reality constituting the precise hypnotic situation [are] highly definitive of
conditions which we have identified in which a speaker of the language a satisfactory somnambulistic hypnotic trance. Along with the visual
consistently will fail to respond in this manner: either when the speaker is restriction, there is also an auditory restriction of such character that sounds,

in a profound somnambulistic trance or when the speaker is a child. even those originating between the operator and the subject, seem to be
totally outside the hypnotic situation. Since there was no assistant present,
Erickson questions Huxley, who is in a profound somnambulistic trance,
this auditory restriction could not be tested. However, by means of a black
with:
thread not visible to the eye, a book was toppled from the table behind him
What is to my right? against his back. Slowly, as if he had experienced an itch, Huxley raised his
hand and scratched his shoulder. There was no startle reaction. This, too, is

46

[PAGE 047]

characteristic of the response made to many unexpected physical stimuli. instructions given. Hence he sat helplessly unable to stand, unable to
They are interpreted in terms of past body experience. Quite frequently, as recognize why. This same measure has been employed to demonstrate a
a part of developing a deep somnambulistic trance, subjects will saddle block anesthesia before medical groups. The subject in the deep trance
concomitantly develop a selective general anesthesia for physical stimuli is carefully positioned, a casual conversation is then conducted, the subject is
not constituting a part of the hypnotic situation, physical stimuli in then placed in rapport with another subject who is asked to exchange seats
particular that do not permit interpretation in terms of past experience. with the first subject. The second subject steps over only to stand helplessly
This could not be tested in the situation with Huxley since an assistant is while the first subject discovers that she is (1) unable to move, and (2) that
necessary to make adequate tests without distorting the hypnotic situation. shortly the loss of inability to stand results in a loss of orientation to the
One illustrative measure I have used 1s to pass a threaded needle through a lower part of her body and a resulting total anesthesia without anesthesia
coat sleeve while positioning the arms and then having an assistant saw having been mentioned even in the preliminary discussion of hypnosis. This
back and forth on the thread from a place of concealment. Often a unnoticed use of catalepsy not recognized by the subject is a most effective
spontaneous anesthesia would keep the subject unaware of the stimulus. measure in deepening trance states.
Various simple measures are easily devised. Huxley was amazed at his loss of mobility and became even more so
Huxley was then gently indirectly awakened from the trance by the when he discovered a loss of orientation to the lower part of his body and he
simple suggestion that he adjust himself in his chair to resume the exact was most astonished when I demonstrated for him the presence of a
physical and mental state he had had at the decision to discontinue until profound anesthesia. He was much at loss to understand the entire sequence
later any further experimental study of Deep Reflection. of events. He did not relate the
Huxley's response was an immediate arousal and he promptly stated comfortable positioning of his body to the unobtrusively induced catalepsy
that he was all set to enter deep hypnosis. While this statement in itself with its consequent anesthesia.
indicated profound post-hypnotic amnesia, delaying tactics were He was aroused from the trance state with persistent catalepsy,
employed in the guise of discussion of what might possibly be done. In anesthesia and a total amnesia for all deep trance experiences. He
this way it became possible to mention various items of his deep trance spontaneously enlarged the instruction to include all trance experiences,
behavior. Such mention evoked no memories and Huxley's discussion of possibly because he did not hear my instructions sufficiently clear.
the points raised showed no sophistication resulting from his deep trance Immediately he reoriented himself to the time at which we had been working
behavior. He was as uninformed about the details of his deep trance with Deep Reflection. He was much at loss to explain his immobile state, and
behavior as he had been be fore the deep trance had been induced. he expressed curious wonderment about what he had done in the Deep
There followed more deep trances by Huxley in which, avoiding all Reflection state, from which he assumed he had just emerged, and what had
personal significances, he was asked to develop partial, selective, and led to such inexplicable manifestations for the first time in all of his
total post-hypnotic amnesias (by partial is meant a part of the total experience. He became greatly interested, kept murmuring such comments as
experience, by selective amnesia is meant an amnesia for selected, "Most extraordinary" while he explored the lower part of his body with his
perhaps interrelated, items of experience), a recovery of the amnestic hands and eyes. He noted that he could tell the position of his feet only with
material and a loss of the recovered material. He developed also his eyes, that there was a profound immobility from the waist down, and he
catalepsy, tested by "arranging" him comfortably in a chair and then discovered, while attempting futilely because of the catalepsy to move his leg
creating a situation constituting a direct command to rise from the chair with his hands, that a state of anesthesia existed. This he tested variously,
("take the book on that table there and place it on the desk over there and asking me to furnish him with various things in order to make his test. For
do it now"). By this means Huxley found himself, inexplicably to him, example, he asked that ice be applied to his bare ankle by me since he could
unable to arise from the char and unable to understand why this was so. not bend sufficiently to do so. Finally, after much study he turned to me,
(The "comfortable arrangement" of his body had resulted in a positioning remarking, "I say, you look cool and most comfortable while I am in a most
that would have to be corrected before he could arise from the chair and extraordinary predicament. I deduce that in some subtle way you have
no implied suggestions for such correction were to be found in the
47

[PAGE 048]

distracted and disturbed my sense of body awareness. I say, is this state she was dressed as she had been just before her departure and not as I had
anything like hypnosis?" seen her earlier. Hence, it was reasonable to assume that she was a reality.
Restoration of his memory delighted him, but he remained entirely After a brief thoughtful pause, he returned to his "conversation" with her,
at loss concerning the genesis of his catalepsy and his anesthesia. He apparently continuing to hallucinate replies. Finally I attracted his attention
realized, however, that some technique of communication had been and made a hand gesture suggestive of a disappearance toward the chair in
employed to effect the results achieved but he did not succeed in the which he "saw" his wife. To his complete astonishment he saw her slowly
association of the positioning of his body with the final results. fade away. Then he turned to me and asked that I awaken him with a full
memory of the experience. This I did and he discussed the experience at
Here Erickson constructs an experience for Huxley which is the some length, making many special notations in his notebook, elaborating
formal equivalent in the kinesthetic representational system of the failure them with the answers to questions he put to me. He was amazed to discover
of the subject in deep trance to respond to conversational postulates in that when I asked [him] to awaken with a retention of the immobility and
the linguistic system. By arranging Huxley's body in a position from anesthesia, he thought he had awakened but that the trance state had, to him,
which it is not possible for him to respond directly to the command for a unrecognizably persisted.
specific movement and then giving Huxley that command, Erickson He then urged further work on hypnotic hallucinatory experiences and a
demonstrates kinesthetically the same formal phenomenon as the great variety (positive and negative visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory,

subject's inability to respond unless each portion of the sequence of tactile, kinesthetic, temperature, hunger, satiety, fatigue, weakness, profound
behavior is made perfectly explicit. In the case of conversational excited expectation, etc.) were explored. He proved to be most competent in

postulates, the literal meaning of the Deep Structure only is responded to, all regards and it was noted that his pulse rate would change as much as

not the force of the sentence given by the literal Deep Structure meaning twenty points when he was asked to hallucinate the experience of mountain
climbing in a profound state of weariness. He volunteered in his discussion
plus the meaning derived from it by the mechanism of conversational
of these varied experiences the information that, while a negative
postulates. In a formally parallel manner, since not all portions of the
hallucination could be achieved readily in a deep trance, t would be most
sequence of kinesthetic steps in the carrying out of the
difficult in a light or medium trance because negative hallucinations were
command are given explicitly, Huxley is paralyzed. The normal states of
most destructive of reality values, even those of the hypnotic situation. That
consciousness mechanisms which allow a person to supply for himself
is, with induced negative hallucinations, he found that I was blurred in
the kinesthetic steps not explictly presented but implied by the
outline even though he could develop a deep trance with a negative
command are not available to Huxley. This area of deep trance behavior
hallucination inherent in that deep trance for all external reality except the
requires more thorough investigation prior to formalization.
realities of the hypnotic situation which would remain clear and well defined
Further experimentation in the deep trance investigated visual,
unless suggestions to the contrary were offered. Subsequent work with other
auditory and other types of ideosensory hallucinations. One of the
subjects confirmed this finding by Huxley. I had not previously explored this
measures employed was to pantomime hearing a door open and
matter of negative hallucinations in light and medium trances.
then to appear to see someone entering the room, to arise in courtesy and
At this point, Huxley recalled his page number identification in the
to indicate a chair, then to turn to Huxley to express the hope that he was
lighter trance states during the inquiry into hypermnesia and he asked that he
comfortable. He replied that he was and he expressed surprise at his
be subjected to similar tests in deep hypnosis. Together we searched the
wife's unexpected return since he had expected her to be absent the entire
library shelves, finally selecting several books that Huxley was certain he
day. (The chair I had indicated was one I knew his wife liked to occupy.)
must have read many years previously but which he had not touched for
He conversed with her and apparently hallucinated replies. He was
twenty or more years. (One, apparently, he had never read, the other five he
interrupted with the question of how he knew that it was his wife and not
had.)
a hypnotic hallucination. He examined the question thoughtfully, then
In a deep trance with his eyes closed, Huxley listened intently, as I
explained that I had not given him any suggestion to hallucinate his wife,
opened the book at random and read a half dozen lines from a selected
that I had been as much surprised by her arrival as he had been, and that

48

[PAGE 049]

paragraph. For some, he identified the page number almost at once and coded information from the distant past is a compelling example of the
then he would hallucinate the page, and "read" it from the point where I kinds of memories which become available to the subject in deep trance. It
had stopped. Additionally, he identified the occasion on which he read is especially suggestive to us that the deeper the trance - the more distinct
the book. Two of the books he recalled consulting fifteen years from Huxley's normal state of awareness - the more available becomes the
previously. [For] another two he found it difficult to give the correct page visually stored material of the non-dominant hemisphere. Huxley's
number and then only approximating the page number. He could not characterization of the differences between his experience of Deep
hallucinate the printing and could only give little more than a summary of Reflection and deep trance also indicates a similar trend:
the thought content; but this, in essence, was correct. He could not
identify when he had read them but he was certain it was more than Description of Deep Reflection Description of deep trance
twenty-five years previously. ... gave him certain inner ... offered only a wealth of
Huxley, in the post-trance discussion, was most amazed by his feelings. .. new points of view. . .
performance [of] a memory feat but commented upon the experience as . . feeling through by means of... not give him an inner
primarily intellectual with the recovered memories lacking in any Deep Reflection. . . feeling. ..
emotional significances of belonging to him as a person. This led to a
This characterization suggests hat one of the differences between Deep
general discussion of hypnosis and Deep Reflection with a general
Reflection and deep trance for Huxley is the extent to which the nonfeeling of inadequacy on Huxley's part concerning proper
dominant hemisphere is accessed in these altered states of consciousness. .
conceptualization of his experiences for comparison of values. While
Huxley was most delighted with his hypnotic experiences for their
interest and the new understandings they offered him, he was also
somewhat at a loss. He felt that, as a purely personal experience, he
derived certain unidentifiable subjective values from Deep Reflection not
actually obtainable from hypnosis which offered mly a wealth of new
points of view. Deep Reflection, he declared, gave him certain inner
enduring feelings that seemed to play some significant part in his pattern
of living. During this discussion he suddenly asked if hypnosis could be
employed to permit him to explore his psychedelic experiences. His
request was met but upon arousal from the trance he expressed the
feeling that the hypnotic experience was quite different than was a
comparable "feeling through" by means of Deep Reflection. He
explained that the hypnotic exploration did not give him an inner feeling,
that is, a continuing subjective feeling, of just being in the midst of his
psychedelic experience, that there was an ordered intellectual content
paralleling the "feeling content" while Deep Reflection established a
profound emotional background of a stable character upon which he
could "consciously lay effortlessly an intellectual display of ideas" to
which the reader would make full response. This discussion Huxley
brought to a close by the thoughtful comment that his brief intensive
experience with hypnosis had not yet begun to digest and that he could
not expect to offer an intelligent comment without much more thought.

Huxley's dramatic performance in his ability to access visually

49

[PAGE 050]

He asked urgently that further deep hypnosis be done with him in First the noun phrase the depth is what is called in the Meta-model created
which more complex phenomena be induced to permit him to explore in Magic I a nominalization. That is, in its Deep Structure representation,

himself more adequately as a person. After a rapid mental review of this noun phrase was a predicate - a word which originally represented a

what had been done and what might yet be done, I decided upon the relationship or process. Through the transformational processes available in
desirability of a deep trance state with the possibility of a two-state natural language systems, this predicate appears as the name of a thing in
the Surface Structure which Erickson uses. Perhaps a non-hypnotic example
dissociative regression; that is, of the procedure of regressing him by
will be of assistance. Consider the two sentences:
dissociating him from a selected recent area of his life experience so that
he could view it as an onlooker from the orientation of another relatively
recent area of life experience. The best way to do this I felt would be by There was a chair in the house. There was frustration in the house.
a confusion technique. '* This decision to employ a confusion technique
was influenced in large part by the author's awareness of Huxley's In Magic I, we developed a number of tests to assist therapists in sharpening
unlimited intellectual capacity and curiosity which would aid greatly by their intuitions in identifying nominalization. For example, if your most

leading Huxley to add to the confusion technique verbalizations other highly valued representational system is visual, you may test to determine
possible elaborate meanings and significances and associations, thereby whether each of the noun phrases in a sentence is a nominalization by
actually supplementing in effect my own efforts. Unfortunately, there imaging a silver-green wheelbarrow and in your mind's eye attempting to
was no tape recorder present to preserve the details of the actual visualize placmg each of the things referred to by the noun phrases in a
suggestions which were to the effect that Huxley go ever deeper and sentence into that wheelbarrow. If you are able to do this, the noun phrase is

deeper into a trance until "the depth was a part and apart" from him, that not a nominalization; otherwise it is. Using the above sentences as an

before him would appear in "utter clarity, in living reality, in impossible example, each of you will be able to visualize placing a chair into a
actuality, that which once was, but which now in the depths of the wheelbarrow but not a frustration. This indicates that the word chair isa
trance, will, in bewildering confrontation, challenge all of your true noun but that the word frustration is a nominalization - a noun which is
memories and understandings." This was a purposely vague yet derived from a predicate.

permissively comprehensive suggestion and I simply relied upon One of the characteristics of nominalizations is that they carry less
Huxley's intelligence to elaborate it with an extensive meaningfulness information than is available. Read through the following sentences, paying

for himself which I could not even attempt to guess. There were, of attention to the information associated with the predicatefrustrate in each of

course, other suggestions but they centered in effect upon the suggestion its forms:

enclosed in the quotation above. What I had in mind was not a defined
situation but a setting of the stage so that Huxley himself would be led That Betty frustrated Max was obvious. That Max was frustrated

to define the task. I did not even attempt to speculate upon what my was obvious. The frustration was obvious.
suggestions might mean to Huxley.
In the first sentence, the word frustrate appears in its verb form and it states
Erickson now introduces what he calls his confusion technique.’ that there is a person (named Betty) who is frustrating another person
The name confusion technique covers a wide range of phenomena. Here (named Max). In the second sentence one of the pieces of information
we will extract only some of the patterns as we will return again and associated with the predicate frustrate is missing - in the linguistic model,
again to this technique, each time isolating' additional patterns. The first this is called deletion, the process of the removal of portions of the full
of the quoted material by Erickson is the seven-word sentence: linguistic representation of the sentence. In the third sentence, both of the
pieces of information associated with the predicate frustrate arc missing,
and the form of the predicate has been changed into a noun form. From the
The depth was a part and apart
third sentence alone it is not possible to determine who is frustrating whom
50

[PAGE 051]

- all of that information has been deleted. When the information linguistically, is the process of nominalization - the linguistic process of
normally carried by a predicate has been deleted in this way, and the representing a process as an event. As shown by the frustration and depth
form of the predicate changed into a noun form, then the result is said to examples, the other two modeling processes are typically involved when the
lack a referential index - that is, the word frustration does not pick out or process of nominalization occurs. The predicate frustrate is used in the
refer to a portion of our experience in its nominal form. Since it has no sentence:
referential index, such a nominal invites projections or hallucinations on
the part of the listener. In a way exactly parallel to the nominalization
The frustration was obvious.
frustration, the word depth has had the information associated with it
deleted and it, therefore, has no referential index. Since it fails to have a in a nominalized form. In the Deep Structure of the sentence in which the
referential index, it invites interpretation, projection and hallucination on nominal frustration occurred, there was the additional information of who or
the part of the listener. what was frustrating whom (actually requires an additional distinction in
One of the requirements of the statements which the hypnotist makes reference structure). Both of these pieces fail to be represented in the
to the client is that these statements be in agreement with or congruent Surface Structure. Similarly, with the nominalization depth, the Surface
with the ongoing experience of the client. We refer to this as pacing. Structure contains no information regarding what depth or whose depth. In
There are several ways in which this may be accomplished by the other words, the linguistic process of deletion has occurred, removing some
hypnotist. The hypnotist may restrict himself to verbal descriptions of of the information. As the information is deleted and thereby fails to occur
precisely those things which he can directly observe. For example, in the actual utterance by the hypnotist, the sentence itself carries no
frequently, as part of an induction, the hypnotist will include statements referential index which picks out a specific experience. Rather the resulting
such as: phrase the depth becomes a possible description of a wide range of
experiences for the listener. This leaves the client a great number of choices
... breathing in. . . and out Reading left to right of interpretation, hallucination, or projection. By this device the client is
more actively engaged in the process of trance induction or deep trance
where he is careful to time his pronunciation of the words in and out to behavior. In addition, of course, the hypnotist successfully paces the client's
match the actual inhalations and exhalations of the client. Or, in the case experience. By skillfully employing the three processes of human modeling
of a standard hand levitation, the hypnotist will include typically - in this case, the specific linguistic mechanisms of these three processes:
statements such as: nominalization, transformational deletion, and lack of referential index - it is
possible for the hypnotist to successfully pace the client's experience without
knowing what it is. This allows the hypnotist an infinite range of choices in
... lifting, a sudden twitch. . . even higher. . .
his verbalizations. As Erickson says:
when these descriptive words are said by the hypnotist precisely at the
point wherein the client's hand is, in fact, lifting, twitching, etc.
. . a confusion technique. . . would aid greatly by leading Huxley
Another excellent technique for pacing is for the hypnotist to use to add to the confusion technique verbalizations other possible
verbal descriptions which allow the client to hallucinate or project his elaborate meanings and significances, and associations, thereby
ongoing experience onto the descriptions being used. The skillful actually supplementing in effect my own efforts. . . This was a
hypnotist employing this pacing technique makes full use of the purposely vague yet permissively comprehensive suggestion and I
universal processes of human modeling - deletion, distortion, and simply relied on Huxley's intelligence to elaborate it with extensive
generalization. As we describe at length in Magic J, Chapters 2, 3 and 4, meaningfulness for himself which I could not even attempt to
within the language system which each of us uses to communicate -there guess... . I did not even attempt to speculate what my suggestions
are a number of distortion mechanisms. Perhaps the most severe of these, might mean to Huxley.


51

[PAGE 052]

Thus, the first portion of the first sentence which Erickson quotes - the Surface Structure - Hypnotizing hypnotists can be tricky
depth - admirably meets both his purposes and Huxley's.
The second pattern which we want to take from the sevenword
meanings of possible
extract is the one carried by the words a part and apart:
Deep Structures -

The depth was a part and apart. hypnotizing for anyone
hypnotists are to attempt
First, notice that in its written form there is no ambiguity about the to tricky hypnotize
phrase - the first portion is a two-word phrase a part while the second
hypnotists
portion is a one-word phrase apart. When presented auditorily, however,
is tricky
the phrase is completely ambiguous. One of the intuitions which people
can come to have regarding the language they speak is that of ambiguity.
An example of phonological or sound ambiguity which parallels the one used
Some types of ambiguity depend upon the representational system in
by Erickson is:
which they occur, such as the one which we are considering when
presenting it auditorily. Other types of linguistic ambiguity persist even
when the representational system is shifted; for example: '* nitrate
It's funny to talk about a deal

Hypnotizing hypnotists can be tricky. night rate


The ambiguity of this sentence is: Which of the following two sentences
is intended by the sentence above: Say the above sentence out loud; under conditions of normal speech, most
listeners will be unable to distinguish between the two visually presented
Hypnotizing hypnotists are tricky. versions. The phonological presentation is completely ambiguous. The
or explanation is the same as above - the Surface Structure is a representation of
For anyone to attempt to hypnotize hypnotists is tricky. more than one Deep Structure. Now consider Erickson's sentence again:

Notice that, whether you read the original sentence aloud and listen to it
The depth was a part and apart.
(auditory representation) or you read it silently without all internal
auditory presentation (internal dialogue), both meanings are possible.
This type of ambiguity has been formalized by transformational linguists The same sound sequence - we will represent it visually as a-part - can be

and is referred to as syntactic ambiguity. In the terms we developed decomposed into two distinct Deep Structure sequences. Notice that Erickson

previously, a sentence or Surface Structure is called ambiguous if it is a compounds the ambiguity as he repeats the sound sequence twice, connecting
them with an and. Thus, there are not two but four possible Deep Structure
linguistic representation of more than one distinct experience, or in
decompositions (see page 103):
linguistic terms if it is a linguistic representation of more than one
In other words, the listener, in this case Huxley, is left with four possible
distinct Deep Structure.”
Deep Structure phrase interpretations for the single Surface Structure phrase


52

[PAGE 053]

a part and apart confront is a linguistic representation of a process of someone's confronting
someone else about something.
apart and a part Through the linguistic process of nominalization all the material associated
a-part and a-part — with this Deep Structure predicate has been deleted, and, consequently, the
AAA apart and apart resulting expression totally lacks a referential index, thereby making it

I a part and a part maximally available for Huxley's interpretation and incorporation into his
ongoing deep trance experience. The Deep Structure predicate bewilder
occurs in the phrase as an adjective form (bewildering) which describes the
Keeping in mind the linguistic distinctions explained above, we turn to an experience of someone associated with the nominalization confrontation. It
examination of the remainder of the quoted material presented by Erickson in his describes the way that the confrontation was experienced. The question here
instructions to assist Huxley in deep trance: is the way that the confrontation was experienced by whom: the person
doing the confronting, the
. . utter clarity, in living reality, in impossible actuality, that which once person being confronted, or someone observing the confrontation?
was, but which now in the depths of the trance, will in bewildering Again, this Deep Structure predicate, n the linguistic process of being
confrontation challenge all of your memories and understandings. . . transformed into a Surface Structure adjective, has lost the information
associated with it in the full linguistic representation, the Deep Structure.
Perhaps the easiest way for you to come to appreciate the structure of The result, again, is a Surface Structure which is maximally vague and,
Erickson's assertions is to settle yourself into a comfortable position, place therefore, maximally congruent with Huxley's ongoing and future
yourself in a state of utter relaxation and, with the experience. To complicate matters somewhat, the two predicates bewilder
thought/feeling/picture/sound which you once had, allow yourself to and confront are associated syntactically. That is, as Huxley selects an
assume that what you are about to hear is extremely important and will interpretation for the missing information associated with the predicate
influence the remainder of your life. Then, have a friend read Erickson's confront, he still has the freedom to apply the bewilder predicate to anyone
words to you in a low, serious, concerned tone of voice at a slow tempo of the pieces of information he has selected for the predicate confront (the
with different phrasings (intonation patterns) and pay attention to all of person confronting may be considered bewildered, or the person being
the interpretations which you are able to assign to them. From a formal confronted, or some observer). The following is a list of the Deep Structure
point of view, the number of possible interpretations are astronomical. For predicates which have been nominalized in Erickson's utterance:
example, twenty of the thirty-one words are Deep Structure predicates. Of
these twenty, only two occur as Surface Structure verbs (typically, the clarity reality actuality depth
least distorted form a Deep Structure predicate may take). The majority of trance confrontation memories
the remainder of these Deep Structure predicates have undergone the understandings
process of nominalization described previously. For each of these, of
course, the number of possible interpretations are multiple - thus, both There are two additional characteristics of the Huxley passage which
successfully pacing Huxley's experience and allowing him maximum occur over and over again in Erickson's verbal work. In several cases,
freedom to select an interpretation which fits for him, all without a Erickson juxtaposes predicates, one modifying the other, in a way
consciousness on Huxley's part. As an example: which violates what linguists call selectional restrictions (see Grinder
. bewildering confrontation. . . and Elgin, 1973; Chomsky, 1965). When a person says a sentence such
as:

the word confrontation is a Surface Structure noun which results from
the process of nominalization - specifically, it derives from the Deep The boy feels silly
Structure predicate confront. Therefore, in Deep Structure, the predicate
53

[PAGE 054]

any native listener of English will accept the sentence as a wellformed sentence of English will respond to this phrase as a selectional restriction violation;
of his language. However, if the person says the sentence: specifically, how can what is actual be impossible, or how can what is
impossible be actual?
The rock feels silly The final pattern which we want to extract from this verbalization by
Erickson is the one involved in the use of the predicates once, was, now,
the typical response bya native listener of English is one of puzzlement, and will. The feature which these predicates have in common is that they all
of a sensation that he has somehow failed to understand what the speaker refer to time - so-called temporal predicates. Specifically, they have the
is attempting to communicate. The transformational linguists' explanation following force:
for this phenomenon goes as follows: Each predicate in a language
system is the name of some process or relationship. In the world of was refers to the past
human experience, certain processes or relationships are restricted in that now refers to the present
they can occur only with certain classes of people or things. For example, will refers to the future
only female human beings can become pregnant. Conversely, the process once ambiguous reference
of being a father is restricted to male humans. Therefore, the sentence:
Thus, all of the major logical possibilities with respect to time occur in
My father is pregnant again a single utterance by Erickson.16 Once again, the consequence of this is to
allow Huxley to assign the interpretation which is maximally congruent
is a decidedly peculiar sentence. Another way of representing these facts with his ongoing and future experience. As we stated in the discussion of
is to point out that the set of objects/people which are referred to by the the predicate-predicate sequences such as . .. bewildering confrontation. ..
term father and the set of people/objects which are referred to by the term these three general categories of nominalization/adjective derivations, selecpregnant do not intersect; they have no members in common. Something tional restriction violations and temporal predicates interact with one
cannot both be a father and be pregnant. Linguistically, the predicate another to provide the client with an astronomical number of possible
pregnant is said to have a selectional restriction which requires that interpretations from which to choose, thus insuring a successful pacing by
whatever it is applied to must be female. Other selectional restrictions are the hypnotist.
less clearly defined. For example, some of you readers will find the
following sentences perfectly acceptable, others will judge them to be It became obvious that Huxley was making an intensive hypnotic
perfectly unacceptable, while others will find some acceptable, others response during the prolonged repetitious suggestions I was offering when
unacceptable, and still others undecidable. suddenly he raised his hand and said rather loudly and most urgently, "I say,
Milton, do you mind hushing up there. This is most extraordinarily
My cat Tripodfeels silly interesting down here and your constant talking is frightfully distracting and
My catfeels silly annoying.”
My goldfish feels silly For more than two hours, Huxley sat with his eyes open, gazing intently
My lizardfeels silly before him. The play of expression on his face was most rapid and
My worm feels silly bewildering. His heart rate and respiratory rate were observed to change
My roses feel silly suddenly and inexplicably and repeatedly at irregular intervals. Each time
My weeds feel silly that the author attempted to speak to him, Huxley would raise his hand,
My oven feels silly perhaps lift his head, and speak as if the author were at some height above
him, and frequently he would annoyedly request silence.
Erickson makes use of this category of linguistic patterning when he After well over two hours, he suddenly looked up toward the ceiling and
uses, for example, the phrase impossible actuality. Many native speakers remarked with puzzled emphasis, "I say, Milton, this is an extraordinary

54

[PAGE 055]

contretemps. We don't know you. You do not belong here. You are sitting belonging to me, and leave in the not so long ago belonging
on the edge of a ravine watching both of us and neither of us knows behind but AVAILABLE to me and now, let us
which one is talking to you; and we are in the vestibule looking at each UPON REQUEST practically see, you are sitting there, wide
other with most extraordinary interest. We know that you are someone everything of importance, awake, rested, comfortable
who can determine our identity and most extraordinarily we are both sure KNOWING BUT NOT and
we know it and that the other is not really so, but merely a mental image
KNOWING that it is B
of the past or of the future. But you must resolve it despite time and AVAILABLE UPON available upon request...
distances and even though we do not know you. I say, this is an
REQUEST. And now, let us knowing but not knowing. . .
extraordinarily fascinating predicament, and am I he or is he me? Come,
see, that's right, you are sitting available upon request
Milton, whoever you are." There were other similar remarks of
there, wide awake, rested, C
comparable meaning which could not be recorded, and Huxley's tone of
comfortable, and ready for and leave behind... practically
voice suddenly became most urgent. The whole situation was most
discussion of what little everything of importance
confusing to me, but temporal and other types of dissociation seemed to
there is. . .. that it is ... ready for
be definitely involved in the situation.
discussion of what little there IS
Wonderingly, but with outward calm, I undertook to arouse Huxley
from the trance state by accepting the partial clues given and by saying in
Each one of the print types in the original article represents a distinct
essence,
portion of the entire communication by Erickson which he marked by some
Wherever you are, whatever you are doing, listen closely to whet
kind of analogical signal. Which specific analogical signals Erickson used at
is being said and slowly, gradually, comfortably begin to act upon
that time for each of the categories represented by the different print types is
it. Feel rested and comfortable, feel a need to establish an
unimportant for our purposes here. From our personal observations and re-
increasing contact with my voice, with me, with the situation I
cordings of Erickson, and keeping in mind the fact that Huxley, typically,
represent, a need of returning to matters in hand with me not so
had his eyes closed during deep trance, our guess is that Erickson used
long ago, in the not so long ago belonging to me, and leave
tonality and tempo shifts of his voice to mark the three sets of messages as
behind but A V AILABLE UPON REQUEST practically
distinct. Erickson has excellent control over his analogical voice qualities
everything of importance, KNOWING BUT NOT KNOWING
(tonality and tempo). One of the useful generalizations from this piece of
that it is AVAILABLE UPON REQUEST. And now, let us see,
Erickson's work is the exquisitely refined ability he has in his use of digital
that's right, you are sitting there, wide awake, rested, comfortable,
analogical system interactions. Essentially, he produces a lengthy sequence
and ready for discussion of what little there is.
of English words and phrases which heard together constitute a well-formed
English communication. Imposed on top of this communication are (in this
In Erickson's article, three different types of print were used as he
particular case) two sets of analogical signals which select or pick out
attempted fo overcome the limitations of a single system (here visual -
sequences of English words and phrases from the total message, each of
print) of communication fo the reader of the technique he employs with
which, itself, constitutes a coherent communication. Specifically, set A is
Huxley. In so doing Erickson is attempting to describe by example one of
designed to assist Huxley in returning to a relatively normal state of
his most powerful techniques. We begin by sorting a portion of the total
awareness; set B has as its function the establishing of the cue which
communication into the three categories as they are marked by the
Erickson will use later to assist Huxley in recovering this experience; set C
different types of print in the article:
is instructions from Erickson to Huxley to experience amnesia with respect
to his deep trance activities. We cannot overemphasize the usefulness and
Original Decomposed by Analogue power of this analogical marking of digital material which decomposes it
Signal into separate message units. For almost everyone with whom we have used
...1n the not so long ago A this technique, it has proven itself immediate and effective. The following

55

[PAGE 056]

discussion is a partial explanation of the effectiveness of this technique: from the grammar of adult English but are fully regular in their patterning.
. . . The mental abilities of a little child seem to be rather
(1) With the exception of some hypnotists and therapists whose limited in many ways, yet he masters the exceedingly
skills demand that they be aware of the congruity or incongruity of complex structure of his native language in the course of a
the messages communicated by the person to whom they are short three or four years. What is more, each child, exposed
attending, no one systematically and consciously represents all of the to a different sample of the language, and generally with
messages presented by a person as that person communicates. At little or no conscious tuition on the part of his parents,
each point in time, as a person communicates with us, he uses his arrives at essentially the same grammar in this brief span.
body posture (e.g., tight, closed, loose), gestures (e.g., hand That is to say, each child rapidly becomes a full-fledged
movements, eye-fixation patterns), tonality (e.g., shrill, resonant), member of his language community, able to produce and
tempo (e.g., rapid, staccato), language (e.g., words, syntax), etc., to comprehend an endless variety of novel yet meaningful
express a set of messages. These messages may fit together utterances in the language he has mastered. . . . Until
(congruent communication) or they may conflict (incongruent recently, behavioristic psychology looked upon language,
communication). In the therapeutic context, these distinctions form and the task of first language learning, as just another form
the basis for assisting the client in changing (see Magic I, Chapter 6;
of human behavior which could be reduced to the laws of
Magic IT, Part U; and Peoplemaking, 1973, Satir). The total message
conditioning. The picture we are now beginning to form,
presented by Erickson constitutes a well-formed communication of
however, is that of a child who is
English. The normal linguistic processing mechanisms for the
creatively constructing his language on his own, in
recovery of meaning apply to this level of structure, and we' become
accordance with innate and intrinsic capacities — a child
aware of the meaning of the total message. These linguistic
who is developing new theories of the structure of the
processes, themselves, arc normally unconscious or preconscious,
language, modifying and discarding old theories as he goes.
their results the meaning of the utterance - conscious. Since we do
It seems clear to us now that children form a variety of
not normally represent separately the messages carried by the other
word categories of their own - based on the functions of
person's analogical signals, we are not conscious of the relationship
words in their own language systems - and so words must
between the digital language material and these signals. Thus, when
be looked at in the light of the child's total system, rather
Erickson uses analogical signals to mark the total message for
than in terms of the adult system, which he has not yet mas-
decomposition into separate message units, we are not aware that
tered... . When the child starts putting two words together
this level of patterning is occurring, and, consequently, we receive
one can begin investigating his active grammar. The
communication of which we are wholly unaware. The result of this
examples presented below demonstrate that child language
process is that what Erickson refers to as our unconscious mind
is structured from this point on, that it soon can be
receives and responds to a set of messages of which we are totally
characterized by hierarchical structures, that it tends to be
unaware. Without awareness, we do not challenge the messages but
regular, that the structures change with age, and that they
simply respond.
do not always correspond to adult structures.
Psycholinguistics, by Dan Slobin, pp. 40-41.
(2) Each of us went through an extended learning experience Scott, Foreman, & Co., 1971.
between the ages of two and five as we learned to speak and understand
the natural language system called English. As we did this, we began by
Some of the message units (take set B as an example) which
learning to respond to, and produce sequences of, English words which
Erickson creates by his analogical marking of the total communication are
were simpler in their structure than adult English; these simpler patterns
not well-formed sequences of adult grammars; critically, however, they are
are called child grammars. These child grammars are entirely distinctive

56

[PAGE 057]

strongly reminiscent of the patterns which each of us employed during dominant hemisphere is occupied with the normal processing of the wellour learning experiences between the ages of two and five. Thus, to formed total communication, the separate message units, carrying their
understand the message carried by the sequence of words and phrases in simpler patterns, are available to the non-dominant hemisphere. In this way
the message units separated by analogical marking by Erickson, it is it is possible for us to receive and respond to messages accepted in the nonlikely that we access the grammatical mechanisms which we employed dominant hemisphere without any conscious ness of it.
as children. This helps to explain the almost inevitable phenomenon of
age regression which "spontaneously" occurs when this technique is
These three considerations, while not exhausting the possibilities of
used.
Erickson's analogical marking of language material, provide a beginning
basis for the analysis of the extraordinary power and effectiveness of this
(3) One of the most intriguing findings of the research which has technique.
been done by psycholinguists and linguists is that the different stages in
child grammars as the child moves from apparently total incompetence
Huxley aroused, rubbed his eyes, and remarked, "I have a most
with language structures to full competence tend to have the same
extraordinary feeling that I have been in a profound trance, but it has
simplified patterns at each stage independently of the child and of the
been a most sterile experience. I recall you suggesting that I go deeper
language which the child is learning (see Slobin, 1974; McNeill, 1970
in a trance, and I felt myself to be most compliant, and though I feel
for a more detailed presentation). This fact along with a number of other much time has elapsed, I truly believe a state of Deep Reflection would
considerations have led researchers to the Universal Grammar have been more fruitful."
hypothesis (see Chomsky, 1965; Grinder and Elgin, 1973, Chapter 13). Since he did not specifically ask the time, a desultory conversation was
In essence, the Universal Grammar hypothesis states that we begin life conducted in which Huxley compared the definite but vague appreciation of
with a pre-wired set of distinctions which is the basis upon which we external realities of the light trance with the more definitely decreased
build as we learn .to understand and speak the amazingly complex awareness of externalities in the medium trance which is accompanied by a
system of natural language to which we are exposed between two and peculiar sense of minor comfort that those external realities can become
five years of age. From the extensive literature of cases of brain damage secure actualities at any given moment.
(see, especially, Goldstein, Lenneberg, Geschwind) and neurological He was then asked about realities in the deep trance from which he had
mapping of localized brain functions (see, especially, Penfield, just recently aroused. He replied thoughtfully that he could recall vaguely
Gazzinga, Eccles, Sperry), we find that, apparently, each of the cerebral feeling that he was developing a deep trance but that no memories came to
hemispheres has the potential to become the so-called dominant mind associated with it. After some discussion of hypnotic amnesia and the
hemisphere - the location of the language system. For example, children possibility that. he might be manifesting such a phenomenon, he laughed
who are the victims of brain injury to the dominant cerebral hemisphere with amusement and stated that such a topic would be most intriguing to
after they have begun or even largely completed the task of learning to discuss. After still further desultory conversation, he was asked a propos of
understand and speak a language, initially lose their linguistic skills but nothing, "In what vestibule would you place that chair?" (indicating a nearby
rapidly regain them. In this process they exhibit the same set of child armchair). His reply was remarkable. "Really, Milton, that is a most
grammar patterns which they showed during their initial learning extraordinary question. Frightfully so! It is quite without meaning, but that
periods. The intersection of these two findings leads us to the conclusion word 'vestibule' has a strange feeling of immense, anxious warmth about it.
that each of the cerebral hemispheres has the wired-in circuits known as Most extraordinarily fascinating!" He lapsed into a puzzled thought for some
universal grammar. As Erickson decomposes his total communication minutes and finally stated that if there were any significance, it was
marking the separate message units analogically, some of the sets (again, undoubtedly some fleeting esoteric association. After further casual
set B in the example) are composed of patterns which approach the conversation, I remarked, "As for the edge where I was sitting, 1 wonder how
simplicity of patterning characteristic of universal grammar.” As the deep the ravine was." To this Huxley replied, "Really, Milton, you can be

57

[PAGE 058]

most frightfully cryptic. Those words 'vestibule: 'edge: 'ravine' have an and operate in the model of the world presented to him by the client.
extraordinary effect upon me. It is most indescribable. Let me see if I can Accepting without objection Huxley's comment that his experience in deep
associate some meaning with them.” For nearly 15 minutes Huxley trance had been "a most sterile experience," Erickson creates an experience
struggled vainly to secure some meaningful associations with those with Huxley which allows Huxley to come to understand the possibilities of
words, now and then stating that my apparently purposive but unrevealing deep trance phenomenon. Specifically, Erickson works to create an
use of them constituted a fu II assurance that there was a meaningful experience in which Huxley will both exhibit amnesia and be partially aware
significance which should be apparent to him. Finally, he disclosed with that something extraordinary is occurring. With his sensitivity to the
elation, "I have it now. Most extraordinary how it escaped me. I'm fully linguistic representation given by Huxley while in deep trance, Erickson
aware that you had me in a trance and unquestionably those words had selects several of the actual words which Huxley used during the period for
something to do with the deep trance which seemed to be so sterile to me. which he had amnesia. Erickson begins to question Huxley. Huxley reacts
I wonder if I can recover my associations." markedly; specifically, when Erickson uses the words employed by Huxley
After about 20 minutes of silent, obviously intense, thought on his during the portion of his deep trance for which he has amnesia, Huxley
part, Huxley remarked, "If those words do have a significance, I can truly responds with statements such as:
say that I have a most profound hypnotic amnesia. I have attempted Deep
Reflection, but I have found my thoughts centering around my mescaline . that word "vestibule" has a strange feeling of
experiences. It was ndeed difficult to tear myself away from those immense, anxious warmth. . .
thoughts. I had a feeling that I was employing them to preserve my
amnesia. Shall we go on for another half hour on other matters to see if ....L hada feeling thatl.....
there is any spontaneous recall in association with ‘vestibule: 'edge: and
'ravine?' " .... feeling of meaningful warmth. . .
Various topics were discussed until finally Huxley said, "It is a most
extraordinary feeling of meaningful warmth those words have for me, but One of the interesting dimensions of Huxley's experience here is that
I am utterly, I might say frightfully, helpless. I suppose I will have to certain words have acquired a seemingly irresistible power. Specifically,
depend upon you for something, whatever that may be. It's extraordinary, when Huxley hears the words vestibule, edge or ravine, he experiences a
most extraordinary."
kinesthetic sensation. And he experiences this body sensation apparently
This comment I deliberately bypassed but during the ensuing
without any choice in the matter. This process connects solidly with several
conversation Huxley was observed to have a most thoughtful puzzled
portions of our experience in the therapeutic context. In both our work with
expression on his face, though he made no effort to press me for
certain types of psychosomatic diseases (e.g., asthma, stuttering) and with
assistance. After some time, I commented with quiet emphasis, "Well,
certain frequently occurring types of patterns of failure to cope effectively in
perhaps now matters will become available." From his lounging
interpersonal relationships, we have encountered what we have come to call
comfortable position in his chair, Huxley straightened up in a startled
fuzzy functions. A fuzzy function (see Magic II, Part III, for a detailed
amazed fashion and then poured forth a torrent of words too rapid to
discussion) is a situation in which a person receives a message in some input
record except for occasional notes.
channel (e.g., visually, auditorily) but, rather than experiencing and storing
In essence, his account was that the word "available" had the effect of
that information or message in the associated representational system, he
drawing back an amnestic curtain, laying bare a most astonishing
represents it in some other representational system. For example, one of our
subjective experience that had miraculously been "wiped out" by the
clients who suffered from asthma experienced asthma attacks whenever he
words "leave behind" and had been recovered in toto by virtue of the cue
heard the word kill and other words associated with interpersonal violence.
words of "become available."
Another of our clients flew into an uncontrollable rage whenever she heard
the word Dolly. Clients whose model of the world specifies that they behave
Here Erickson once again demonstrates his refined ability to enter as though they have no choice about what they experience kinesthetically
58

[PAGE 059]

whenever they hear a particular sound sequence are displaying the fuzzy by the various national and ethnic groups can be easily represented in terms
function which we call hear-feel. Accepting a model of the world in of the fuzzy functions selected as positive and negative, as are the
which they have no control over certain fuzzy functions reduces the differences between the cultural standard requirements for the sexes, both
choices that the clients have in their coping behavior. Specifically, for within a cultural or ethnic group and across different groups. The
example, if each time the client hears a certain word he "automatically" significance of the Erickson-Huxley interchange in this portion of the article
feels a certain way, then he no longer has the ability to respond is that it demonstrates that fuzzy-function circuits are learned, and, more
creatively; rather, he can only react. The responsibility for his experience importantly. it demonstrates the value of hypnosis as a research tool to begin
- literally, the way he feds — lies outside himself and statements such as: the exploration of the process of this type of human circuitry. Erickson has
shown a life-long sensitivity for this dramatic and exciting possibility. Very

He makes me feel angry early in his career he explored the various phenomena of hypnotically
induced deafness and color blindness (see Erickson, 1938a and b).
She frustrates the hell out of me
Finally, note that Erickson shows his usual sensitivity to the person with
are unfortunately accurate representations of the client's experience. whom he is working. He allows Huxley to explore different ways of
Formally identical patterns exist in the other possible combinations of recovering the material associated with the hear-feel circuits which have
input channebrepresentational systems. For example, one of our clients been established. Huxley is creative in his attempts to overcome the amnesia
experienced intense panic feelings of fear whenever she saw a car which is at the root of the hear-feel circuits he is experiencing. When
stopped on the inside lane of a highway which had four lanes. This is an Huxley has spent some considerable time in this attempt, Erickson simply
example of the fuzzy function we call see-feel. In each of these cases, the mentions one of the cue phrases which he had marked analogically as
authors used enactment techniques and related skills involving the belonging to set B - the set of cue words and phrases which will allow
systematic use of representational systems to assist the client in changing Huxley to recover his memories. The results are dramatic. This sequence,
so that she had a choice about feeling the sound and sights she had again, shows the value of hypnotically induced fuzzy functions as a research
received or stored in the corresponding representational system. (These instrument for the exploration of human neurological potential - altered
techniques are described extensively in Magic II, Parts I, II and III.) The states of consciousness.
point here is that fuzzy functions are not bad or crazy; they form the basis
for much pleasure and creativity in our experience. They are, however, in He explained that he now realized that he had developed a "deep trance,"
certain contexts a restriction of the choices that a human being has about a psychological state far different from his state of Deep Reflection, that in
what portions of the world are available to him (phobias, for example). Deep Reflection there was an attenuated but unconcerned and unimportant
Thus, the therapeutic techniques which we have developed are designed awareness of external reality, a feeling of being in a known sensed state of
not to remove or destroy these fuzzy function processes, but rather to subjective awareness, of a feeling of control and a desire to utilize
assist clients in gaining control and choice over these circuits. We notice, capabilities and in which past memories, learnings, and experiences flowed
also, that these same patterns occur at the cultural or societal level. freely and easily. Along with this flow there would be a continuing sense in
Certain classes of experience are specified as negative fuzzy function and the self that these memories, learnings, experiences, and understandings,
identified as taboo - for example, pornography is identified culturally in however vivid, were no more than just such an orderly meaningful alignment
this country (U.S.A.) as a negative see-feel; similarly, the culture has of psychological experiences out of which to form a foundation for a
proscribed the use of those words which describe certain body profound, pleasing, subjective emotional state from which would flow
experiences such as fucking, shitting, etc; that is, they have been
comprehensive understandings to be utilized immediately and with little
identified as negative hear-feels. Conversely, the cultural standards of
conscious effort.
physical beauty, grace, etc., and melody, rhythm, etc., are simply the
The deep trance state, he asserted, he ww knew to be another and
culturally identified, positively valued fuzzy functions for see-feeling and
entirely different category of experience. External reality could enter but it
hear-feeling, respectively. Furthermore, the cultural differences exhibited
acquired a new kind of subjective reality, a special reality of a new and
59

[PAGE 060]

different significance entirely. For example, while I had boon included in standing; and that he, aged 52, was looking at himself, Aldous, aged 23.
part in his deep trance state, it was not as a specific person with a specific Then Aldous, aged 23, and Aldous, aged 52, apparently realized
identity. Instead, I was known only as someone whom he (Huxley) knew simultaneously that they were looking at each other and the curious questions
in some vague and unimportant and completely unidentified relationship. at once arose in the mind of each of them. For one the question was, "Is that
Aside from my "reality," there existed the type of reality that one my idea of what I'll be like when I am 52?" and, "Is that really the way I
encounters in vivid dreams, a reality that one does not question. Instead, appeared when I was 23?" Each was aware of the question in the other's
one accepts such reality completely without intellectual questioning and mind. Each found the question of "extraordinarily fascinating interest" and
there are no conflicting contrasts nor judgmental comparisons nor each tried to determine which was the "actual reality" and which was the
contradictions so that whatever is subjectively experienced is "mere subjective experience outwardly projected in hallucinatory form."
unquestioningly accepted as both subjectively and objectively genuine To each, the past 23 years was an open book, all memories and events
and in keeping with all else. were clear, and they recognized that they shared those memories in common,
In his deep trance, Huxley found himself in a deep, wide ravine, high and to each only wondering speculation offered a possible explanation of any
up on the steep side of which, on the very edge, I sat, identifiable only by of the years between 23 and 52.
name and as annoyingly verbose. They looked across the vestibule (this "vestibule" was not defined) and
Before him, in a wide expanse of soft, dry sand was a nude infant up at the edge of the ravine where I was sitting. Both knew that that person
lying on its stomach. Acceptingly, unquestioning of its actuality, Huxley sitting there had some undefined significance, was named Milton, and could
gazed at the infant, vastly curious about its behavior, vastly intent on be spoken to by both. The thought came to both, could he hear both of them,
trying to understand its flailing movements with its hands and the but the test failed because they found that they spoke simultaneously, nor
creeping movements of its legs. To his amazement, he felt himself could they speak separately.
experiencing a vague curious sense of wonderment as if he himself were Slowly, thoughtfully, they studied each other. One had to be real. One
the infant and looking at the soft sand and trying to understand what it had to be a memory image or a projection of a self-image. Should not
was. Aldous, aged 52, have all the memories of the years from 23 to 52? But if he
As he watched, he became annoyed with me since I was apparently did, how could he then see Aldous, aged 23, without the shadings and
trying to talk to him, and he experienced a wave of impatience and colorations of the years that had passed since that youthful age? If he were to
requested that I be silent. He turned back and noted that the infant was view Aldous, aged 23, clearly, he would have to blot out all subsequent
growing before his eyes, was creeping, sitting, standing, toddling, memories in order to see that youthful Aldous clearly and as he then was.
walking, playing, talking. In utter fascination he watched this growing But if he were actually Aldous, aged 23, why could he not speculatively
child, sensed its subjective experiences of learning, of wanting, of feeling. fabricate memories for the years between 23 and 52 instead of merely seeing
He followed it in distorted time through a multitude of experiences as it Aldous as 52 and nothing more? What manner of psychological blocking
passed from infancy to childhood to school days to early youth to teenage. could exist to effect this peculiar state of affairs? Each found himself fully
He watched the child's physical development, sensed its physical and cognizant of the thinking and the reasoning of the "other." Each doubted "the
subjective mental experiences, sympathized with it, emphathized with it, reality of the other" and each found reasonable explanations for such
rejoiced with it, thought and wondered and learned with it. He felt as one contrasting subjective experiences. The questions arose repeatedly, by what
with it, as if 1t were he himself, and he continued to watch it until finally measure could the truth be established and of how did that unidentifiable
he realized that he had watched that infant grow to the maturity of 23 person possessing only a name sitting on the edge of a ravine on the other
years. He stepped closer to see what the young man was looking at, and side of the vestibule fit into the total situation? Could that vague person have
suddenly realized that the young man was Aldous Huxley himself, and an answer? Why not call to him and see?
that this Aldous Huxley was looking at another Aldous Huxley, obviously With much pleasure and interest, Huxley detailed his total subjective
in his early fifties, just across the vestibule in which they both were experience, speculating upon the years of time distortion experienced and


60

[PAGE 061]

the memory blockages creating the insoluble problem of actual identity. properly be the one to develop them fully. My notations concerned primarily
Finally, experimentally, the author remarked casually, "Of course, the sequence of events and a fairly good summary of the total development.
all that could be left behind to become A v AILABLE at some later This discussion was continued until preparations for scheduled activities
time." for that evening intervened, but not before an agreement on a subsequent
Immediately there occurred a re-establishment of the original preparation of the material for publication. Huxley planned to use both Deep
posthypnotic amnesia. Efforts were made to disrupt this re-induced Reflection and additional self-induced trances to aid in writing the article
hypnotic amnesia by veiled remarks, frank open statements, by a but the unfortunate holocaust precluded this.
narration of what had occurred. Huxley found my narrative statements
about an infant on the sand, a deep ravine, a vestibule "curiously
Concluding Remarks
interesting," simply cryptic remarks for which Huxley judged I had a
It is unfortunate that the above account is only a fragment of an
purpose. But they were not evocative of anything more. Each statement I
extensive inquiry into a nature of various states of consciousness. Huxley's
made was, in itself, actually uninformative and intended only to arouse
state of Deep Reflection did not appear to be hypnotic in character. Instead,
associations. Yet no results were forthcoming until again the word
it seemed to be a state of utterly intense concentration with much
"AVAILABLE" resulted in the same effect as previously. The whole
dissociation from external realities but with a full capacity to respond with
account was related by Huxley a second time but without his realization
varying degrees of readiness to externalities. It was entirely a personal
that he was repeating his account. Appropriate suggestions when he had
experience serving, apparently, as an unrecognized foundation for conscious
finished his second narration resulted in a full recollection of his first
work activity enabling him to utilize freely all that had passed through his
account. His reaction, after his immediate astonishment, was to compare mind in Deep Reflection.
the two accounts item by item. Their identity amazed him, and he noted His hypnotic behavior was in full accord with hypnotic be havior elicited
only minor changes in the order of narration and the choice of words. from other subjects. He was capable of all the phenomena of the deep trance
and he could respond readily to posthypnotic suggestions and to exceedingly
There are two patterns here which we find of interest: first, if the
minimal cues. He was emphatic in declaring that the hypnotic state was quite
reader examines the description by Huxley of his deep trance experience,
different from the Deep Reflection state.
he will notice the consistent choice of visual predicates - a pattern which
While some comparison may be made with dream activity, and certainly
we discussed previously in our commentary. Second, the multiple re-
the ready inclusion of the "vestibule" and the "ravine" in the same subjective
induction of amnesia and subsequent removal of the amnesia for the
situation is suggestive of dream-like activity, such peculiar inclusions are
original deep trance experiences as well as for the recall of these
somewhat frequently found as a spontaneous development of profound
experiences again in the normal state of consciousness validate the power
hypnotic ideosensory activity in highly intellectual subjects. His
and effectiveness of the message groups distinguished by Erickson by his
somnambulistic behavior, his open eyes, his responsiveness to me, his
analogical marking technique.
extensive posthypnotic behavior all indicate that hypnosis was
unquestionably definitive of the total situation in that specific situation.
Again, as before, a posthypnotic amnesia was induced, and a third Huxley's remarkable development of a dissociated state, even bearing in
recollection was then elicited, followed by an induced realization by mind his original request for a permissive technique, to view hypnotically
Huxley that this was his third recollection. his own growth and development in distorted time relationships, while
Extensive detailed notations were made of the whole sequence of indicative of Huxley's all-encompassing intellectual curiosity, is suggestive
events, and comparisons were made of the individual notations, with of most interesting and informative research possibilities. Questioning postinterspersed comments regarding significances. The many items were experimentally dis closed that Huxley had no conscious thoughts or plans for
systematically discussed for their meanings and brief trances were review of his life experiences nor did he at the time of the trance induction
induced to vivify various items. However, only a relatively few notations make any such interpretation of the suggestions given him. This was verified
were made by me of the content of Huxley's experience since he would by a trance induction and making this special inquiry. His explanation was

61

[PAGE 062]

that when he felt himself "deep in the trance" he then began to search for decision was finally reached and his own feeling of elation and relief was
something to do and "suddenly there I found myself - most identical with that of his other self.
extraordinary." My subject explained that the experience was literally a moment-by-
While this experience with Huxley was most notable, it was not my moment reliving of his life with only the same awareness he had then and
first encounter with such developments in the regression of highly that the highly limited, restricted awareness of himself at 26 was that of
intelligent subjects. One such experimental subject asked that he be being an invisible man watching his own growth and development from
hypnotized and informed when in the trance that he was to develop a childhood on, with no more knowledge of the child's future than the child
profoundly interesting type of regression. This was primarily done for his possessed.
own interest while he was waiting for me to complete some work. His He had enjoyed each completed event with a vast and vivid panorama of
request was met and he was left to his own devices while sitting in a the past memories as each event reached completion. At the point of
comfortable chair on the other side of the laboratory. About two hours entrance to college the experience terminated. He then realized that he was
later he requested that I awaken him. He gave an account of suddenly in a deep trance and that he wanted to awaken and to take with him into
finding himself on an unfamiliar hillside and, in looking around, he saw a conscious awareness the memory of what he had been subjectively
small boy whom he immediately "knew" was six years old. Curious experiencing.
about this conviction about a strange little boy, he walked over to the
This same type of experience has been encountered with other
child only to discover that that child was himself. He immediately
experimental subjects, both male and female, but each account varies in the
recognized the hillside and set about trying to discover how he could be
manner in which the experience is achieved. For example, a girl who had
himself at 26 years of age watching himself at the age of 6 years. He
identical twin sisters three years younger than herself found herself to be "a
soon learned that he could not only see, hear, and feel his child-self, but
pair of identical twins growing up together but always knowing everything
that he knew the innermost thoughts and feelings. At the moment of
about the other." In her account there was nothing about her actual twin
realizing this, he felt the child's feeling of hunger and his wish for
sisters; all such memories and associations were excluded.
"brown cookies." This brought a flood of memories to his 26-year-old
Another subject, highly inclined, mechanically, constructed a robot
self, but he noticed that the boy's thoughts were still centering on cookies
which he endowed with life only to discover that 1t was his own life with
and that the boy remained totally unaware of him. He was an invisible
which he endowed it. He then watched that robot throughout many years of
man, in some way regressed in time so that he could see and sense
experiential events and learnings, always himself achieving them also
completely his childhood self. My subject reported that he "lived" with
because he had an amnesia for his past.
that boy for years, watched his successes and his failures, knew all of his
Repeated efforts to set up an orderly experiment have to date failed.
innermost life, wondered about the next day's events with the child and,
Usually the subject objects or refuses for some not-too comprehensible
like the child, he found to his amazement that even though he was 26
reason. In all my experiences with this kind of development in hypnotic
years old, a total amnesia existed for all events subsequent to the child's
trances, this type of "reliving" of one's life has always been a spontaneous
immediate age at the moment, that he could not foresee the future any
occurrence and with highly intelligent, well-adjusted experimental subjects.
more than could the child. He went to school with the child, vacationed
Huxley's experience was the one most adequately recorded and it is
with him, always watching the continuing physical growth and
most unfortunate that the greater number of details, having been left with
development. As each new day arrived, he found that he had a wealth of
him, were destroyed before he had the opportunity to write them up in full.
associations about the actual happenings of the past up to the immediate
Huxley's remarkable memory, his capacity to use Deep Reflection, his
moment of life for the child-self.
ability to develop a deep hypnotic state to achieve specific purposes and to
He went through grade school, high school, and then through a long
arouse himself at will with full conscious awareness of what he had
process of deciding whether or not to go to college and what course of
accomplished (Huxley required very little instruction the next day to
studies he should follow. He suffered the same agonies of indecision that
become skilled in autohypnosis) augured exceedingly well for a most
his then-self did. He felt his other self's elation and relief when the
informative study. Unfortunately the destruction of both notebooks

62

[PAGE 063]

precluded him from any effort to reconstruct them from memory because We are aware of other gradations of linkage available in natural language but restrict
my notebook contained so many notations of items of procedure and ourselves to these three. A more refined analysis will be presented in subsequent
volumes. These patterns constitute a beginning of what we refer to as natural logic.
observation for which he had no memores and which were vital to any
For some additional patterns of natural logic or human modeling, see Polya
satisfactory elaboration. However, it is hoped that the report given here (Patterns ofPlausible Interference, 1954) and Lakoff (Linguistics and
may serve, despite its deficiencies, as an initial pilot study for the Natural Logic, 1970).
development of a more adequate and comprehensive study of various 5. See Magic I, Chapters 3 and 4.
states of consciousness.
6. Some forms of deletion leave the resultant Surface Structure well
formed, that is, a grammatical sentence of English. Other deletions result in
ungrammatical sentences. Erickson uses both in his work. We will discuss their
In summary then, we point out simply that Erickson generalizes in
appropriate context for use and the difference in the client's experience in Parts II
his concluding remarks about what he has called in other contexts time
and III of this volume. We do not make the distinction here in Part I.
distortion (see, especially, Cooper and Erickson, Time Distortion in
Hypnosis, 1959). In this case he relates the ability demonstrated by
7. Amer.]. Clin. Hypn., 1966, 3, 198-209.
various subjects to accomplish in the subjective time sense achieved in
their deep trance tasks which in clock time would be impossible - for 8. Various commentators on the development of mathematics have
example, a review of their entire life without any sense of rushing or pointed out that important advances by "gifted" mathematicians frequently involve
"sudden insight" or a description by the mathematician wherein "the solution
hurrying. We simply mention this phenomenon here - we will return to
flashed before my eyes." More recently, Gardiner (1975, p. 375) reports:
this topic later. . . as one discourses in language, the eyes should shift to the
This article by Erickson of a joint, cooperative venture between right. Conversely, when a person is using spatial imagery, as in
himself and one of this century's most talented and creative human following a route or solving a geometrical problem, his right
beings is an invaluable record which suggests some very specific ways in hemisphere should be activated and his eyes should consequently
which we, as human beings, may begin the process of exploring our own shift leftwards. . . Steven I Jarnad interviewed graduate students
and professors in mathematics at Princeton University, classifying
potential for experiencing - indeed, for creating - altered states of
them by the direction in which their eyes moved whena series of
consciousness. We end this commentary simply by endorsing Erickson's
questions were posed. Those whose eyes moved to the right were
final statement: found (in the opinion of their peers) to be less creative as
. it is hoped that the report given here may serve mathematicians, displayed less interest in the arts, and utilized a
despite its deficiencies, as an initial pilot study for the smaller amount of visual imagery in solving problems than a
development of a more adequate and comprehensive matched group of mathematicians whose eyes moved to the left,
reflecting activity in their non-dominant hemisphere. . . .
study of the various states of consciousness.
9. Amer. J. Clin. Hypn., 1965,8,14-33.

10. Huxley, A. The Doors of Perception. New York: Harper and
FOOTNOTES FOR PART I Brothers, 1954.

11. We present a more detailed account of these types of evidence in
1. For additional study of the processes by which people create models Magic II, Parts II and II.
of the world, we recommend The Structure ofMagic I and I.
12, Erickson, M. H. The confusion technique in hypnosis, 1964, 6,
2. Gardner, Sperry, Gazzinga, 1969.
269-271. Amer. J. Clin. Hypn.
3. See Beuer, Miller, etc.

4. In this first volume, we distinguish only three levels of linkage:
13. Sherlock Holmes presents several excellent examples of Erickson's
(a) Simple conjunction (b) confusion technique - see p. 423 of Volume I of The Annotated Sherlock
Implied Causatives Holmes, by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle; edited by William A. Baring-Gould
(c) Cause-Effect (Clarkson N. Potter, Inc., New York).

63

[PAGE 064]

14. This particular example was one of the topics of investigation when we
[Bandler and Grinder] visited with the author [Erickson] of the article upon
which we are now commenting.


15. Transformational linguists have developed a test for the difference
between ambiguity and vagueness; sentences with nominalizations,
typically, are vague, not ambiguous. PART Il
16. We present the patterning of temporal predicates in another volume
with an accompanying discussion of time distortion in hypnosis. The
readers can, however, easily construct examples by arranging and
rearranging the temporal predicates used by Erickson in conjunction with
the set of any temporal predicates which typically occur as adverbs such as:
FAMILIARIZATION
soon, shortly after. recent, previous, now, then, afterwards, initially,
finally, successively, ... WITH
17. There also exists some evidence that the non-dominant hemisphere
stores frequently occurring whole words and phrases with their meanings. PATTERNS OF ERICKSON'S
HYPNOTIC WORK


64

[PAGE 065]

Introduction This sentence can mean either one of the following
interpretations :

In Part I of this volume our purpose was two
1. Hypnotist in act of hypnotizing can be tricky in what
fold: first, we wanted you to see that there were
they do to hypnotize
systematic patterns of behavior in Milton
Erickson's work in hypnosis; and second, that
2. Hypnotizing the class of people in the profession of
these patterns could be identified and extracted
hypnotizing can be tricky in the sense of being difficult or
in a way to be useful to you in your own
having some unexpected outcomes.
hypnotic work. During this process, we hoped
that you could begin the process of becoming
The intended meaning is not clear and cannot be determined by
familiar with these patterns in a way that would
the Surface Structure alone. This is an example of syntactic
allow you to identify them and to imagine how
ambiguity.
they could be useful understandings in your field
The following excerpt from another Erickson article
of endeavor. This second part of the book is
contains an example of kinesthetic ambiguity used by Erickson.
devoted to familiarizing you with these patterns
The kinesthetic ambiguities are in italic type for clarity. The
in a more systematic manner. It is designed to
shared patterns of difficulty of interpretation and multiple
present to you the characteristics of each of these
meaning are the same in a formal sense, and are examples of
patterns in a way that will allow you to
how the same formal patterns can be used in any of the sensory
understand not only the nature of each pattern,
systems.
but also the useful aspect and implication of each
pattern. In Volume I we have focused primarily
She was then brought through a side door to confront me.
on the linguistic notions and how they work for
Silently we looked at each other, and then (as I had done many
the purpose of induction and suggestion. We
times previously with seminarians in the U.S., in seeking out
would like to point out that they are by no means
what I consider clinically to be "good, responsive" subjects
all of the patterns of behavior used by Milton
before the beginning of a seminar and hence before I was
Erickson in his work with hypnosis, but they are
known to them) I walked toward her briskly and smilingly and
what we believe to be the most basic and the
extended my right hand and she extended hers. Slowly, I shook
easiest to learn and employ. Each of the
hands with her, staring her fully in the eyes even as she was
linguistic patterns presented in this part of
doing to me, and I ceased smiling. As J let loose of her hand, I
Volume I can be generalized to the other forms
did so in an uncertain, irregular fashion, slowly withdrawing
of analogical communication used by human
it, now increasing the pressure slightly with my thumb, then
beings (voice tone, body movement, etc.) given
with the little finger, then with the middle finger, always in an
in subsequent volumes. For example, we have uncertain, irregular, hesitant manner and, finally, so gently
mentioned briefly the linguistic notion of withdrawing my hand that she would have no clear-cut
ambiguity, a Surface Structure of natural awareness ofjust when I had released her hand or what part of
language which, by the nature of its construction, her hand I had last touched. At the same time, I slowly
can have more than one meaning, e.g.: changed the focus of my eyes by altering their convergence,
thereby giving her a minimal but appreciable cue that I seemed
Hypnotizing hypnotists can be tricky
to be looking not at, but through, her eyes and off into the

65

[PAGE 066]

distance. Slowly the pupils of her eyes dialated full, attentive, expectant, wondering interest in what I was
and, as they did so, I gently released her hand doing. With my right thumb, I made slight tactile pressure on
completely, leaving it in mid-air in a cataleptic the latero-volar-ulnar aspect of her wrist, as if to turn it upward;
position. A slight upward pressure on the heel of at the same moment, at the area of the radial prominence, I
her hand raised it slightly. made a slightly downward tactile pressure at the dorso-lateral
aspect of her wrist with my third finger; also at the same time, I
The second unexpected,... induction was done made various gentle touches with my other fingers somewhat
in January, 1961, during a visit to Caracas, comparable in intensity but nonsuggestive of direction. She
Venezuela. I had been invited to tour the Hospital made an automatic response to the directive touches without
Concepcion Palacios during which I was asked to differentiating them consciously from the other touches,
address the staff on the use of hypnosis in evidently paying attention first to one touch and then to another.
obstetrics at an impromptu meeting in the As she began responding, I increased varyingly the directive
conference room. One of the audience suggested touches without decreasing the number and variation of the
that I demonstrate as I discussed the phenomena other distracting tactile stimuli. Thus, I suggested lateral and
of hypnosis. Remembering my experience in upward movements of her arm and hand by varying tactile
Mexico City, I asked if I might work with some stimuli intermingled with a decreasing number of nondirective
young woman who did not know the purpose of touches. These responsive, automatic movements, the origin of
my visit there and who did not understand which she did recognize, startled her, and as her pupils dilated, I
English and who had had no experience in so touched her wrist with a suggestion of an upward movement
hypnosis of any sort. Three young women were and. . . her arm began rising so gently discontinuing the touch
brought in and I looked them over and selected that she did not notice the tactile withdrawal and the upward
the one who gave me a clinical impression of movement continued. Quickly shifting my fingertips to hers, I
what I term "responsive attentiveness." I asked varied the touches, so as to direct in an unrecognizable fashion a
that the others be dismissed and that she be told full upward turning of her palm, and then other touches on her
that I wished her cooperation while I lectured. fingertips served to straighten some, to bend others, and a
Very carefully, my translator so informed her proper touch on the straightened fingertips led to a continuing
without giving her any more information and she bending of her elbow. This led to a slow moving of her hand
nodded her head affirmatively. toward her eyes. As this began, I attracted with my fingers her
Stepping over to her and standing face to face visual attention and directed her attention to my eyes. I focused
with her, I explained in English for those who my eyes for distant viewing as if looking through and beyond
understood it that they were to watch what I did. her, moved my fingers close to my eyes, slowly closed my eyes,
My translator kept silent and the young lady eyed took a deep, sighing breath and sagged my shoulders in a
me most attentively and wonderingly. relaxed fashion and then pointed to her fingers which were
approaching her eyes.
I showed the girl my hands, which were She followed my pantomimed instructions and developed a
empty, and then I reached over with my right trance that withstood the efforts of the staff to secure her
hand and gently encircled her right wrist with my attention. (1967, pp. 93-96)
fingers, barely touching it except in an irregular,
uncertain, changing pattern of tactile stimulation
The preceding extract was presented as an example to show
with my fingertips. The result was to attract her
66

[PAGE 067]

you how each of the linguistic patterns which we it stopping the internal dialogue and they are
present can be generalized to analogical convinced that it is the single most important
communication systems. Our intention in this technique that an apprentice can learn. .. .
volume is to focus primarily on the patterns of
language Milton Erickson uses in his work. Our "Stopping the internal dialogue is,
strategy will be to regroup the patterns presented however, the key to the sorcerers’ world," he
so far into natural groupings based on their use said. "The rest of the activities are only props;
and their formal characteristics. They have been all they do is accelerate the effect of stopping
split into techniques of: the internal dialogue."


(1) Pacing, to distract and utilize the . . . The teacher reorders the view of the
dominant hemisphere; world. I have called that view the island of the
(2) Accessing the non- dominant tonal. I've said that everything that we are is on
hemisphere that island. The sorcerers' explanation says that
Careful reading of Part II will provide you the island of the tonal is made by our
not only with a variety of linguistic techniques perception, which has been trained to focus on
of induction and suggestion, but also with a certain elements; each of those elements and all
coherent strategy for their use in hypnotic of them together form our view of the world.
work.
The job of a teacher, insofar as the apprentice's
We conclude with a series of quotes from a
perception is concerned, consists of reordering
well-known contemporary author, Carlos
all the elements of the island on one half of the
Castenada (Tales of Power, 1974; PI. 231- bubble. By now you must have realized that
233,245,247-248,265). cleaning and reordering the island of the tonal
means regrouping all its elements on the side of
... The first act of a teacher
reason. My task has been to disarrange your
is to introduce the idea that the
ordinary view, not no to destroy it, but to force
world we think we see is only a
it to rally Oil I the side of reason... .
view, a description of the world.
. . . He drew an imaginary circle on the rock and
Every effort of a teacher is
divided it in two along a vertical diameter. He said that
geared to prove this point to his
the art of a teacher was to force his disciple to group his
apprentice. But accepting it
view of the world on the right half of the bubble.
seems to be one of the hardest
"Why the right half?" I asked.
things one can do; we are
"That's the side of the tonal,” he said. "The teacher
complacently caught in our
always addresses himself to that side, and by
particular view of the world,
presenting his apprentice on the one hand with the
which compels us to feel and act
warrior's way he forces him into reasonableness and
as if we knew everything about
sobriety, and strength of character and body; and by
the world. A teacher, from the
presenting him on the other hand with unthinkable but
very first act he performs, aims at
real situations, which the apprentice cannot cope with,
stopping that view. Sorcerers call
he forces him to realize that his reason, although it is a

67

[PAGE 068]

most wonderful affair, can only cover a sorcerers," he said. "They were not fools; they knew
small area... . what they were doing and sought the usefulness of the
nagual by training their tonal to let go for a moment,
... "Walking in that specific manner so to speak, and then grab again. This statement
saturates the tonal,” he said. "It floods doesn't make sense to you. But that's what you've been
it. You see, the attention of the tonal doing all along: training yourself to let go without
has to be placed on its creations. In losing your marbles. Dreaming, of course, is the
fact, it is that attention that creates the crown of the sorcerers' efforts, the ultimate use of the
order of the world in the first place; so, nagual."
the tonal must be attentive to the
elements of its world in order to
maintan it, and must, above all, uphold
the view of the world as internal
dialogue."
He said that the right way of walking
was a subterfuge. The warrior, first by
curling his fingers, drew attention to
the arms; and then by looking, without
focusing his eyes, at any point directly
in front of him on the arc that started at
the tip of his feet and ended above the
horizon, he literally flooded his tonal
with information. The tonal with out its
one-to-one relation with the elements
of its description, was incapable of
talking to itself, and thus one became
silent. ...


. . . Order in our perception is the
exclusive realm of the tonal; only
there can our actions have a sequence;
only there are they like stairways
where one can count the steps. There is
nothing of that sort in the nagual.
Therefore, the view of the tonal is a
tool, and as such 1t is not only the best
tool but the only one we've got. ...


"Dreaming is a practical aid devised by

[PAGE 069]

That's not true; you know you can do a lot. You can X, Y, Z, etc.
Pacing, Distraction and Utilization of the
Dominant Hemisphere The characteristic result in our experience is that, the more you try to "help" in this
way, the more the other person expresses the opposite viewpoint. As an additional
example, an acquaintance might say to you:
In understanding this technique, it may be well to keep in mind
the pattern of the magician which is not intended to inform but to
I want your opinion; do you think
I should X or Y, etc. You say:
distract so that his purposes may be accomplished.
Milton H. Erickson, Special Techniques of Brief
Well, X looks good.
Hypnotherapy, 1967, p. 393.


Introduction Typically, the person will immediately defend Y. One strategy which we have

The induction of the altered state of consciousness called trance requires and found invaluable in our therapeutic work is to agree with the other person who will

implies the distraction and/or utilization of what Milton calls the conscious mind. then, invariably, take the other side. As an example, consider the following
transcript from a therapy session:
Conscious representation of ongoing experience to oneself may come in a number
of distinct modalities (visual, auditory, kinesthetic). In order to establish a trance
state all of the representational systems must, to some extent, be involved in the Jane: I'm so dumb, I... I Therapist: I've not iced I hat; in
process, since the process is generally one of simultaneous representation of a never say the right thing. fact, you're so dumb that I
small, focused part of the experience. The beginning of this process we call pacing. don't think anyone can help you. You
This is usually achieved in most hypnotic work by having clients focus their eyes probably can't do anything - you'd better
on a single spot and listen to the sound of the hypnotist's voice. The hypnotist just give up.
begins to describe the experiences he knows by observation the client is having;
for example, the changes in visual perception (e.g., the third feeling of the client's Jane: Well. ..a...um...a Therapist: No, no you're right;
eyes that result from his staring at a fixed point). This description, explained you must be beyond help. I think you'd
before, establishes a feedback loop between what the client is observably doing - better just go home and lock yourself in
what the hypnotist sees and hears the client doing - and what the client hears the the closet; no one in the whole wide
hypnotist saying. This is, in fact, equivalent to meeting the client at his model of world is as dumb as you.
the world - going to the client's reality, accepting it, and then utilizing it for the
purposes of the hypnotic session. Meeting a client at his model of the world, Jane: (interrupting) I'm not Therapist: OK, if you think
pacing that model and then leading it into new territory is one of Erickson's that bad; come on, you can be helped, let's
consistent strategies which make his work easier both for himself and for his (beginning to laugh) / begin.
client. Any attempt to force a client into something, or to get him to deny what he know what you're doing,
believes, opens the possibility for resistance by giving the client something to so let's just get on with it,
resist. This struggle only serves to waste the time and energies of all involved and shall we?
very rarely serves any purpose.
Most of you probably have had the common experience of becoming what we Erickson has a very refined sensitivity to this kind of communication; he meets
called "hooked" in interpersonal communications. Someone, for example, comes his client at his model, accepting it and utilizing it to the fullest. The following
up to you and casually says something such as: extracts are examples of this exceptionally refined ability.

Gee, I'm just so stupid; I can't do anything right. Case Report 1
George had been a patient in a mental hospital for five years. His identity had
One possible response is to attempt to be "helpful" and reply: never been established. He was simply a stranger around the age of 25 who had

69

[PAGE 070]

been picked up by the police for irrational behavior and committed to the state author courteously replied in kind. There followed then brief interchanges of long
mental hospital. During those five years he had said, "My name is George," "Good and short utterances of word-salad until George fell silent and the author went to
morning," and "Good night," but these were his only rational utterances. He uttered other duties.
otherwise a continuous word-salad completely meaningless as far as could be This continued for some time. Then George, after returning the morning
determined. It was made up of sounds, syllables, words, and incomplete phrases. greeting, made meaningless utterances without pause for four hours. It taxed the
For the first three years he sat on a bench at the front door of the ward and eagerly author greatly to miss lunch and to make a full reply in kind. George listened
leaped up and poured forth his word-salad most urgently to everyone who entered attentively and made a two-hour reply to which a weary two-hour response was
the ward. Otherwise, he merely sat quietly mumbling his word-salad to himseff. made. (George was noted to watch the clock throughout the day.)
Innumerable efforts had been made by psychiatrists, psychologists, nurses, social The next morning George returned the usual greeting properly but added about
service workers, other personnel and even fellow patients to secure intelligible two sentences of nonsense to which the author replied with a similar length of
remarks from him, all in vain. George talked only one way, the word-salad way. nonsense. George replied, "Talk sense, Doctor." "Certainly, I'll be glad to. What is
After approximately three years he continued to greet persons who entered the your last name?" "O'Donovan and it's about time somebody who knows how to talk
ward with an outburst of meaningless words, but in between times he sat silently asked. Over five years in this lousy joint" . . . (to which was added a sentence or
on the bench, appearing mildly depressed but somewhat angrily uttering a few two of word-salad). The author replied, "I'm glad to get your name, George. Five
minutes of word-salad when approached and questioned. years is too long a time" . . . (and about two sentences of word-salad were added).
The author joined the hospital staff in the sixth year of George's stay. The The rest of the account is as might be expected. A complete history sprinkled
available information about his ward behavior was secured. It was learned also that with bits of word-salad was obtained by inquiries judiciously salted with wordpatients or ward personnel could sit on the bench beside him without eliciting his salad. His clinical course, never completely free of word-salad which was
word-salad so long as they did not speak to him. With this total of information a eventually reduced to unintelligible mumbles, was excellent. Within a year he had
therapeutic plan was devised. A secretary recorded in shorthand the word-salads left the hospital, was gainfully employed, and at increasingly longer intervals
with which he so urgently greeted those who entered the ward. These transcribed returned to the hospital to report his continued and improving adjustment.
recordings were studied but no meaning could be discovered. These word-salads Nevertheless, he invariably initiated his report or terminated it with a bit of wordwere carefully paraphrased, using words that were least likely to be found in salad, always expecting the same from the author. Yet he could, as he frequently
George's productions and an extensive study was made of these until the author did on these visits, comment wryly, "Nothing like a little nonsense in life, is there
could improvise a word-salad similar in pattern to George's, but utilizing a Doctor?" to which he obviously expected and received a sensible expression of
different vocabulary. agreement to which was added a brief utterance of nonsense. After he had been out
Then all entrances to the ward were made through a side door some distance of the hospital continuously for three years of fully satisfactory adjustment, contact
down the corridor from George. The author then began the practice of sitting was lost with him except for a cheerful postcard from another city. This bore a brief
silently on the bench beside George daily for increasing lengths of time until the but satisfactory summary of his adjustments in a distant city. It was signed properly
span of an hour was reached. Then, at the next sitting, the author, addressing the but following his name was a jumble of syllables. There was no return address.
empty air, identified himself verbally. George made no response. He was ending the relationship on his terms of adequate understandin g.
The next day the identification was addressed directly to George. He spat out During the course of his psychotherapy he was found hypnotizable, developing
an angry stretch of word-salad to which the author replied, in tones of courtesy a medium to deep trance in about 15 minutes. However, his trance behavior was
and responsiveness, with an equal amount of his own carefully contrived word- entirely comparable to his waking behavior and it offered no therapeutic
salad. George appeared puzzled and, when the author finished, George uttered advantages, although repeated tests were made. Every therapeutic interview was
another contribution with an inquiring intonation. As if replying the author characterized by the judicious use of an appropriate amount of word-salad.
verbalized still further word-salad.
The above case represents a rather extreme example of meeting a patient at the
After a half dozen interchanges, George lapsed into silence and the author
level of his decidedly serious problem. The author was at first rather censoriously
promptly went about other matters.
criticized by others but when it became apparent that inexplicable imperative needs
The next morning appropriate greetings were exchanged employing proper
names by both. Then George launched into a long word-salad speech to which the of the patient were being met, there was no further adverse comment. (1967, pp.


70)

[PAGE 071]

501-502) visual alternation.

Erickson's ability to meet George at his modelof the world, even to the extent
. .. A clinical instance in which this same technique was employed centers
of speaking his language, is a brilliant example of how Erickson will go to the
around an obstreperous 25-year-old patient for whom hypnotherapy was not
client to make contact in his model, instead of expecting the client to come to him.
indicated. Nevertheless, he repeatedly demanded hypnosis and in the same breath
When practitioners of hypnosis and therapy learn this skill, the term resistant client
declared himself unhypnotizable. On one occasion, he forced the issue by
will have no meaning, and trance states will be available to more people.
demanding absolutely, "Hypnotize me even though I'm not hypnotizable. "
The next excerpt is a good example of what, typically, is called a resistant
This demand was met by employing softly spoken suggestions of slow,
patient, who may have been labeled as unhypnotizable or unsusceptible. Erickson's
progressive relaxation, fatigue, and sleep. Throughout the hour that this was done,
induction is simple because he meets the client at her model and leads quickly into
the patient sat on the edge of his chair, gesticulated, and bitterly denounced the
the desired state. Her "resistance" becomes the very model for the induction.
entire procedure as stupid and incompetent. At the close of the session, the patient
declared that his time and money had been wasted. He could "remember every
"You wish to have hypnosis utilized in connection with your dental ineffectual, stupid suggestion" that had been offered and could "remember
work. Your husband and his colleagues wish the same, but each time hypnosis everything that took place the whole time."
was attempted, you have failed to go into a trance. You got scared stiff and you The writer immediately seized upon these utterances to declare, somewhat
cried. It would really be enough just to get stiff without crying. Now you want repetitiously, "Certainly you remember. You are here in the office. Naturally here
me to treat you psychiatrically, if necessary, but I don't believe it is. Instead, I in the office you can remember everything. It all occurred here in the office and
will just put you in a trance so that you can have hypnosis for your dentistry." you were here and hem you can remember everything." The patient impatiently
She replied, "But I'll just get scared stiff and cry." demanded another appointment and left angrily.
She was answered with, "No, you will first get stiff. That is the first thing to do
and do it now. Just get more and more stiff, your arms, your legs, your body, At the next appointment, he was deliberately met in the reception room. He
your neck - completely stiff - even stiffer than you were with your husband. immediately inquired if he had kept his previous appointment. Reply was given
"Now close your eyes and let the lids get stiff, so stiff that you can't open evasively that surely he would remember if he had done so. He explained that on
them." that day, he had suddenly found himself sitting in his car unable to remember if he
Her responses were most adequate. had just returned from his appointment or were just leaving for it. This question he
debated for an indefinite period of time before he thought of checking with his
Erickson's ability both to pace and to utilize his client's model of the world is watch and then he discovered that the time was long past the proper hour.
a great tool; there is much for other practitioners of hypnosis to learn from this However, he was still unable to decide the problem because he did not know how
area of his work. Too often the failure of hypnotists to meet the client and use the long he had debated the question. He asked, again, if he had kept his previous
client's model results in failures that could have been the very source of success. appointment, and again he was assured evasively that surely he would remember if
A dramatic example of this occurred in our work after a visit with Erickson. We he had.
were conducting an evening seminar in hypnotism and exploring the various As he entered the office, he stopped short and declared, "I did too keep my
hypnotic phenomena described by Erickson in his articles. We were working with appointment. You wasted my time with that silly, soft, gentle, ineffectual hypnotic
negative hallucinations with a young woman. While she was in a deep trance, we technique of yours, and you failed miserably."
gave a series of relatively direct suggestions to her that she would not see her After a few more derogatory comments, he was maneuvered into returning to
hand. When she awoke, she opened her eyes, looked at her right hand carefully the reception room where he again manifested an amnesia for the previous
and said in a disappointed tone, "But it's still there." One of the authors appointment as well as his original inquiries about it. His questions were once more
immediately replied, "Yes, of course, you can see that hand," his voice clearly parried. He was led back into the office, where for a second time he experienced
implying more. She then shifted slowly her gaze, looking over at her other hand, full recall of the previous appointment.
and gasped, "I don't believe it! It's gone!" Pacing her initial response, accepting Again he was induced to return to the reception room with a resultant
her present model of her ongoing experience and leading her made possible this reestablishment of his amnesia. Upon reentering the office, he added to his

71

[PAGE 072]

recollection of the previous appointment a full recall of his separate entrances into Before she had finished the cigarette, she had developed a light trance. Then
the reception room and the accompanying amnesic states. This bewildered and the suggestion was made that she might continue to enjoy smoking as she slept
intrigued him to such an extent that he spent most of the hour going from the office more and more soundly; that the cigarette would be looked after by the hypnotist
to the reception room and back again. He experienced a full amnesia in the while she absorbed herself more and more completely in deep sleep; that, as she
reception room, and full recollection of the total experience inclusive of the slept, she would continue to experience the satisfying feelings and sensations of
reception room manifestations in the office. smoking. A satisfactory profound trance resulted and she was given extensive
The therapeutic effect of this hypnotic experience was the almost immediate training to teach her to respond in accord with her own unconscious pattern of
correction of much of the patient's hostile, antagonistic, hypercritical, demanding behavior. (1967, p. 18)
attitude and the establishment of a good rapport. An acceleration of therapy resulted
even though no further hypnosis was employed. (1967, pp. 41-42) Pacing, then, is part of Erickson's general strategy for dealing with the
dominant hemisphere in establishing a trance state. As this pacing feedback loop is
Inexperienced hypnotists too readily accept initial failure as a lack of ability established, the rest of the overall strategy for dealing with the dominant
on the part of themselves or the subject. Erickson consistently emphasizes the hemisphere begins. Erickson describes this as follows:
importance of accepting every aspect of the client's behavior and utilizing it,
thereby meeting his client's at their model of the world and leading them to new Deep hypnosis is that level... that permits the subject to function
places. His description of this process follows: adequately and directly at an unconscious level of awareness
without interference by the conscious mind.
In trance induction, the inexperienced hypnotist often tries to direct or bend
the subject's behavior to fit his conception of how the subject "should" behave. This is accomplished by pacing, simultaneously distracting and utilizing the
There should be a constant minimization of the role of the hypnotist and a constant unconscious patterns of behavior generated by the dominant hemisphere. Speaking
enlargement of the subject's role. An example may be cited of a volunteer subject, to a client in a way that makes use of the process by which people create linguistic
used later to teach hypnosis to medical students. models of their experience allows the hypnotist to tap the vast resources of his
client. The Structure of Magic I is the volume in which we described the process
After a general discussion of hypnosis, she expressed a willingness to go into a by which people create linguistic models of their experience. The Meta-model is a
trance immediately. The suggestion was offered that she select the chair and set of precise forms with which a psychotherapist can directly challenge
position she felt would be most comfortable. When she had settled herself to her impoverishing representations. Hypnosis, on the other hand, does not challenge
satisfaction, she remarked that she would like to smoke a cigarette. She was these processes of representation but rather turns them into the very vehicle that
immediately given one, and she proceeded to smoke lazily, meditatively watching enables a client to achieve both the trance state and its goals. Thus, therapeutic
the smoke drifting upward. Casual conversational remarks were offered about the goals can be achieved in waking therapy by Meta-modeling both to understand and
pleasure of smoking, of watching the curling smoke, the feeling of ease in lifting to expand your client's model of the world. What could be called in hypnosis an
the cigarette to her mouth, the inner sense of satisfaction of becoming entirely anti- or inverse Meta-model is used to pace and distract, utilizing the modeling
absorbed just in smoking comfortably and without need to attend to any external processes of the client to achieve trance and the goals of the hypnotic endeavor.
things. Shortly, casual remarks were made about inhaling and exhaling, these words This inverse Meta-model we have lovingly named the "Milton model."
timed to fit in with her actual breathing. Others were made about the ease with
which she could almost automatically lift her cigarette to her mouth and then lower Causal Linguistic Modeling Processes
her hand to the arm of the chair. These remarks were also timed to coincide with In constructing models of our experience, each of us attempts to make sense
her actual behavior. Soon, the words "inhale," "exhale," "lift," and "lower" acquired out of the patterns which we experience. We attempt to create for ourselves a map
a conditioning value of which she was unaware because of the seemingly or guide for our behavior in the world which will be of use in securing the things
conversational character of the suggestions. Similarly, casual suggestions were which we want for ourselves. The language systems which we use in constructing
offered in which the words sleep, sleepy, and sleeping were timed to her eyelid our models have the same three modeling universals deletion, distortion, and
behavior. generalization - which we encounter in other representational systems. When we
72

[PAGE 073]

remain flexible in our use of these processes, they are the basis for the useful, trance voice
creative and beneficial representations we generate and use to make our way in the Your eyelids will grow You sit all the way down in
world. However, when we make the tragic error of mistaking the model for the Heavy the chair
territory, we then have representations which impoverish our experience and limit
our potential. Thus, the very same processes which allow us to produce useful and Thatforgotten name will You finish repeating the let
aesthetically pleasing models of our experience can impoverish and limit us. appear suddenly in your ters of the alphabet to your
Hypnosis is a particularly striking example of this. mind's eye self
One of the most common forms of distortion is the way in which we select
several parts of our experience and establish causal relations among them, linking
them in our model so that, when we detect the presence of one or more of these (c) Cause-Effect - use of predicates which claim a necessary connection
parts, we come to expect some other part. between the portions of the speaker's experience such as: make, cause,
Linguistically, we have found it useful to distinguish three categories of causal force, require, etc.
relations or linkages:
The general form for this type of causal linkage is:

(a) Conjunction - use of the connectives and, but (i.e.,
and not) X causative predicate Y
(e.g., will make)
Statements exploiting simple conjunctions have the general form:
Sitting all the way in that You go into a profound somnambulistic
X and Y chair trance

Staring at that paperweight Your eyelids become heavy
You are listening to the You are relaxing more and
sound of my voice more
Listening to the sound of You relax more and more
You are sitting in the chair You are drifting deeper into my voice
trance
Each of these constructions makes the claim that there is a connection
You are focusing your eyes Your eyelids are becoming between two classes of events. The strength of the connection that is claimed varies
on that spot heavy from simple co-occurrence to one of necessity. As we showed in Part I of this
volume, the most typical way in which a hypnotist uses these modeling processes is
by linking some portion of the client's on-going experience which the client is able
(b) Implied Causatives - use of the connectives as, while,
immediately to verify to some experience or behavior which the hypnotist wishes
during, before, after, ...
the client to have. These same patterns may be made to appear much more complex
by introducing negatives into the general forms presented, as the following
Statements which make use of this type of causal linkage have the
examples show:
same type of form:

you won't be able to keep
X as Y your eyelids open as you feel their weight...
while
during
~X as
Y

You will go deeper into You listen to the sound of my

73

[PAGE 074]

desk; the monotony of the filing cabinet; the need to take a rest; the comfort
where ~is the symbol for negation of closing one's eyes; the relaxing sensation of a deep breath; the delight of
learning passively; the capacity for intellectual learning by the unconscious.
You can't prevent as You feel the tight
yourselffrom experi- ness around your
encing the deep feeling eyes
of sadness Here is an excellent example of Erickson's use of Cause-Effect at a high level
of patterning. He maneuvers the client into a situation wherein she comes to
xX as Y believe that her feeling of success caused the author's discomfiture. This makes use
of the client's own modeling processes to assist her in entering trance.
Not talking makes it so easy To not listen to any
sound but my voice . + . To illustrate, a Ph.D. in psychology, extremely scornful and skeptical of
hypnosis, challenged the author to "try to work your little fad" on her in the
~X makes it so easy ~Y
presence of witnesses who would be able to attest to the author's failure. However,
she did state that if it could be demonstrated to her that there were such a
phenomenon as hypnosis, she would lend herself to any studies the author might
In addition, to add negation to the basic patterns, you may also compound the plan. Her challenge and conditions were accepted. Her promise to act as a subject,
events listed under the cover symbols X and Y, thus making each of them if convinced, was carefully and quietly emphasized since it constituted behavior of
themselves complex as in: her own and could become the foundation for future trance behavior. Next, a
technique of suggestion was employed which was believed certain to fail, which it
did. Thus, the subject was given a feeling of success gratifying to her, but carrying
Not speaking and will make You go even more
an admixture of some regret over the author's discomfiture. This regret constituted
Preventing your rapidly into a trance
a foundation stone for future trances. Then, apparently as a face-saving device for
eyes from closing as you listen to the
the author, the topic of ideomotor activity was raised. After some discussion,
sound of my voice
indirect suggestion led her to express a willingness to cooperate in experimentation
—X]l and -X2 will make YI as Y2 of ideomotor activity. She qualified this by stating, "Don't try to tell me that
ideomotor activity is hypnosis, because I know it isn't." This was countered by the
observation that ideomotor activity could undoubtedly be achieved in hypnosis
As the reader can verify for himself, the variations on these patterns are
even as in the waking state. Thus, another foundation stone was laid for future
inexhaustible.
trance activity. .. . (1967, p. 21)
We now quote several examples of Erickson's use of these
patterns. A closely related modeling process called mind reading - the situation in which
... And that paperweight; the filing cabinet; your foot on the rug; the one person claims to have knowledge of another person's non-observable behavior
ceiling light; the draperies; your right hand on the arm of the chair; the - is useful in pacing and leading the client.
pictures on the wall; the changingfocus ofyour eyes as you glance about, For example, here are some common Surface Structures of this form that are
the interest of the book titles; the tension in your shoulders; the feeling of rarely challenged in spite of their mind reading. These, in fact, are a part of almost
the chair; the disturbing noises and thoughts; weight of hands and feet;
everyone's experience. In some cases, these statements may be true, but without a
weight of problems, weight of desk; the stationery stand; the records of
specification of the process, no distinction between hallucinations and well-formed
many patients; the phenomena of life, of illness, of emotion, of physical
representations can be made.
and mental behavior; the restfulness of relaxation; the need to attend to
one's needs; the need to attend to one's tension while looking at the desk or
the paperweight or the filing cabinet; the comfort of withdrawal from the I know what makes him happy.
environment; fatigue and its development; the unchanging character of the You should have known I wouldn't be pleased. I know he

74

[PAGE 075]

doesn't like me. and convey the same Deep Structure meaning. Linguistics, as we stated before, is
I'm sorry to keep annoying you. the study of the intuitions which each of us has as a native speaker/listener of
You must be wondering about my concern. English and the formalization of those intuitions. We ask you now to pay attention
to your own intuitions and to the formal maps which represent the experiences you
By carefully employing the mind-reading pattern, the hypnotist can successfully
have. These individual, personal intuitions will allow you to check what we are
pace and lead the client even in the areas of the client's experience which have no
doing in this book and also are the very skills which have made it possible for
observable consequences. We quote another example from Erickson's work. Milton Erickson to create his successful techniques of hypnosis. If you pay
attention to your own intuitions, trust them and use them, there is much that you
We both want to know why you are so promiscuous. We both want to know
can and will learn. As a child, you learned a natural language full of complexities
the cause ofyour behavior. We both know that that knowledge is in your
in a very short time - an ability which no machine has yet acquired. Your language
unconscious mind.
has rules which you use in a systematic way, without being consciously aware of
For the next two hours, you will sit quietly here thinking of nothing, doing
what those rules are, just as Erickson uses language in a rule-governed way during
nothing, just knowing that your unconscious is going to tell you and me the
hypnosis. This book, then, is a map of the rules he uses without being cognizant of
reason for your behavior. It will tell the reason clearly and
them - a map to help you learn his intuitions and to pay attention to, and learn from,
understandably, but neither you nor I will understand until the right time
your own intuitions.
comes, and not until then. You don't know how your unconscious will tell. I
Now, if you heard the Surface Structure:
won't know what it tells until after you do, but then I will learn the reason
too. At the right time, in the right way, you will know and I will know. Something was given
Then you will be all right. (1967, p. 402)
you would know intuitively the Deep Structure:
The careful and skillful use of these patterns will soon blur the distinction
between pacing and leading the client's experience. Someone gave something to someone

Transderivational Search
In order to make the fullest relevant meaning out of the Surface Structure
This section deals with the distinctions of the dominant hemisphere which are
Something was given, you know that someone had to do the giving and someone
the most important to an understanding of Milton Erickson's effective work with
had to do the receiving. The model of this process is represented as follows:
hypnosis. Each of the following linguistic distinctions shares a common pattern,
1.e., in order to find a relevant meaning in the Surface Structure of these forms,
full linguistic representation Deep Structure
information must be obtained from outside the Deep Structure meaning that is N


derived from the Surface Structure actually said. We intend to keep this section as Transformation Three
simple as possible, and we suggest that you consult the construction exercises in “ Processes
Part III for additional help. Derivation y > > Human
Transformational processes are any deletion, distortion, or generalization that “ Modaling
occur between the full linguistic representation - Deep Structure - and the Surface \

Structure that is actually spoken or written, or heard, or seen. For example, this
spoken or written representation. . . Surface Structure
case of deletion:

This is a representation of part of the process we go through in understanding and
Someone can give something to someone
producing speech and writing. But if you consider the example even further, you

could be uttered in this form or could be said as: will see that the words someone and something have no referential index. The
meaning of just who gave what to whom is not available even in the Deep
Structure. How, then, is the meaning made clear? How does a listener find a
Something was given

75

[PAGE 076]

meaningful interpretation of these words relevant to his own experience? The where: NP = noun phrase
simple answer would be to ask; however, during a hypnotic induction this can VP = verb phrase
rarely be done, and in many V = verb


other circumstances people do not have the opportunity to ask.
Specifically, for the example given Furthermore, does this search for meaning take place on a conscious level? The
answer, apparently, is "No." We are constantly processing information, most of it
Deep Structure Representation unconsciously. If you heard the sentences:


You know, people should study language closely if they want to
learn how to use it in their work. People who do hypnosis use
SS language as their main tool, yet they fail to study it closely.
NP1 VP
How would you recover the meaning most relevant for you? Now think of those
Someone Y I
y
same words being said to you personally by another person in a conversation.
Pay attention to your intuitions as you do this. Most likely, you will connect the
V NP2 NP3 sentences about people to be about you, depending upon whether you are
engaged in the practice of hypnosis and how well you can fully experience these
Y TA y
words being said about you. They do not mention you directly nor is there any
gave something to someone
Deep Structure reference to you. Nevertheless, some process is at work in you
A y which supplies a referential index which will make meaning out of the words as
though they were being said to you specifically. We call this phenomenon a
, Derivation including
transderivational search. Visually, this can be represented as:
N transformational deletion
(twice) removing NP1 and NP3.
(1) If Deep Structure] a NP with no referential index

Vi, } (derivation)

Surface structure representation Surface Structure
where " | "means includes
Then
S
a AAA
(2) A set of derivations which are formally equivalent to the Deep Structure
NP VP (1) will be generated, except that they will have noun phrases which

3
Something
IN
was given
have referential indices.


(3) The new Deep Structures which contain referential indices (noun phrases) must,
Transformational permutation NP2 of course, come from somewhere obviously, the client's model of the world. For
becomes the subject in NP1 position. years now we have found it very valuable in our work to ask any client who claims
he does not know the answer to one of our questions to guess. The guess must come
from the client's model; it is, in essence, a one-line dream. This goes on constantly
will people as they process language, and it is one main source of the massive
76

[PAGE 077]

problems resulting from "projecting" upon the communications of others. However, of the client's experience. Erickson describes a sentence of this form as:
this projection can become a singular tool in hypnosis when used as Erickson
skillfully does. A formal representation of this transderivation search could be . . Sounds so specific, yet it is so general. . .
diagrammed as follows:
Certain sensations in your hand will increase.
You become aware of that specific memory.
Deep [ DS; DS& ... D.S.n Nobody knows for sure.
Structure | NP with People can be comfortable while reading this sentence.
~referential
Index All of the above Surface Structures are examples of generalized referential indices.
Transderivationak Certain sensations does not refer to any particular sensation, thus allowing the
client to fully supply the index most relevant from his own experience. The same is
Search true for the specific memory, allowing the client a choice. People, again, could be
anyone, and Nobody could be anyone, also. There is no referential index in any of
ss. | I ss. | SS. |... S.S.n the above four phrases.

Noun Phrases with no referential indices.
(a) D.S4 = DAS.
jk... an
......


except Example sentences
(b) D.S.; differs from D.S.j,x......n in that
woman A woman who went into a trance.
D.S. j»k......n all have referential index indices on their included noun
patient A patient I had once.
phrases, where ~means negation.
problem The problem was improving.
one One can feel so good.
The set of Deep Structures activated by the transderivation search will be a result of
Situation Way situation is decaying.
the richness of the listener's model of the world. However, the one referential index feeling I get that feeling each time I'm in this situation.
that will always be available in anybody's model of the world will be his own
.. . And that paperweight; the filing cabinet; your foot on the rug; the
unique referential index. All of the above diagrams are a formal way of displaying
ceiling light; the draperies; your right hand on the arm of the chair; the
what happens when somebody says to you:
pictures on the wall; the changing focus of your eyes as you glance about;
the interest of the book titles; the tension in your shoulders; the feeling of
People should be nicer to me the chair; the disturbing noises and thoughts; weight of hands and feet;
weight of problems, weight of desk; the stationery stand; the records of
Who is the person you think of that they are saying should be nicer? Could be many patients; the phenomena of life, of illness, of emotion, of physical and
anyone - could even be you. The specific forms of Surface Structure which activate mental behavior; the restfulness of relaxation; the need to attend to one's
transderivational search will now be presented one by one. needs; the need to attend to one's tension while looking at the desk or the
paperweight or the filing cabinet; the comfort of withdrawal from the
1. Generalized Referential Index environment; fatigue and its development; the unchanging character of the
Surface Structures of this form can be extremely useful in hypnotic endeavors. desk; the monotony of the filing cabinet; the need to take a rest; the comfort
A sentence with a noun phrase with a generalized referential index allows the client of closing one's eyes; the relaxing sensation of a deep breathi the delight of
full assessing and activating of the transderivational search processes. This is learning passively; the capacity for intellectual learning by the
accomplished simply by using noun phrases with no referential index in the world UNCONSCIOUS. ...

77

[PAGE 078]

lin guistic representation - Deep Structure - and the actual sentences used by us in
2. Generalized Referential Index with Suggested Noun Phrase our communication - Surface Structure. Notice the difference in the amount of
This class of patterns 8 basically the same as the previous one with a single information available in each of the following sentences:
exception: Specifically, a person attaches the missing noun phrase to any position
in the sentence, thus increasing the likelihood it will be selected by the (1) The man bought the car from the woman for twenty dollars.
transderivational search. For example, in the last section, the Surface Structure: (2) The car was bought.


People can be comfortable while reading this sentence In the field of transformational grammar, each predicate or process word can be
classified by the number and kind of nouns or arguments whose relationship or
takes on a slightly different form: process it describes. The predicate buy can be classified as a four-place predicate:

People can be comfortable while reading this sentence, Joe. buy is a predicate which describes the process which takes place
Joe, people can be comfortable while reading this sentence. among:

People, Joe, can be comfortable while reading this sentence. a buyer the person doing the buying, acquiring the material
People can, Joe, be comfortable while reading this sentence. a seller - the person doing the selling, releasing the material
People can be comfortable, Joe, while reading this sentence. the material -- the things whose possession is being changed
the amount - the thing or service being exchanged for the material
Each of these forms has a slightly different effect. Try saying them out loud, using
your own intuitions as a gauge to experience the differences. Exchange them with a In the first sentence, all of these noun arguments occur in the Surface Structure (1);
partner and pay attention to the intuitions you have while hearing them, how they in the second sentence, only one of them is represented; the other three have been
affect you. Try them in the course of a normal conversation. For example, say to removed by the transformational processes of deletion (see Magic / for a fuller
someone in the course of a conversation: discussion).
In the context of hypnosis, as the client attempts to make sense, or, more
You know (name) People can read this sentence (name) any time they accurately, to make complete meaning, out of the hypnotist's verbalizations, the
want to. skillful use of the transformational process of deletion assists the hypnotist in
pacing the client. By skillfully deleting portions of the full linguistic representation
Surface Structures of this form are easy to construct and can be very useful. the Deep Structure - the client is forced to activate additional Deep Structures to
recover the full meaning. In the process of generating and sekcting these Deep
Deletion - Grammatical and Ungrammatical Structures in their search for full meaning, clients will generate and select Deep
One of the three universal processes of human modeling is deletion. This Structures which will:
process occurs at the neurological level, the social level and the level of individual
experience (see Magic I, Chapter 1, for more detailed discussion). Our sensory 1. Insure participation on the part of the client, fully engaging the dominant
apparatus detects and reports on changes in the patterns of energy only within hemisphere
narrow ranges. For example, the human ear shows phenomenal amplitude 2. Insure that the hypnotist's verbalizations effectively pace the client's
sensitivity even to displacement of the eardrum the diameter of a hydrogen atom experience
(Noback, 1967, p. 156). It responds to wavelengths only between 20 and 20,000 3. Insure that the client has the freedom to employ his own resources in the
cycles per second. Thus, patterns of energy - potential sounds - above 20,000 process of recovering the full meaning
cycles per second are not available to us to assist us in organizing our experience.
In other words, our nervous systems delete all of the patterns above 20,000 cycles There are two types of deletions which Erickson typically employs:
per second. At the level of patterning of language, transformational linguists have
identified a number of specific patterns of deletion which occur between the full 1. Grammatical deletion, in which the resulting Surface Structure is a well-

78

[PAGE 079]

formed sentence of English Nominalization
2. Ungrammatical deletion, in which the resulting Surface Structure is not Nominalization is the linguistic process of turning a process word or verb into
a well-formed sentence of English an event or thing through a complex transformational process. This almost always
occurs with the total deletion of some referential index and also serves to activate
The sentence presented earlier - The car was bought - is an example of the use of transderivational search. For example:
grammatical deletion. Examples of the result of ungrammatical deletion are
sentence fragments such as: The satisfaction of allowing your unconscious mind to communicate
The awareness of the feeling of the char
and you fully realize so well that you. . . The depths of the trance state
and so clearly you want and need... Hearing the impossible actuality
I will want soon to tell you. . . The utter comfort of knowledge and clarity
As the presence of relaxation and curiosity
These sequences of words are considered by most native speakers of English to be
sentence fragments - pieces of sentences which, in themselves, do not constitute a ... And that paperweight; the filing cabinet; your foot on the rug; the
complete, wellformed sentence of English. Such fragments - the result of ceiling light; the draperies; your right hand on the arm of the chair; the
ungrammatical deletion - force maximum participation on the part of the client to pictures on the wall; the changing focus of your eyes as you glance about;
make a complete meaning. the interest of the book titles; the tension in your shoulders; the feeling of
the chair; the disturbing noises and thoughts; weight of hands and feet;
. . . And that paperweight; the filing cabinet; your foot on the rug; the weight ofproblems, weight of desk; the stationery stand; the records of
ceiling light; the draperies; your right hand on the arm of the chair; the many patients; the phenomena of life, of illness, of emotion, of physical
pictures on the wall; the changing focus ofyour eyes as you glance about; and mental behavior; the restfulness of relaxation; the need to attend to
the interest of the book titles; the tension in your shoulders; the feeling of one's needs; the need to attend to one's tension while looking at the desk
the chair; the disturbing noises and thoughts; weight of hands and feet; or the paperweight or the filing cabinet; the comfort of withdrawal from
weight of problems, weight of desk; the stationery stand; the records of the environment; fatigue and its development; the unchanging character
many patients; the phenomena of life, of illness, of emotion, of physical of the desk; the monotony of the filing cabinet; the need to take a rest; the
and mental behavior; the restfulness of relaxation; the need to attend to comfort of closing one's eyes; the relaxing sensation of a deep breath; the
one's needs; the need to attend to one's tension while looking at the desk delight of learning passively; the capacity for intellectual learning by the
or the paperweight or the filing cabinet; the comfort of withdrawal from UNCONSCIOUS. . . .
the environment; fatigue and its development; the unchanging character
of the desk; the monotony of the filing cabinet; the need to take a rest; the Nominalization occurs when Deep-Structure process words are transformed
comfort of closing one's eyes; the relaxing sensation of a deep breath; the into nouns in the Surface Structure. Nominalization of a process word serves the
delight of learning passively; the capacity for intellectual learning by the hypnotist as a tool in overloading the dominant hemisphere's linguistic processes
unconscious...
by requiring complex coding. Deletions must be recovered and ambiguity often
arises. For example, in the Surface Structure:
The preceding paragraph is a variable jungle of deletions, both grammatical and
ungrammatical. For example, consider the two italic examples:
The satisfaction of knowing you can learn
the changingfocus ofyour Change from what to what?
eyes the referential index of just whose satisfaction is deleted, the search for full
meaning will require that the following meanings be accessed from other sources:
the phenomena of life What phenomena? Of whose life?

X satisfies Y by Y knowing Z
79

[PAGE 080]

(nominalized in Surface Structure) comfort of closing me's eyes; the relaxing sensation of a deep breath; the
delight of learning passively; the capacity for intellectual learning by the
Nominalization serves to allow the client to activate from his model of the world UNCONSCIOUS. . . .
the meanings which will best serve his own purposes and needs, at the same time
aiding in the process of overloading the dominant hemisphere. Ambiguity
Nominalizations also will allow the hypnotist to better pace the client by using Each of us, as a native speaker of English, has the ability to appreciate some of
phrases which are very unspecified by nature and require the client to fill in the the patterns in the structure of the English language. One of the patterns which we
meaning and specification. are able to sensitize ourselves to detect is that of ambiguity. Ambiguity is the name
of the pattern in which a single sentence in English is a verbal representation of
Selectional Restrictions more than one distinct process in the world of the listener's experience. As we
This is the class of Surface Structures which are usually referred to as stated in Magic I:
metaphors. They are violations of well-formed meaning as understood by native Ambiguity is the intuition that native speakers have when the
speakers of the language. For example, the Surface Structures: same Surface Structure has more than one distinct semantic
meaning and is represented as (see page 165):
The man drank the rock
The flower was angry Ambiguity in the Meta-model is the case wherein more than one Deep
The happy chair sang a love song Structure is connected, by transformations, with the same Surface Structure.
Nearly every sentence has more than one possible interpretation.
are violations of selectional restrictions. Drinking implies the act of consuming Yet in ordinary use we appear to understand each sentence in one
some liquid substance; rocks are defined as something which are not, by their way at a time. The preceding sections have outlined some of the
nature, liquid. Anger is an activity engaged in by sentient beings - animals; flowers psychological mechanisms which we employ in sentence
are not of this class. Thus, this also violates selectional restrictions. Happiness is an understanding, hut it has not specified how often we reapply them
activity engaged in by sentient beings. Chairs do not have this quality; they are not to a single speech stimulus which has more than one potential
in the class of animals which can sing songs. Selectional restriction in normal interpretation. Some recent experiments indicate that we process
conversation demands that transderivational activity be performed to access a many structures for each sentence preconsciously but we are
referential index that will be well formed, as when Erickson told Joe (in Part I) that conscious of only one meaning at a time.
a tomato plant can feel relaxed and comfortable. A well-formed meaning requires a
noun phrase which identifies a sentient being for the activity of feeling relaxed and
comfortable. This is the power of metaphor, fairy tales, and fables. It is also the
process at work when Erickson tells stories about a tomato plant or a tractor.

... And that paperweight; the filing cabinet; your foot on the rug; the
ceiling light; the draperies; your right hand on the arm of the chair; the
pictures on the wall; the changing focus of your eyes as you glance about;
the interest of the book titles; the tension in your shoulders; the feeling of
the chair; the disturbing noises and thoughts; weight of hands and feet;
weight ofproblems, weight of desk; the stationery stand; the records of
many patients; the phenomena of life, of illness, of emotion, of physical
and mental behavior; the restfulness of relaxation; the need to attend to
one's needs; the need to attend to one's tension while looking at the desk
or the paperweight or the filing cabinet; the need to take a rest; the

80

[PAGE 081]

visually, 1t is completely ambiguous when presented auditorily. We follow with a
Deep Structure Deep Structure Deep Structure list of examples of additional phonological ambiguities:


a
Derivation light (in color, or in weight)
(series of knows/nose
transf.) here/hear
Surface Structure read/red


As a specific example : .. And that paperweight; the filing cabinet; your foot on the rug; the
ceiling light; the draperies; your right hand on
Deep Struc. 1 Deep Struc. 2 the arm of the chair; the pictures on the wall; the changing focus of your
FBI agents who For someone to investiga- eyes as you glance about; the interest of the book titles; the tension in your
Conducting investi- gate FBI agents can be shoulders; the feeling of the chair; the disturbing noises and thoughts;
gations can be dan- dangerous for someone. weight of hands and feet; weight of problems, weight of desk; the
gerous for someone. stationery stand; the records of many patients; the phenomena of life, of
I _ illness, of emotion, of physical and mental behavior; the restfulness of
Surface Structure : Investigating FBI agents can be relaxation; the need to attend to one's needs; the need to attend to one's
dangerous tension while looking at the desk or the paperweight or the filing cabinet;
the comfort of withdrawal from the environment; fatigue and its
development; the unchanging character of the desk; the monotony of the
Ambiguous Sequences - Conclusion filing cabinet; the need to take a rest; the comfort of closing one's eyes; the
Although every sentence contains some sort of ambiguity, in ordinary usage relaxing sensation of a deep breath; the delight of learning passively; the
nearly every sentence is preceded by a context which makes one interpretation capacity for intellectual learning by the unconscious. . . .
more likely than any of the others. Thus, the preceding studies may be
experimental oddities rather than representative of normal perceptual behavior. Weight pronounced aloud becomes ambiguous. Is it weight or wait? Wait is
Their primary implication for normal perceptual habits is to highlight the also an effective message for this patient who has trouble concentrating.
hypothesis of the preceding section that during speech perception we oscillate
between two kinds of activities: periods of stimulus input and unconscious One very rich source of these word ambiguities is pairs of words which are
processing (during which potential ambiguity can have an effect), and periods of ambiguous with respect to their syntactic category. Many verb/nominalized verb
internal analysis and conscious perception of the preceding unit (during which combinations have this feature:
potential ambiguities arc ignored in favor of one interpretation).
Plath and Bever, 1968,p. 43 lift rest talk pull push shake point nod hand touch move feel


We have identified four categories of ambiguity which occur in Erickson's Each of these words, depending upon its context, may function either as a predicate
work. These are phonological, syntactic, scope and punctuation.” An excellent or as a noun (more specifically, as the nominalization derived from that predicate).
example of phonological ambiguity occurs in Erickson's trance instruction with When these words are used in well-formed Surface Structures in English and are
Huxley; specifically, the phrase: marked analogically, for example, as distinct from their surrounding linguistic
context, Erickson is able to make full use of their inherent phonobgical ambiguity.
. . . A part and apart... The extract given from Magic I is an example of a syntactic ambiguity.
Another example is the one used in the commentary in this volume on the Huxley
As we stated in the commentary, while the phrase is unambiguous when presented article:

81

[PAGE 082]

the paperweight or the filing cabinet; the comfort of withdrawal from the
Hypnotizing hypnotists can be tricky environment; fatigue and its development; the unchanging character of the
desk; the monotony of the filing cabinet; the need to take a rest; the
.. . And that paperweight; the filing cabinet; your foot on the rug; the comfort of closing one's eyes; the relaxing sensation of a deep breath; the
ceiling light; the draperies; your right hand on the arm of the chair; the delight of learning passively; the capacity for intellectual learning by the
pictures on the wall; the changing focus of your eyes as you glance about; unconscious. . . .
the interest of the book titles; the tension in your shoulders; the feeling of
the chair; the disturbing noises and thoughts; weight of hands and feet; One place where this scope ambiguity seems to occur frequently and effectively in
weight of problems, weight of desk; the stationery stand; the records of Erickson's work is where several sentences are embedded under a factive verb. For
many patients; the phenomena of life, of illness, of emotion, of physical example, Erickson might say:
and mental behavior; the restfulness of relaxation; the need to attend to
one's needs; the need to attend to one's tension while looking at the desk ... how soon you will fully realize that you are sitting here comfortably,
or the paperweight or the filing cabinet; the comfort of withdrawal from listening to the sound of my voice, and you are going into a deep trance only
the environment; fatigue and its development; the unchanging character as quickly as your unconscious mind wants. . . .
of the desk; the monotony of the filing cabinet; the need to take a rest; the
comfort of closing one's eyes; the relaxing sensation of a deep breath; the The ambiguity here is whether the portion of Erickson's communication which
delight of learning passively; the capacity for intellectual learning by the occurs after the word and is a part of the sentence which begins with the verb
unconscious. . .. realize. If it is, then it is presupposed to be true. If it is not, then it is simply an
independent sentence which the client may challenge. Predicates such as realize
Scope ambiguity is the kind of ambiguity present in sentences and phrases require that whatever follows them in the same sentence is presupposed to be true
such as: in order for the communication taking place to make any sense at all. For example,
if I say to you:
the old men and women
Are you aware that you are sitting on my hat?

The ambiguity here is whether the adjective old applies both to the noun phrase
men and women or simply to the noun phrase men. In other words, is the phrase to I am presupposing that you are sitting on my hat and simply asking whether you

be understood to be: are aware of it. Either a yes or a no answer on your part indicates your acceptance
of the truth of the portion of the sentence which follows the factive predicate

the men who are old and the women who are old aware. Thus, when Erickson uses the scope ambiguity with a factive predicate, he

or leaves the client to deal with the question (not necessarily consciously - in fact,
the men who are old and the women preferably, not consciously) of whether his going into a deep trance is a fact
presupposed by the communication or not, an excellent topic to occupy the client's

. .. And that paperweight; the filing cabinet; your foot on the rug; the dominant hemisphere.

ceiling light; the draperies; your right hand on the arm of the chair; the The fourth type of ambiguity which we find as a consistent pattern in

pictures on the wall; the changing focus of your eyes as you glance about; Erickson's work is punctuation ambiguity. Erickson might, for example, say:

the interest of the book titles; the tension in your shoulders; the feeling of
... 1 notice that you are wearing a watch carefully what Iam doing. . .
the chair; the disturbing noises and thoughts; weight of hands and feet;
weight of problems, weight of desk; the stationery stand; the records of
many patients; the phenomena of life, of illness, of emotion, of physical This sequence of words is not a well-formed sentence of English. We decompose
and mental behavior; the restfulness of relaxation; the need to attend to the sequence into two sequences, each of which is a well-formed sentence of

one's needs; the need to attend to one's tension while looking at the desk or English:

82

[PAGE 083]

... 1 notice that you are wearing a watch...
and Lesser Included Structures
... Watch carefully whatI am doing. . . The following two categories of Surface Structures Imbedded Questions and
Imbedded Commands - which have included in them another structure can
Here Erickson is making use of the ambiguity of the word watch which can occur constitute a valuable resource for giving imbedded commands and for building
both as a noun and as a verb in the Surface Structures of English. Essentially, response potential by utilizing the processes of the dominant hemisphere.
Erickson has overlapped two well-formed Surface Structures of English. The Imbedded Commands and Imbedded Questions arc the two categories of this that
listener, up until the word carefully, has processed the first of these well-formed will be discussed here.
sentences and recovered the Deep Structure meaning; however, when he comes to
the word carefully, his normal processing strategies fail. As he receives the Imbedded Questions
remainder of the communication from Erickson, he attempts other analyses, Imbedded Questions serve the purpose of building response potential in a
probably recovering the second well-formed Deep Structure. However, there is no client by raising questions without allowing an overt response from the client.
solution to the overlap problem and the normal processing strategies fail. If he They very often are a presupposition of some other command and serve to distract
assumes that the word watch is a noun which goes with the first part of the the dominant hemisphere by having it utilize the internal dialogue in answering
communication, then the second part makes no sense at all (i.e., he cannot recover questions, or trying to answer questions, or even trying to figure out if it should
a Deep Structure for it). If he assumes that the word watch is a verb and goes with answer the questions, or even, still further, if it cou/d answer the questions, even
the second part of the communication, then he can recover no Deep Structure for though a question has not really been asked. Some examples will serve to clarify
the first portion of the communication. In this sense, then, there is no satisfactory this concept:
solution to the punctuation ambiguity involving overlap. Thus, the ambiguity here
is to which sequence of words will the listener assign the phonologically I wonder whether you know which hand will rise first I'm curious to know
ambiguous pivot word (watch, in this example). This phenomenon could be if you can really find your knee in the dark
classified equally well as a special case of ungrammatical deletion. No matter I don't know if you know whether or not you're going into a trance
which characterization you prefer to assist you in organizing your experience of it, I'm pondering over how you feel about the prospect of hypnosis
it constitutes a very powerful technique for distracting the dominant hemisphere. I'm very curious about when you first decided to see me and what you
These four types of ambiguity have in common that each is a single language really want for yourself
representation of more than one meaning or Deep Structure. In each, the client is
faced with the task of selecting meaning from the set of possible Deep Structures All of the above Surface Structures have in common the characteristic of raising a
which the single Surface Structure represents. In order to accomplish this, the question without a request for an overt reply by the client. This is most easily
listener must generate a set of Deep Structures and make some decision as to which accomplished by making a statement about the question in the form that follows:
he will accept as the meaning of the communication intended by the hypnotist.
Again, this involves a transderivational search for the most appropriate meaning X (question verbs) if Y (aware) of (question)
which can be represented by the Surface Structure presented. Ambiguity, then, has I'm curious whether you know which of your hands will rise first.
a positive value in the context of hypnosis in that, since the client generates a
number of Deep Structures and searches through these transderivationally for the
X call be (he speaker of any other person as well; example:
most appropriate meaning, he will:
John is wondering if you know which of your hands will rise first.
(not aware) can be any phrase such as wonder, curious, don't know, etc.
1. Become an active participant in the hypnotic process 2. Select a Deep "if" can be any conditional such as whether, if; whether or not
Structure which represents a meaning which fits for him, thereby insuring or can be a question word such as about, how, what, when, why
a satisfactory pacing I'm curious why you came here, and if you even know why.
3. Employ his normal linguistic processing mechanisms with a where question verbs are any verbs which allow embedded questions to
transderivational search for meaning follow.

83

[PAGE 084]

My mother often tells me to Fred, breathe deeply and slowly.
These imbedded questions are most effective when they are stacked together
to maximally distract the dominant hemisphere. Imbedded commands may also be given by direct and indirect quotation. This
This allows the hypnotist to follow these imbedded questions with a clear is one of Erickson's favorite and most often utilized forms of giving commands
command desired by the hypnotist, thereby utilizing the response potential the indirectly. This is accomplished by placing the command in the context of either a
hypnotist has built up in the client, e.g.: direct or an indirect quote from some other time, place, or situation. For example:


I wonder why you wish to go into a trance, and I'm even more curious to
I used to have a patient who would tell me to feel relaxed
know ifyou know whether or not you think you can, I don't know ifyou
know how soon you will close your eyes; in fact, I don't even know ifyou These are most effective when they are also marked analogically by emphasizing
know anything about a trance at all. I'm pondering this and I am very the command and by looking intently at the listener, if their eyes are open.
curious about knowing ifyou know how to even relax completely.
Indirect Imbedded Command:

Imbedded Commands
My friends tell me to feel comfortable and to loosen up when we are out on
Imbedded Commands serve the purpose of making suggestions to the client
the town
indirectly and, thereby, making it difficult to resist in any way. These constitute a
pattern of Surface Structures which include within them a command, just as the
Direct Imbedded Command:
preceding pattern included a question. For example:

Children are able to Fred, sit down and relax I had a patient once who would say to me, Milton, scratch your nose. It
I may, Fred, breathe deeply while I speak but you don't mind, do you never made much sense but he would consistently tell me to Do it now.
People must Fred, sit all the way down in the chair relax
Plants can Fred, feel comfortable and relaxed Another example would be:


Meaning is so difficult to understand; what does it mean when someone
These four Surface Structures are one type of imbedded command. These are
says, don't move or don't talk. What do they mean when they say, shut your
constructed by placing the client’s name after a modal operator such as:
eyes NOW. What do they mean when they say, Count backwards silently
from 20 to 1.
can, may, might, must, able to

All of the above-described lesser included structures, both questions and
This is a sufficient, though not a necessary, condition for imbedded commands.’
commands, serve the hypnotist as valuable tools to give suggestions indirectly and
They may also be constructed by using the infinitive form of some predicate such
at the same time to distract and utilize the dominant hemisphere. The imbedding of
as:
either questions or commands is simply the inclusion of the question or command
in a larger Surface Structure which serves as a cloak. The style thus far presented
to see, to feel, to move
has been the grammatical approach; however, the effect is the same if the
imbedding is not grammatical, in fact, it may be more effective when presented in
Many people want to see clearly what I mean.
non-grammatical form. This will serve to further distract and overload the

Imbedded Command form: dominant hemisphere. For example, consider the following combination of all
lesser included structures, both grammatical and non- grammatical:

Many people want to Fred, see clearly. .. I want you to Fredfeel relaxed
I wonder whether or not you understand that you can feel comfortable and

84

[PAGE 085]

relaxed, now, I had a friend who used to say, You can learn anything if
This shows that, when one says the sentence which
only you give yourself a chance to relax, and I wonder if you know means the opposite I he one that denies what the first one claims is true -
whether or not you can Fred feel relaxed, and I'm very curious to know if one still must assume that there is a cat on the table in order to make sense
you fully realize that you can Fred know you can and will learn now. I
out of the sentence. A sentence which must be true in order for some other
also wish, though I don't know whether or not you wish to know, ifyou can
sentence to make sense is called the presupposition of the second
Fred have closing eyes and restfulfeelings now.
sentence.


Derived Meanings The value of the skilfull use of presuppositions in the hypnotic context is that
When each of us uses natural language systems to communicate, we assume the it allows the hypnotist to build a model of the ongoing process by using
listener's ability to hear our Surface Structures and decode them from sound presuppositions. Since presuppositions are not an immediate question to the client,
sequences into meaning. In other words, we assume the listener's capability to it is very difficult for him to challenge them. Thus, the client accepts the
recover the Deep Structure representation from the Surface Structure we present. In hypnotist's presuppositions and the process continues. For example, Erickson
addition to this recovery of the Deep Structure from a Surface Structure, we often says:
assume certain additional abilities in the way that the listener will make meaning
out of what we offer. Here we are referring to native speaker/listener's ability, for I don't yet know whether it will be your right hand or your left hand
example, to establish a context in which the sentence we present could have some or both ofyour hands which your unconscious mind will allow to rise
pragmatic value. Erickson uses two of these extra or derived-meanings abilities on to yourface. ...
the part of native listener's in his work. These are Presuppositions and
Conversational Postulates. We presented the subject of Presuppositions in Magic I Here the issue is which hand or whether it will be one or both hands, not whether
as one of the Meta-model distinctions (Chapters 3 and 4). the client will respond to hand levitation. Or, again, Erickson says:


In recent work in linguistics, transformationalists have begun to When I wake you from the trance, you will fully recognize your fine
explore how presuppositions work in natural language. Certain ability to learn quickly from your unconscious mind
sentences when used imply that certain other sentences must be
true in order for them to make sense. For example, if I hear you Here the issue is whether the client will fully recognize, not whether she will
say: recognize, or whether she has been in a trance (presupposed by wake you from
trance), or whether she has and can learn from her unconscious mind. These latter
(37) There is a cat on the table are background assumptions which the client must develop and accept for the
communication to be meaningful at all. The way in which Erickson consistently
I may choose to believe that there is a cat on the table or not and, uses presuppositions to assist the client in entering deep trance and learning deep
either way, I can make sense out of what you are saying. However, trance phenomena demonstrates the power of this technique. ~
if I hear you say:
... When you get up and move your chair to the other side of that table
(38) Sam realized that there is a cat on the table your unconscious mind will then release a lot of important information.
Perhaps it will take your unconscious even longer than five or ten minutes

I must assume that there is, in fact, a cat on the table in order to to do it, or perhaps it will not be until the next session. . . .
make any sense out of what you are saying. This difference shows
up clearly if I introduce the negative element not into the sentence: Again, since the presuppositions of a sentence arc not part of its Deep
Structure, their use both involves the client as an active participant in the process
(39) Sam does not realize that there is a cat on the table of making meaning (in this case, derived meaning) and removes from challenge
whatever the presuppositions of the statements are.


85

[PAGE 086]

The second class of derived meanings used by Erickson arc called moving, this statement is an effective pacing technique. Similarly, if the client's
Conversational Postulates. As with the presuppositions, the meaning represented eyes are closed when Erickson says the second sentence, then the effect is far the
by the conversational postulates is derived it is not a part of the Deep Structure client to respond by opening his eyes. Finally, when the client hears Erickson utter
recovered by the client but requires additional processing. For example, if I say to the third sentence, it has the effect of the command go even deeper into a trance.
you: We will present a formal outline of these phenomena in Part III.


Can you take out the garbage?


the literal Deep Structure requires only that you respond with a yes ora no.
However, the typical response is for you to take out the garbage. In other words,
although I use a Surface Structure whose corresponding Deep Structure is a
yes/no question, you respond to it as though it were a command. In the
Appendices at the end of this volume, we will instruct you on how to construct
examples utilizing these conversational postulates to secure the effects you wish
as a hypnotist. For our present purposes, it is necessary only to point out that,
when Erickson chooses to use the conversational postulate mechanism for
securing a response from his client, he is operating consistently with his stated
guidelines. Specifically, by using conversational postulates, he avoids giving
commands, simultaneously allowing the client to choose to respond or not and
avoiding the authoritarian relationship between himself and the client. Thus, the
client, if he chooses to respond to the sentence:


... Can you allow your hand to rise. ..


by allowing her hand to rise, actively participates in the process of trance
induction, using conversational postulates to understand the derived meaning of
the Surface Structure yes/no question — a processing act in addition to the
recovery of the Deep Structure. If he fails to respond, there is no disruption of the
process of trance induction by Erickson, since there was no command given; a
question was simply asked and no response is required.
The non-yes/no question form of the communication also works in the same
way. Erickson might, for example, say:


There is no need for you to move
or

There is no needfor you to keep your eyes closed
or

It is possible for you to go even deeper into a trance


If the client is moving when Erickson says the first of these sentences, then the
effect of the communication is the command don't move. If the client was not

86

[PAGE 087]

Accessing the Non - Dominant Hemisphere concepts, and the trance state of the subject probably accounts for
her acceptance of them, but, at all events, they served the
Hypnosis is essentially a communication of ideas and purposes.

understandings to a patient in such a fashion that he will be most
receptive to the presented ideas and thereby be motivated to These passages underline one of the most important characteristics of
explore his own body potentials for the control of his Erickson's complex behavior in hypnosis and therapy. His willingness to accept
psychological and physiological responses and behavior. the client's model of the world allows him to assist his client in changing.
Milton H. Erickson, 1967 This means I'm less distracted by the content of what people say.
Many patterns of behavior are reflected in the way a person says
Milton Erickson has succeeded in developing a powerful set of techniques for something rather than in what he says.
accessing and communicating with the nondominant hemisphere in human beings.
His skills allow him to call out the resources of the person with whom he is In other words, Erickson listens for the modeling principles which the clients use
communicating. In his hypnotic work Erickson makes extensive use of the distinc
- to construct their realities.
tion between the conscious and the unconscious mind of the client. Erickson A number of people in the history of civilization have made this point - that
received his medical and psychiatric training in the standard institutions of his there is an irreducible difference between the world and our experience of it. We,
school years; specifically, he was trained in the psychoanalytic tradition from as human beings, do not operate directly upon the world, but, rather, we operate
which he appropriated the terms conscious and unconscious. In his own writings upon the world through our representations of it. Each of us creates a
he uses the two terms in a number of ways. He, himself, comments in Hypnotic representation of the world we live in - that is, we create a map or model which we
Psychotherapy, 1948: use to generate our behavior. The map or model which we create serves us as a
representation of what is possible, what is available, what the structure of the
As for the trance state itself, it should be regarded as a special, unique, but wholly world is. Our representation of the world determines to a large degree what our
normal psychological state. . .. For convenience in conceptualization, this special experience of the world is, how we perceive the world, what choices we see
state, or level of awareness, has been termed Unconscious or subconscious. available to us as we live in the world.
It must be remembered that the object of the world of ideas as a
Again, Erickson, in The Investigation of a Specific Amnesia, 1967, p. 159, whole [the map or model RWB/JTG] is not the portrayal of reality
- this would be an utterly impossible task - but rather to provide us
comments:
with an instrument for finding our way about more easily in the
While in a state of profound, hypnotic sleep, the subject was given the world.
H. Vaihinger, The Philosophy ofAs If, p.15.
suggestion that she could reveal indirectly the information desired with neither
conscious nor subconscious realization of what she was doing. To this end she
was instructed to continue in a state of deep hypnosis, thereby dissociating her No two human beings have exactly the same experiences. The model of the

conscious mind from, and leaving it in, a state of quiescence. At the same time, world which we create to guide us is based, in part, upon our experiences. Each of
by means of her subconscious mind, she was to engage the author in an us may, then, create a different model of the world we share, and thus come to live
animated conversation. Thus, with both conscious and subconscious minds in a somewhat different reality.
engaged, a third level of consciousness in response to hypnotic suggestion would .. Important characteristics of maps should be noted. A map is

emerge from the depths of her mind, and would express itself by guiding her not the territory it represents, but, if correct, it has a similar
hand in automatic writing, of which she would be aware neither consciously nor structure to the territory, which accounts for its usefulness. . . .
subconsciously. A. Korzybski, Science & Sanity, 4th Ed., 1958, pp. 58-60.


Erickson goes on to comment in a footnote to this portion of the text: Erickson allows himself the same flexibility in the creation of his own model
The author assumes no responsibility for the validity of these for therapy and hypnosis. This flexibility has allowed him to detect and to come to

87

[PAGE 088]

utilize effectively in his work patterns which are very fast and powerful. both on his part and on that of others. He has found, for example,
Our purpose is to create a model of a portion of Erickson's behavior which will that skill in balancing a dowel in one hand is enhanced when one is
make these patterns available. One of the most' simultaneously speaking if the dowel is in the left hand, while
useful ways of organizing our own experience in hypnosis and therapy, and of performance is impaired when one is speaking if the dowel is in
understanding Erickson's technique, was to realize Erickson's use of the terms the right hand. His explanation is that speaking and bal ancing
conscious and unconscious refer (at least partially) to the dominant and non- are competing activities, which, owing to the "spill-over" effect,
dominant hemispheres of the human brain. We are not suggesting that Erickson's interfere with one another when they both occur in opposite
use of the term unconscious mind is always and only referring to the nondominant hemispheres, and they then promote and facilitate one another.
hemisphere, but that a model which translates the terms in this way provides a Exemplifying the same, complementary side-effect, speaking
guide for learning Erickson's techniques. improves the subject's ability to recognize elements in the right
visual field, even when those shapes are nonsensical. In contrast,
Once a satisfactory deep trance state has been achieved by the client, for example, when the patient rehearses melodies (a right-hemisphere function),
both hemispheres are being accessed and utilized, especially in some of the more a left-visuabfield advantage results.
complex deep trance phenomena (e.g., positive hallucinations). As with any model,
the usefulness of this translation of the term unconscious into the term non- This partial list of cerebral asymmetries in the human brain serves both as a list
dominant hemisphere will be the criterion for its acceptance. of ways in which the unconscious may be accessed in the context of hypnosis and
also as an important organizing principle in the context of therapy, especially in
The Non-dominant Hemisphere in Humans work with incongruities (see Magic I, Chapter 6, and Magic II, Part II). In other
As we related in the Introduction to Part II, research on the neurological words, by recognizing these asymmetries, the hypnotist who is working to assist
organization of human beings (especially, split-brain) has revealed some typical the dient in achieving trance becomes systematic in his choices about how to
differences between the behavior of the cerebral hemispheres. Specifically, the communicate with the unconscious mind of the client.
researchers have identified differences in the quality, speed and accuracy of In the list of non-dominant hemisphere functions, we have included special
response of the two parts of the cerebral cortex for different sensory and represen- classes of language. This requires an explanation and a slight excursion into
tational functions (see, especially, Jerre Levy's article, Psychobiological linguistic and psycholinguistic research. There are two parts to the explanation.
Implications of Bilateral Asymmetry). For our present purposes, the most First, human language systems are remarkably complex systems. The intricacies of
interesting of these are the following: the patterning in human languages has so far exceeded the linguist's «ills in
creating a model which represents all of these patterns. In other words, although we
dominant non-dominant are completely systematic in our linguistic behavior, we have not yet been
hemisphere functions hemisphere functions successful in describing that behavior. Thus, the task of learning the patterns which
are our language system has eluded the linguists, yet, each of us accomplishes
full language system visualization essentially the same task between the ages of two and six years. Furthermore,
tempo melody although the languages of the world sound dramatically quite different when heard
contralateral side of special class of and appear quite different when represented visually in their written forms, a
the body language deeper analysis of their patterns shows a close similarity in their structures. Out of
contralateral side of all of the logically possible forms which the patterns (syntax) of natural language
the body systems could have, only a relatively restricted number of patterns occur. Largely
independent of the specific language which they are learning, children seem to
This asymmetry between the cerebral hemispheres shows up in interesting learn at the same rate with the same kind of "mistakes." These considerations have
ways in common, everyday tasks; for example, Gardner (1975, p. 374) comments: led linguists and psycho linguists to formulate the model of wired-in (neurological)
Kinsbourne's model of hemispheres competing for control of linguistic distinctions known as Universal Grammar. These universal distinctions
attentional mechanisms has generated some imaginative research, are said to be part of the genetically specified nervous system of each of us at birth.

88

[PAGE 089]

The presence of these universals in the model helps researchers to understand both distraction and simultaneous utilization of the dominant hemisphere, and accessing
how languages display such marked similarity and also how children accomplish of the non-dominant hemisphere. One of the most direct and powerful of the nonthe complex task of learning a language in such a short time. dominant hemisphere accessing techniques found by hypnotists is that of having
The second part of the explanation involves the fact that children who are fully the client create visual images in his mind's eye. By bringing the client to a task
fluent in a language and who suffer some brain trauma in the language hemisphere which presupposes a visualization capacity, the hypnotist facilitates the transfer of
typically become mute. They then go through the standard stages for the control from the dominant hemisphere to the non-dominant hemisphere.
acquisition of the language once again and become fully fluent speakers. This Subjective accounts from many subjects explaining
pattern has been interpreted by researchers as a demonstration of the ability of these findings may be summarized as follows:
either hemisphere to learn and to function as a full linguistic system. Thus, in the "When I listen to the imaginary metronome, it speeds up or slows
case in which some condition prevents the dominant hemisphere from functioning down, gets louder or fainter, as I start to go into a trance, and I just
adequately as the language center, the non-dominant hemisphere will take over that drift along. With the real metronome, it remains distractingly
function. This equipotentiality or plasticity of the human nervous system is another constant, and it keeps pulling me back to reality instead of letting
piece of evidence pointing to great human potential so far largely unexplored. me drift along into a trance. The imaginary metronome is
Considering these two facts together, we predict that the non-dominant changeable and always fits n with just the way I'm thinking and
hemisphere will demonstrate some language abilities. Specifically, as a minimum, feeling, but I have to fit myself to the real one."
all of the distinctions available in the Universal Grammar model will be present in In this same connection, mention should be made of findings
the non-dominant hemisphere. This prediction of the authors turns out to be sup- in experimental and clinical work centering around hypnotically
ported by research from various sources. For example, one description of the induced visual hallucinations. For example, a patient, greatly
classes of language abilities by hemisphere is given by Levy (1974, p. 174): confused about her personal identity, was induced to visualize a
Since the right hemispheres of commissurotomy patients appear to number of crystal balls in which she could hallucinate a whole
have some comprehension of both spoken language as well as series of significant life experiences, make objective and
written nouns, verbs, and adjectives, and also have some minimal subjective comparisons and thus establish the continuity of her
capacities for expressive speech, the question arises as to the life, from one hallucinated experience to the next. With a real
differences in the two hemispheres which underlie the vast crystal ball, the hallucinated experiences were physically limited
differences in Inguistic abilities. If the minor hemisphere could in extent, and the changing and superimposition of "scenes" much
comprehend no speech, but could produce some, one could postu- less satisfactory.
late the absence of phonologies in the right hemisphere and could Milton H. Erickson, 1967, pp. 8 and 9
interpret speech production as a result of a direct translation from a
semantic to articulatory code. If the right hemisphere could Our experiences in both hypnosis and therapy have repeatedly included for
comprehend, but not produce speech, one could postulate the many of our clients the distinction 'mentioned previously in the commentary on the
absence of an articulatory code. However, when the right Huxley article - the difference between imaging a picture in the mind's eye and
hemisphere can both comprehend and express language, even seeing a picture in the mind's eye. The experience of imaging a picture is an
though at a very limited level, an interpretation becomes much activity which occurs in the dominant hemisphere - this, essentially, is the
more difficult. construction of a visual image using the language system to lead in the
construction. The images which result from this process are, typically, poor in
We will return to the topic of linguistic communication with the non-dominant quality, unfocused and drab, with only a faint resemblance to the images which the
hemisphere later in this chapter. client experiences with his eyes open. The process of seeing a picture in the mind's
eye is apparently a non-dominant-hemisphere activity. Here, the resulting images
Visual Accessing are clear and focused and so closely approximate the client's experience with his
The hypnotist is faced with the task of assisting the client in getting access to eyes open. Clients will differ greatly in their ability to see pictures in their mind's
his unconscious or non-dominant hemisphere. As we outlined, this has two parts - eye. In general, clients who have as their most highly valued representational

89

[PAGE 090]

system a visual system will respond most satisfactorily to this technique of visual rhythmically, listening to the sound of the voice counting, he is to make clear,
accessing of the non-dominant hemisphere. The hypnotist needs only to ask the focused images of each of the numerals as he hears its name, each in a different
client to visualize to begin the process of trance induction effectively. In the color. Listening to the client's use of predicates for identifying the client's most
context of therapy, the therapist's skills in identifying and responding to the client highly valued representational system will allow the hypnotist to easily decide
in the client's own representational system is one of his most powerful techniques: whether a visualization accessing induction will be effective.
These two case reports have been presented in considerable detail Hypnotists have, in fact, developed a series of so-called suggestibility tests
to illustrate the naturalistic hypnotic approach to children. There is which they often use prior to beginning a standard induction. These suggestibility
seldom, if ever, a need for a formalized or ritualistic technique. tests are simply ways for testing to determine whether the client has the ability to
The eidetic imagery of child, his readiness, eagerness and actual employ certain representational systems. For example, notice the predicates which
need for new learnings, his desire to understand and to share in the occur in the following hand clasp suggestibility test (Weitzenhoffer, 1957, pp. 127-
activities of the world about him, and the opportunities offered by 128):
"pretend" and imitation games all serve to enable him to respond I want you to clasp your hands like this. . . make them real tight, as
competently and well to hypnotic suggestions. (1967, p. 423) tight as you can. .. . As you do, you will soon find that your
fingers are becoming locked together, so that your hands are
Franz Baumann, a well-known San Francisco medical hypnotist who becoming stuck together... your hands and fingers are sticking
specializes in child and adolescent practice, utilizes the visualization accessing more and more together... more and more tightly clasped together.
technique in his inductions almost exclusively with consistent results. Specifically,
he has his clients close their eyes and watch their favorite TV program. Visual Precisely the same suggestibility test - that is, a test for representational system
fantasy work - called Guided Fantasy (see Magic I, Chapter 6, and Magic II, Part I, abilities - can easily be altered to serve as a test for the client's visualization
for a fuller discussion) - was the way in which cach of the authors first became abilities. Specifically, by shifting the predicates used to visual predicates and
interested in hypnosis as a tool for assisting clients in changing. Our therapeutic observing how well the client responds, the hypnotist can make a valid choice as to
experiences had already convinced us of the power and effectiveness of which kind of accessing of the non-dominant hemisphere he will use. For example,
visualization as a therapeutic technique before we became aware that the behavior using Weitzenhoffer's induction as a guide, we change the predicates from
of our clients matched perfectly the behavior described by hypnotists of their kinesthetic to visual:
clients doing visual tasks while in light and medium trances.
One of the techniques employed by hypnotists in inducing or deepening a I want you to make a picture in your mind's eye of your hands clasped together.
trance state in a client is that of having the client count, or counting for the client. Look just above your hands and see the dark green bucket filled with white glue.
This technique serves several purposes. In the present context, the counting Watch closely as the white fluid falls, dripping down the scarred, battered sides of
technique is a special case of visual accessing of the non-dominant hemisphere. the green bucket... .
When a client is listening to himself or someone else count, he is quite likely
simultaneously to represent the numerals which he is hearing as an internal visual In many of Erickson's inductions, he will include statements about the letters of
display. Numerals, as with other standard visual patterns, are stored in the non- the alphabet - for example, reminding the client of the great difficulty which he
dominant hemisphere; thus, the counting technique accesses the unconscious part experienced at one point in his life in distinguishing between a b and a d as he
of the client's brain. The relative ineffectiveness of counting as a trance induction learned the alphabet forms. In addition to functioning as a covert instruction for age
and deepening technique for certain clients now becomes understandable - these regression, these statements access the visual representations for the letters of the
are clients whose ability to access the non-dominant hemisphere for visual alphabet just as the numeral sequences do, making this a special case of visual
representations has yet to be developed. With this understanding of the counting accessing.
task as a special case of visual accessing of the non-dominant hemisphere, If the client shows little or no ability to create non-dominant hemisphere visual
hypnotists who are working with clients who have some ability to see visual representations, the hypnotist need not give up the choice of accessing the nonrepresentations in their mind's eye may increase the effectiveness of this technique dominant hemisphere by visualizing. Indeed, it is exactly here that Erickson again
simply by instructing the client, for example, that, as he sits there breathing demonstrates his skills. As he describes in the Huxley article, as part of a "standard

90

[PAGE 091]

procedure" for Erickson, he uses the client’s most highly valued representational hypnotist can instruct the client to look and to see whatever visual representations
system to assist him in gaining access to others. are commonly associated with those body sensations. By using the client's most
In the problem of developing general techniques for the induction highly valued representational system as a lead system, the client can be helped to
of trances and the eliciting of hypnotic behavior, there have been gain access to new states of awareness. For example: In one of our training
numerous uncritical utilizations of traditional misconceptions of sessions, a middle-aged psychologist complained that he was unable to make visual
hypnotic procedure. The "eagle eye," the "crystal ball," strokings imagery, in spite of the fact that he had his clients use this technique. We had this
and passes, and similar aids as sources of mysterious force have man place his body in the position of playing his piano (his favorite hobby). He
been discarded by the scientifically trained. Yet the literature was then instructed to move his fingers in the pattern of a familiar tune. With his
abounds with reports of hypnotic techniques based upon the use of eyes closed, he was instructed to hear the tune internally as well as to move his
apparatus intended to limit and restrict the subject's behavior, to fingers. He was then asked to look down at the keyboard. He exclaimed, "I can see
produce fatigue and similar reactions, as if they were the essential the keys and my fingers on the keyboard." He was then instructed to look up at the
desiderata of hypnosis: Crystal balls held at a certain distance from rest of the piano, and then at the rest of the living room, and then at the people in
the eyes, revolving mirrors, metronomes, and flashing lights are the room. This technique of using highly valued representational systems to
often employed as the major consideration. As a result, too much recover and improve impoverished ones is a common technique in our work. The
emphasis is placed upon external factors and the subject's main principle is simply to find a situation in which the impoverished system
responses to them. Primarily, emphasis should be placed upon the overlaps the developed system, such as recovery of dialogue by having a visual
intrapsychic behavior of the subject rather than upon the client see someone's mouth moving and then hear the words, and many variations
relationship to externalities. At best, apparatus is only an incidental of this theme. This is an example of what we call body tuning (see Magic II).
aid, to be discarded at the earliest possible moment in favor of the The visual accessing principle, then, ties together many of
utilization of the subject's behavior which may be initiated but not Erickson's observations about effective deep trance inductions:
developed by the apparatus. However much staring at a crystal ball ... The utilization of imagery rather than actual apparatus permits
may be conducive to fatigue and sleep, neither of these results is an the subject to utilize his actual capabilities. . .. The utilization of
essential part of the hypnotic trance. To illustrate: A number of imagery in trance induction almost always facilitates the
subjects were systematically trained by a competent hypnotist to development of similar or related, more complex hypnotic
develop a trance by staring fixedly at a crystal ball held at a behavior. For example, the subject who experiences much
distance of six inches and slightly above the subjects' eye level. As difficulty in developing hallucinations often learns to develop
a result of this conditioning, efforts to hypnotize them without a them whena trance is induced by utilization of imagery... was in-
crystal ball were difficult and, in some instances, ineffectual. duced to visualize a number of crystal balls in which she could
Personal experimentation with these subjects disclosed that having hallucinate a whole series. . . .
them simply imagine that they were looking at a crystal ball Erickson, Deep Hypnosis and Its Induction, 1967, p. 9.
resulted in more rapid trance induction and profounder trance
states. Repetition of this procedure by colleagues and students Accessing the Non-dominant Hemisphere by Melody
yielded similar results. Return to the actual crystal gazing resulted Another one of the asymmetries which has been consistently found between
in the original slower and less profound trances characterized by the cerebral hemispheres in humans is the location of melody. Apparently, the non-
greater dependence upon external factors. dominant hemisphere is the storage location for representations of melodies in
Milton H. Erickson, 1967, pp. 8 and 9 humans.
The fact that totally aphasic patients can recite well-known verses,
If, for example, the client has a well-developed kinesthetic representational sing simple familiar songs, and emit curse words suggests the
system but little or no ability for non-dominant hemisphere visualization, then the presence of whole auditory Gestalts in the right hemisphere,
hypnotist may have the client adopt a particular familiar body posture. Once the particularly in view of the fact that such patients cannot recite
client is in that body position and fully experiencing the kinesthetic sensations, the verses or sing songs unless they start at the beginning. If they are

91

[PAGE 092]

stopped midway through, and then told to continue where they left In our own work in hypnosis, the instruction to the client to playa melody or
off, they cannot do so, but must start over again at the beginning. series of melodies inside his head has proven again and again an effective induction
The same phenomenon occurs to a lesser degree in normal people technique, particularly in combination with some of the other techniques. Some
for material which has been thoroughly memorized in a given se- convincing evidence for both locality and usefulness of melody comes from work
quence, such as the alphabet. being done with asphasic patients, those people who have brain damage and have
suffered partial loss of language abilities. Those patients who have suffered lesions
Bogen and Bogen (1969) suggest that if the right hemisphere has a in their dominant hemisphere, in Broca's area in the base of the 3rd frontal
special capacity for tonal, timbre and other aspects of music (see convolution, can be treated with what is called melodic intonation therapy.
Milner, 1962), then interhemispheric communication could
contribute to musical creativity. They report that, in collaboration What this amounts to is with singing to train the non-dominant hemisphere to
with Gordon, observations were made of patients, known to be perform the functions lost by the dominant hemisphere's damage. The lost
right handed, asked to sing before and during administration of distinctions in language arc trained into the other hemisphere by singing patterns of
sodium amytal into the right internal carotid artery. During the words instead of saying them (a task which the Broca's asphasic can not do until
time when the left hemiparesis was evident, articulation was after the words have been sung repeatedly). See Gardner, 1974, for further reading.
intelligible, though slurred, and while rhythm was preserved, Jane was then thoroughly drilled in saying the "Pease Porridge"
singing was essentially amelodic, having relatively few changes in rhyme in a halting, hesitant and stuttering fashion.
She learned this in a phenomenally fast manner, and then
pitch.
Anne, who knew nothing of this special measure, was asked to

The last twenty-five years have led to a marked revision of some recite with Jane the Pease Porridge rhyme, however hesitantly she
had to do it.
of these older notions. We are now aware that while aphasic
Slowly the two began, Anne slowly, while Jane began to
disorders of speech and comprehension are even more strongly
increase the tempo and then to stutter the words in a painfully
linked to left unilateral lesions than was thought by the classical
annoying fashion. Anne glanced at the author, was sternly
authors, certain disabilities, for instance dressing difficulty, are
instructed to listen to Jane and to continue the joint recitation.
more closely associated with right hemisphere damage. It now
Anne turned to Jane and her lips and face showed the ideomotor,
seems likely that the right hemisphere is not the minor
therefore involuntary and uncontrollable efforts on
hemisphere, but rather is itself dominant for certain functions.
Anne's part to correct Jane's stutter. On and on, over and over, Jane
Thus it appears to be dominant for certain spatial functions (while
continued, with Anne's lips twitching and finally Anne was
the left is probably dominant for others), for certain musical tasks,
haltingly prompting Jane throughout the whole rhyme. This
and as has now been suggested by several lines of evidence, pos-
particular session lasted about two hours and Anne's speech
sibly for certain aspects of emotional response.
became increasingly better. The same measure was employed with
Gardner, 1975, pp. 329-330
other rhymes and Anne was obviously pleased and confident
The use of melody as a technique for accessing the unconscious portion of the though often immensely annoyed.
human mind is mentioned specifically by Milton H. Erickson, 1967, p. 451
Erickson:
" A musician, unresponsive to direct hypnotic suggestion, was The selection of melody itself offers the hypnotist many choices. For example,
induced to recall the experience of having his thoughts haunted by in the context of therapy, the hypnotist might choose to select some melody
a strain of music. This led to a suggested search for other similar
connected in the client's life history with a period of his life which the hypnotist
[memories] . Soon he became so absorbed in trying to recall
wishes the client to recover for the purposes of an enactment. Similarly, in the
forgotten melodies and beating time as a kinesthetic aid that a
context of hypnotism, the hypnotist might give the client some melody to play
deep trance...
inside his head which indirectly suggests age regression. We have found nursery
Erickson, 1967, p. 30.
92

[PAGE 093]

rhyme melodies particularly effective in this way. this part. Simultaneously, Richard will speak into the ear contralateral to the non-
dominant cerebral hemisphere (in this example, the left ear), using only the
Language Accessing of the Non-dominant Hemisphere simplest of linguistic forms - either single-word utterances or the patterns used by
As we stated previously, the so-called mute, or non-dominant, hemisphere in children at the two-word utterance stage of language development (see pivot
humans, typically, has some language ability. The extent of this ability seems to be grammars in Slobin, 1974). In employing the double induction technique, rarely
unknown, with different researchers making conflicting claims (compare, for have we had an induction last for more than five minutes before a satisfactory
example, Gazziniga, 1970, with Levy, 1974). What is probable in light of the trance state is reached by the client.
universal grammar and plasticity findings is that the nondominant hemisphere has One model which accounts for the power and speed of the double induction is
all of the distinctions available in universal grammar. that:
Since the right hemispheres of commissurotomy patients appear fo
have some comprehension of both spoken language, as well as (a) We are successfully overloading the dominant
written nouns, verbs, and adjectives, and also have some minimal hemisphere;
capacities for expressive speech, the question arises as to the and
differences in the two hemispheres which underlie the vast (b) We are accessing the non-dominant hemisphere with
differences in linguistic abilities. If the minor hemisphere could the child grammar style of language which we feed into
comprehend no speech, but could produce some, one could postu- that hemisphere.
late the absence of phonologies in the right hemisphere and could
interpret speech production as a result of a direct translation from A second model which provides a guide for understanding the
a semantic to articulatory code. If the right hemisphere could potency of this technique is:
comprehend, but not produce speech, one could postulate the
absence of an articulatory code. However, when the right (a) We are successfully overloading the dominant
hemisphere can both comprehend and express language, even hemisphere;
though at a very limited level, an interpretation becomes much and
more difficult. (Levy, 1974, p. 237) (b) We are not accessing the non-dominant hemisphere, but, rather, the
child grammar material we feed into the ear most intimately connected
Thus, as further linguistic and psycholinguistic research uncovers the structure with the nondominant hemisphere is being processed by and reof universal grammar, the exact linguistic capabilities of the non-dominant sponded to by the dominant hemisphere without awareness.
hemisphere will become available. Equally fascinating to us is the role that
hypnotism has the potential to play in researching the linguistic capabilities of the This last model is a distinct possibility as it is true that the human car has
non-dominant hemisphere. Until more thorough studies of the linguistic projections to both cerebral hemispheres. If conflicting messages arrive at the same
capabilities of the mute hemisphere are made, however, we are aware of two ear or at the projection areas of the auditory cortex, the contralateral ear message
models of our experience in hypnosis which account for our observations. has priority. However, simply because the contralateral ear message has priority
As mentioned previously, one of the most powerful techniques which we have over the ipsolateral ear message does not imply that the ipsolateral ear message is
developed is the double induction - an induction in which each of us speaks entirely lost with respect to the dominant hemisphere. Thus, the second model
simultaneously into the client's cars. In doing this type of induction, we would claim that the speed and effectiveness of our double inductions depend, not
systematically vary the style of speech we use depending upon into which ear we upon accessing the non-dominant hemisphere linguistically, but rather depend upon
are speaking. For example, if John is speaking into the contralateral ear with the combination of overload and child grammar to the dominant hemisphere. By
respect to the dominant hemisphere (e.g., in right-handed people, usually the left presenting a conflicting message to the dominant hemisphere without its
cerebral hemisphere is dominant, and the contralateral car is the right ear), he will awareness, we are forcing the client to regress his dominant hemisphere linguistic
systematically use the most complex syntactic forms of the language, employing abilities to an earlier stage of development. The only additional piece of evidence
all of the linguistic overload/distraction principles presented in the first chapter of which we have at this time is that there is a tendency for the side of the body

93

[PAGE 094]

controlled by the hemisphere (the contralateral hemisphere) to respond startfrom scratch and nobody phonologically, to scratch
differentially to instructions delivered to that hemisphere. The result, particularly really knows. ... nose)
evident in the physical asymmetries in the client's face, is that, when conflicting
instructions are received simultaneously by the client in different ears, the sides of The response which Erickson anticipates is for the client, without any
the body respond independently. Similarly, when hand levitation instructions are consciousness of his action, to scratch his nose. The choices which Erickson has for
interspersed in the conflicting material being fed into the client's hemisphere, the analogically marking the original message are as numerous as the means he has of
hand controlled by the hemisphere to which those instructions are presented tends communicating analogically; for example, shifts of tonality, tempo, repetitive
to be the hand which rises. These patterns seem to us to support the first model. Of movements of different parts of the body, changes in facial expression, eye fixation
course, it is possible that both processes are occurring. In any case, while the on the same object, etc.
double induction serves as one of the most powerful induction ad deepening The Huxley article presents an excellent example of the use of analogical
techniques of which we are aware, the question of which model is more useful marking by Erickson to fragment the Surface Structure into three sets: the original,
remains unanswered.“ a set of cue words to induce amnesia, and a set of cue words to remove amnesia.
Milton Erickson has never, to our knowledge, worked closely with another Erickson's exquisite control over this technique allows him to induce and remove
hypnotist and used the double-induction technique we have been presenting. He is the memories of Huxley's experience from Huxley's consciousness repetitively.
so skillful in his use of the language that he is able to accomplish something quite This pattern of analogical marking of included words and phrases to create
close to the double induction. In this procedure, which we call analogical marking independent message sets is available for any purpose which the hypnotist needs. It
of included sequences, Erickson presents the dominant hemisphere with a series of simply requires that the hypnotist select some set of analogical cites - as many
highly complex, syntactic constructions which, apparently, overload the processing different ones as he wishes to create independent message sets - and use them to
capacity of the linguistic mechanisms of the dominant hemisphere. These well- identify the words and phrases in his ongoing speech which he wishes to have
formed Surface Structures of English form a pool of sequences of English words serve either as an independent message or as cues for some desired behavior by the
and phrases which have a double function. They are, first of all, constituents or client. The only limit to this technique is the creativity of the hypnotist.
sub-parts of the Surface Structures directed by Erickson at the dominant Here we are unable, at present, to provide an explanation of the technique free
hemisphere. They are, secondly, embedded, or contain messages which are of ambiguity. Again, in modeling our own experience with this technique as well
received by and responded to by processes outside the normal boundaries of as Erickson's, there are several plausible models:
consciousness. An example will help:
(a) The original Surface Structure message is processed by the dominant
.... realize that you have to start from scratch and hemisphere while the included, analogically marked messages are
nobody really knows. .... accepted and responded to by the non-dominant hemisphere;
or
The phrases presented above are part of a complex and wellformed-in-English (b) The original as well as the analogically marked, included message
Surface Structure which is received and processed by the dominant hemisphere. In units are received and processed by the dominant hemisphere - the
addition, however, the words in non-italic type are identified by some analogical original message by the normal processing mechanisms, and the
marking supplied by Erickson which distinguishes them from the remainder of the included messages by processes wholly outside of consciousness and
words in that well-formed Surface Structure. This analogical marking of included age regression occurs;
words and phrase results in the fragmentation of the communication into (in this or
case) two sets: (c) Both of the above explanations in combination.

.... realize that you have to start from scratch and In any case, the form of the process is clear to us - we provide a step-by-step
nobody really knows. .... procedure for the construction and use of this technique in the final part of this
volume.
.... realize that you have to scratch knows (equivalent, One question which interests us greatly about this technique is

94

[PAGE 095]

the choice of analogical marking which the hypnotist selects to identify the
included message units. There are several things to consider in choosing the
Conclusion to Part II
analogical marking signal. First, if the non-dominant hemisphere is being accessed,
then the most effective choice of analogical marking by the hypnotist will be one
of the sets of analogical signals which, typically, are processed and distinguished
by the non-dominant hemisphere. The non-dominant hemisphere processes and
distinguishes the analogical signal sets of tonality and analogical body posture and
movements of the hypnotist's body visually. So, by this model, the most effective
cues for the hypnotist to use will be tonal and body shifts. If the second model is a
more useful representation of the process of communicating by digital analogical
signal combinations, t hen the most effective cues will be those which are normally
received and processed by the dominant hemisphere, tempo shifts, for examples

In hypnotic research, and the clinical use of hypnosis, Milton Erickson stands
Summary
out as the world's most effective and creative practitioner. His skill is recognized
In this section, we have presented what we consider to be one of the most
around the world as not only the most effective, but, for most people who have
wide-open and exciting areas of research into altered states of human
seen or heard of his work, as exceptional and remarkable, and, for some, stretching
consciousness, communication, and human potential. The parallels between the
the limits of credibility. His career holds a long and uncountable list of successes in
organization of the parts of the human brain which Erickson refers to as the
areas in which no other could succeed. He has been able to help to have better lives
conscious and unconscious and the functional organization of the human cerebral
untold numbers of people who were considered to be beyond help. He has assisted
hemispheres are striking. Furthermore, the parallels between the organization of the
the hopeless, who had tried every avenue of assistance to no avail, to have hope,
unconscious and conscious portions of the human mind and the patterns of
and he has given them the choices they desperately desired. This courageous man
incongruity in the therapeutic context are startlingly close (see Magic II, Part ID.
has been called everything from a miracle worker to a fraud; he is loved and
We have reviewed three classes of techniques for accessing the nondominant
praised by some, and feared and despised by others. He has been attacked and
hemisphere in humans in the context of hypnotism: the first two classes,
harassed; even as recently as the 1950's, the American Medical Association tried to
visualization and melodic accessing, are well supported by Erickson's work and
revoke his medical license. But, against a sceptical world, he has continued to
research, our own work in hypnosis and the neurological research referenced
explore, develop, and use hypnosis. He has acquired a skill in its use that he,
within the section. The third class of accessing techniques involves ways to
himself, does not fully understand. The power of his skill cannot be discounted by
communicate with the non-dominant hemisphere linguistically. Here the evidence
those who have experienced it firsthand. But, like most highly talented people, his
is equivocal, and there are at least two coherent models which account for the
skill is explained as being only intuition and, therefore, unlearnable. Our specific
process. The relationships between universal grammar, the plasticity of the human
skill is in making intuitions about human behavior explicit and, therefore,
nervous system, and the possibility of communicating with the non-dominant
learnable. This volume constitutes merely a beginning in the process of making
hemisphere raise questions which, when answered, will provide information of
Milton Erickson's hypnotic skills available for others to learn. We have focused,
importance to the fields of hypnosis, neurology, psychology and linguistics.
primarily, in this volume, on the linguistic aspects of his work on the way he uses
Fortunately, the ambiguity regarding the most useful model for describing the
language. We intend in future volumes to build a further model of his work which
possibility of accessing the mute hemisphere linguistically does not prevent us
will include the way he uses analogical forms of communication (voice tone, voice
from constructing a step-by-step model which will make these powerful Erickson
tempo, body gestures, movements, etc.) and also how he uses the information he
techniques available to others. We will present models for each of these accessing
receives both verbally and analogically from his clients. This is just a beginning,
techniques later in this volume. Erickson demonstrates in his refined use of these
not the whole model of his work. We have presented thus far what we believe to be
methods a sensitivity to all the resources which are available to the client, both
the most basic and common language patterns in his work. Part III presents to you
consciously and unconsciously.
the tools for constructing these patterns explicitly.
Thus far we presented three major principles for organizing your experience
95

[PAGE 096]

while doing trance inductions. First is pacing clients; this means that you take the Erickson, frequently, will tell a story in which the main figure is the same sex, age, and

observable and verifiable behavior of the client and connect it with the behavior to from the same state as the client who is listening. In other cases, Erickson will vary these

which you wish to lead the client. features. We have begun building a more detailed model of these processes. Especially
interesting to us are the ways in which predicates can be generalized. For example, the
hypnotist might generalize a predicate to its maximally unspecified form:
You're sitting there, breathing, watching that spot (pacing)

do for active verbs
becoming relaxed. (leading) be for stative verbs


And as you close your eyes (pacing) Or he might generalize within the same representational system, input or
output channel beginning with:

you will feel your body float and become light. (leading)
speak to talk
converse
And as you sit all the way down in the chair (pacing) intone
whine
you will go into a deep trance. (leading) cry

plead
The pacing strategy is then connected with the behavior desired. State


Or he might generalize such that each predicate contains something in its Deep Structure
And as you close your eyes (pacing)
representation which does not occur explicitly in its Surface
Structure representation. We will call this semantic incorporation.
you go into a deep trance, remembering a pleasant memory from your For example, each of the following words induces as part of its Deep Structure
childhood (leading) representation the word hand:


and this will make you smile. (pacing) slap, handle, grasp, pass (to), hold (depending on the object), wear (a ring), catch,
catch hold of, steer, paddle, row, stroke, pour, chop,
This process is continued throughout the entire trance state. The second principle is slice, pin (a medal on), button, tear, strum, play (a guitar), etc.
to distract and utilize the dominant hemisphere. The third principle is the accessing
of the non-dominant hemisphere. A detailed model of these generalization principles would be the basis for Erickson's well-
known skill in creating and telling stories for his clients - a model for therapeutically
We would like to point out that, when Erickson refers to the unconscious, he is
effective metaphor.
referring to more than the non-dominant hemisphere and the linguistic processes in
the dominant hemisphere below the level of awareness. Erickson's behavior 2. Notice that there is a useful interaction between the patterns of nominalization,
systematically demonstrates that, frequently, he is using the term unconscious to selectional restrictions, deletion, and ambiguity. Consider a phrase such as:

refer to the processes and functions of the non-dominant hemisphere. This
. . the feeling of the couch. ..
constitutes a rich source of research which can be applied to hypnoss. When we
learn to segregate exactly the specific components of the unconscious mind,
The ambiguity is whether the noun phrase the couch is the Deep Structure subject or object
medical and dental, as well as psychological uses of hypnosis will be faster and
of the predicate feel; in other words, whether ~the Deep Structure of the above phrase is:
more effective. Part III is designed to give specific skills necessary to utilize the
patterns we have identified in Erickson's work. someone feels the couch
or

the couch feels a certain way to someone
FOOTNOTES TO PART II
Another way of stating the question raised by this phrase is whether the Deep Structure
1. In this section, we focus on ways in which nouns can be generalized. For example, subject or object has been deleted. This ambiguity can only occur when the predicate

96

[PAGE 097]

selectional restrictions allow nouns of different classes to fit grammatically into both the
subject and the object positions.

3. The reader may have noticed that the patterns called lesser included structures
(specifically, embedded commands) overlap with conversational postulates. One of the
presuppositions of every command is the statement to the effect that the person who is to be PART II
given the command is able to do what the command directs. Furthermore, the Surface
Structure using the yes/no question form corresponding to that presupposition will have the
command embedded as a lesser included structure.

4. We have noticed the common tendency of subjects in an initial profound
somnambulistic trance to speak only in single word utterances until instructed how to speak CONSTRUCTION
with more normal patterns.

5. The limiting case is where the client becomes aware of the crossmodality cuing -
this would reduce the effectiveness of such cues. The client rarely becomes aware of such
OF
cross-modality cuing - when this happens, typically, he knows something is going on but he
doesn't know what. THE PATTERNS

OF ERICKSON'S HYPNOTIC WORK


97

[PAGE 098]

Introduction Construction and Use of
Linguistic Causal Modeling Processes
This last part of Volume 1 is designed to provide you with the step-by-step
As we have stated repeatedly, each of us constructs, from our experiences, a
procedure for constructing each of the patterns presented thus far. This format will
model or representation of the world in which we live. In the process of
allow you to utilize the potent skills of Milton Erickson in your own work, for
constructing this model or guide for our behavior, we employ the three universal
your own purposes, in your own way, and in whatever context you need for
processes of human modeling: Generalization, Distortion and Deletion. Within the
effective hypnotic skills. We highly recommend that you use this portion of the
language system which we use to assist us in making sense out of our experience,
book as a training manual, reading each section slowly one at a time.
we often try to "explain" the connections between different parts of our model of
Experimenting with each pattern on paper and vocally will provide you with a way
the world in causal terms, employing the terms of natural language and, typically,
to train yourself first, consciously to produce each pattern. Then, as our experience
claiming a necessary connection between these parts of our experience. Such
in training others in these techniques has proven repeatedly, these formal patterns
explanations, generally, are absurd in that they attempt to reduce the complex
drop out of your consciousness while you will continue to be able to generate the
circumstances involved in the production of some event to a simple, often single,
patterns spontaneously. This kind of careful study will allow you to reap the
"cause."
greatest rewards, whether you use hypnosis for medical, dental, psychological, or
Gregory Bateson (1972, pp. 399-400) has characterized this type of
research purposes. We have found with our students that those who use the
explanation of causal reasoning and contrasts 1t with cybernetic explanation:
method of reading and rereading, returning again and again as you would to any
Causal explanation is usually positive. We say that billiard ball B
training in a complex skill, acquire the greatest’ proficiency. We add this
moved in such and such a direction because billiard ball A hit 1t at
suggestion to help you to gain the most that you can from Milton Erickson's years
such and such an angle. In contrast to this, cybernetic explanation
of creative experience. Those who seek your help, then, will have the oppor tunity
is always negative. We consider what alternative possibilities
to best realize their own vast potential and succeed in gaining their own goals with
could conceivably have occurred and then ask why many of the
your skillful help.
alternatives were not followed, so that the particular event was one
of those few which could, in fact, occur.


In cybernetic language, the course of events is said to be subject to restraints,
and it is assumed that, apart from such restraints, the pathways of change would be
governed only by equality of probability. In fact, the "restraints" upon which
cybernetic explanation depends can in all cases be regarded as factors which
determine inequality of probability. If we find a monkey striking a type writer
apparently at random but in fact writing meaningful prose, we shall look for
restraints, either inside the monkey or inside the typewriter. Perhaps the monkey
could not strike inappropriate letters; perhaps the type bars could not move if
improperly struck; perhaps incorrect letters could not survive on the paper.
Somewhere there must have been a circuit which could identify error and eliminate
it.
Ideally - and commonly - the actual event in any sequence or aggregate is
uniquely determined within the terms of the cybernetic explanation. Restraints of
many different kinds may combine to generate this unique determination. For
example, the selection of a piece for a given position in a jigsaw puzzle is
"restrained" by many factors. Its shape must conform to that of its several

98

[PAGE 099]

neighbors and possibly that of the boundary of the puzzle; its color must conform to sitting all the way down in the You go into a deep trance
the color pattern of its region; the orientation of its edges must obey the topological chair
regularities set by the cutting machine in which the puzzle was made, and so on.
From the point of view of the man who is trying to solve the puzzle, these are all Your breathing changing You become aware of those
clues, i.e., sources of information which will guide him in his selection. From the particular sensations in your fingers and
point of view of the cybernetic observer, they are restraints. hands
Similarly, from the cybernetic point of view, a word in a sentence, or a letter
within the word, or the anatomy of some part within an organism, or the role ofa
species in an ecosystem, or the behavior of a member within a family - these are all The reader can easily determine that the connections which are claimed by the
to be (negatively) explained by an analysis of restraints. example sentences to hold between the two pieces of behavior are not, in fact,
necessary connections. However, in the context of a hypnotic induction, since the
We find ourselves in essential agreement with Bateson 's comments. In fact, in client employs these same types of semantic ill-formedness modeling principles,
Magic I, we spend time discussing the negative effects which a specific form of these causal connections are extraordinarily effective in securing the behavior
this causal type of explanation has on people. We call this specific type of causal desired.
explanation causeeffect. Associated with this type of causal modeling process is To construct such sentences is quite easy; simply follow these steps:
another type called mind-reading. In this type of modeling, an individual comes to
believe that he knows the thoughts, feelings, etc., of another without any direct Step 1 - Determine the type of behavior which you, as the hypnotist, wish to elicit
communication of these experiences on the part of this second person (see Magic [, from the client; call this Y;
Chapters 3, 4, and 6;Magic II, Chapters 2 and 3). Step 2 - Identify some behavior which the client is already experiencing, some
In the context of hypnosis, however, wherein one of the objectives which the portion of his ongoing behavior and experience; call this X;
hypnotist has is, initially, to pace and then to lead the client's experience, these Step 3 - Make up a sentence which has the form:
processes of cause-effect and mind-reading have a positive value. Since the client,
characteristically, employs these types of explanation for himself, the hypnotist can X Cause Y
make use of this process to assist the client in achieving the desired state of trance.
Specifically, the hypnotist can make causal connections between immediately
The hypnotist may employ the verb cause, itself, directly or use some verb which is
verifiable portions of the client's experience and the desired behavior.
synonymous with cause (e.g., make), or which incorporates cause as a portion of its
First, we present some examples of this technique of utilizing
meaning, such as: force, require, push, pull, close, open.
cause-effect in the hypnotic context:
Closely associated with these cause-effect sentences is a group of sentences
which involve what we have called an implied causative (see Magic I for a fuller
Sitting all the way down in that chair will make you go into a deep trance. discussion). This class of sentences does not, strictly speaking, involve the claim of
As you continue to breathe, each exhaling of your breath will make you a necessary connection between two events; they do, however, invite the listener to
become more and more relaxed. make an inference of a necessary, causal connection between the two events
When your hand touches your face, it will cause you to go completely into mentioned; that is, they claim a contingency between two classes of events or
a profound trance. experiences. First, we list some examples of this class:
As your breathing slowly changes, it will make you aware of those
particular sensations in your fingers and hand.
As you sit all the way down in that chair, you will go into a deep trance
Each of these example sentences has the same logical form: As you listen to the sound of my voice, you will relax more and more
When you fully understand this communication, you will be at the right level of
trance
x cause Y After you have finished allowing your hand to return to your thigh, you will be fully

99

[PAGE 100]

prepared to experience new deep trance phenomena You can continue to feel the satisfaction of. . .
You are Izarning ‚even more rapidly than you just . . .
You really are beginning. to understand how quickly you can. . .

Each of these sentences has the same logical form:
In each of these sentences, the speaker/hypnotist is claiming to have knowledge of
some experience which the listener is having without specifying how he came to

XL as | Y have that knowledge. Specifically, the hypnotist is claiming that he knows about
the following internal states of the listener:
sit all the way down in you go into a
that chair when deep trance wondering, feeling, learning, understanding


In none of the examples does the hypnotist specify how he came
you finish allowing your you will be fully prepared to have this information.
hand to return to your after to experience new In order to construct sentences of this class, the hypnotist must:
thigh deep trance phenomena
Step 1 - Identify some internal state or experience of the client which is consistent
with all of the information which is available to him;
Step 2 - Form a sentence which states that he knows that the client is having this
experience.


Again, the readers can easily satisfy themselves that there is no logical connection, There are two additional comments which a hypnotist will find of use in
necessary or not, between the behaviors under the X and Y categories. constructing these sentences: first, there are a number of internal states or
In a step-by-step format, the hypnotist may construct these experiences which are typical of a human being undergoing a trance induction, or
implied causative sentences by: which a person will experience whenever the name of this experience is mentioned;
for example:
Step 1 - Determine the type of behavior which you, as the hypnotist, wish to elicit
from the client; call 1t Y; wondering, learning, feeling, thinking, remembering, _ recalling,
Step 2 - Identify some behavior which the client is already experiencmg, some experiencing
portion of his ongoing behavior and experience; call this X;
Step 3 - Make up a sentence of the form:
Choosing anyone of these activities as the basis for constructing a sentence which
X implied causative connective Y
is semantically ill-formed mind reading will insure a successful pacing of the
where the implied causative connective is any connective which invites
client's experience. Another excellent choice is any verb which is unspecified with
the listener to a causal connection examples: as, when, after, before,
respect to representational systems. Second, when forming a sentence employing
during, throughout, following, etc.
the mind-reading technique, the hypnotist can use it in conjunction with the
technique of using presuppositions to cover the claim he is making. For example,
A second type of closely related sentences which Erickson uses in trance work
rather than simply saying:
are those called mind reading. These are sentences by which the speaker claims to
have knowledge of the internal, unobservable experience of the listener without
... you are learning. .. .
specifying the process by which he came to have that knowledge. Here is a list of
examples:
the hypnotist may use a word such as even which forces the listener to accept the
You must be wondering now what will happen next. . . truth of the mind-reading claim by the hypnotist in order to make any sense out of

100

[PAGE 101]

the communication and to focus, instead, on the question of speed, as in the
Transderivational Phenomena!
example:

One of the desirable characteristics of the communication which occurs
... you are learning even more rapidly than. .. .
between a hypnotist and his client is that the client participate actively in the
process. When the client can be engaged actively in the communication process at
Or, as a second example, notice the difference between:
both the conscious and the unconscious levels of the mind, the communication will
be highly successful. The four classes of phenomena presented in this section have
... you can feel the. ...
in common the fact that the client is engaged at the unconscious level of his mind
and
in his participation in the communication process. By engaging the client at the
... you can continue to feel the. ...
unconscious level, the hypnotist accomplishes several important tasks
simultaneously. First, when the client is participating unconsciously, his conscious
In this example, the predicate continue presupposes that the activity mentioned
mind does not interfere with the transition to the altered state of consciousness
(feeling) began prior to the saying of the sentence; thus the client's attention is
which is the immediate objective of the trance induction. Second, since the client's
shifted from whether or not he is feeling X to when he first began to feel X. We
conscious mind is not making the selection of the meaning conveyed by the
will present a more systematic treatment of presuppositions in the section on
hypnotist's communication, his response is the response selected as most
Derived Meanings.
appropriate to the unconscious needs of the client. (We repeat ourselves from Part
In summary, then, the hypnotist may make use of the linguistic causal
I for the reader's convenience.)
modeling processes which the client typically employs in constructing his model of
In our everyday communications with the people around us, we employ a set
the world and his ongoing experience in order to achieve the goals of the hypnotic
of language processing strategies which allow us to extract from the speech of
encounter. Specifically, since these modeling processes are an integral part of the
others the meaning of the words, phrases, and sentences which they use. These
client's construction of the world of his experience, the hypnotist, by the skillful use
language processing strategies arc the research domain for psycholinguists (see, for
of these techniques, can successfully pace and lead the client to the desired
example, references for Bever and for Slobin in the Bibliography). Erickson has
objectives in hypnosis. Erickson employs these techniques with the grace and
succeeded in utilizing these language processing mechanisms in a way which
power of a master.
allows him to communicate with both the conscious and the unconscious portions
of the client's mind. Essentially, he accomplishes this by presenting the client with
a Surface Structure of English which activates the normally conscious mind-
processing mechanisms. At the same time, he activates additional meaning
recovery processes which develop meanings which are available to the
unconscious portion of the client's mind but not to the conscious portion. In some
cases, he uses Surface Structures of English which are not well formed. The effect
that this has is, typically, to overload or jam the normal language processing
mechanisms of the client while the unconscious mind of the client extracts the
most appropriate meaning for its purposes. We begin by reviewing the basic
linguistic distinctions necessary for an understanding of these techniques (see
Magic I, Appendix A, for fuller discussion).
Each sentence of every natural language has two distinct representations: the
representation of the way it actually sounds (or, if written, the way it actually
appears), called the Surface Structure, and the representation of the meaning which
it has, called the Deep Structure. For example, when a person says the sentence:

The window was broken

101

[PAGE 102]

the Surface Structure' is the representation of the actual sounds made by the person With these basic linguistic distinctions, we may begin a presentation of the
speaking, or, in the case of a written representation, the words written out, as patterns themselves.
above. In addition to this representation, this sentence is associated with another
representation which is the meaning it has - the Deep Structure. In this partic ular Transderivational Search - Generalized Referential Index
case, the Deep Structure can be represented as: One of Erickson's favorite devices, employed when the client is in both trance
and "normal" state of awareness, is for him to tell a story. This story. typically,
PAST (BREAK [someone, window, with something]) begins with the phrase: / bad a patient once . . . . Erickson then proceeds to
describe some actual or created-on-the.spot version or an experience which will be
This Deep Structure representation is designed to capture the intuition that each of relevant to the person to whom he is presently speaking. The amount of relevance
us has as a native speaker of English that, when we hear the Surface Structure which the story has depends upon how direct Erickson wishes to be in his

presented above, we understand the following: communication; in general, this will depend upon the depth of the client's trance.
Erickson employs the principle that the client will respond best if the relevance of
the story is just outside the client's conscious awareness. This is an example of the
(a) Some event occurred in the PAST;
transderivational search for meaning spurred by the use of a generalized referential
(b) The event was a complex event having the following parts:
index. If Erickson utters the sentence:
(1) An action - BREAK - which occurred between:
a. The agent - some person or thing doing the breaking - here You can focus your eyes on the corner of. ...
represented by someone,
b. The object - some person or thing being broken - here
the noun you has the referential index of the client - the person to whom Erickson
represented by the window,
is talking - and the client is conscious that Erickson intends the word you to
c. The instrument - the thing used to do the breaking here
refer to him. However, when Erickson says:
represented by with something.

I had a patient once... .
Notice that, even though not all of the parts of the Deep Structure representation
appear in the Surface Structure (in this case, the agent and the instrument are not
the client's normal linguistic processing mechanisms derive from that Surface
represented in the Surface Structure), the native speaker of English has that
Structure a Deep Structure meaning which contains no noun which refers to the
information available in his understanding of the sentence. The ways in which
client himself. Similarly, when a client hears the following phrases:
Surface Structures can differ from their associated Deep Structures is the research
domain of transformational linguists. They have postulated a series of formal
mapping operations called transformations which specify precisely how Deep and People can make the most of learning opportunities. ... A man once sat in
that very chair andfelt nervous. ...
Surface
A waitress wanted to have an important thing for herself... .
Structures may differ - the entire process which links a Deep Structure to its
Surface Structure(s) is called a derivation.
he constructs for himself a Deep Structure which includes no occurrence of a noun
which has his own referential index as a part. Erickson's behavior and the response
which he secures from his clients, as well as our own experience and the responses
deep structure which we consistently secure from our clients, have convinced us that there is an
extra bit of linguistic processing which occurs at the unconscious level. The most
useful model which we have found to assist us in organizing our own experience,
> derivation
as well as building a model for Erickson's work, is that of the transderivational
search. This process operates as follows:
surface structure
y
(a) The client hears a well-formed Surface Structure;

102

[PAGE 103]

(b) The client recovers the associated Deep Structure and is aware of the Deep Structure:
meaning of that Deep Structure, one which has no direct reference to
him; POSSIBLE (MAKE MOST [I, this specific learning opportunity] )
(c) The client activates a transderivational search for an additional Deep
Structure which is more relevant for his ongoing experience. In other words, among the Deep Structures identical with the one originally
recovered is the one above - one which has the associated Surface Structure:
This last step requires more explanation. Clients do not randomly generate
additional Deep Structures; rather, the Deep Structures which they generate are I (the client) can make the most out of this learning opportunity
systematically related to the originally recovered Deep Structure. Specific ally, they
generate Deep Structures which are identical in form to the recovered Deep
Thus, by the process of transderivational search, the client generates the meaning
Structure except that they substitute nouns with referential indices which pick out
which is maximally relevant for his ongoing experience. By this technique,
portions of their ongoing behavior, thus making them maximally relevant for
Erickson successfully paces the client's ongoing experience, allows the client
themselves. We illustrate by example. The client hears the Surface Structure:
maximal freedom to create meaning for himself and, thereby, participate actively
in the process of communication, and avoids instructing the client in a way of
People can make the most of learning opportunities
which he is conscious (no "resistance" could possibly arise as no direction to resist
has been given by Erickson).
the normal linguistic processing mechanisms apply, deriving the This transderivational search technique is the pattern common to all of the
associated Deep Structure? phenomena presented in this section. With this in mind, we extract the formal
pattern of the transderivational search as shown on page 223.
POSSIBLE (MAKE MOST {EVER Y (people, learning opportunities)] ) In other words, the client recovers the Deep Structure which
corresponds to the Surface Structure Erickson utters, then he generates a series of
So, presenting the entire process to this point in a visual display, we have: Deep Structures identical up to the referential indices. From this set, the client then
selects the Deep Structure which is most relevant for his ongoing experience.
POSS (MAKE MOST [EVERY (people, learning opportunities)] ) From the description of the transderivational search model,


deep structure 1 deep structure 2.......... deep structure n

\ derivation 1

by transderiva
tional search
J


processes
People can make the most out of learning opportunities


Now, by the principle of transderivational search, the client begins the unconscious
surface structure 1 surface structure 2 .... surface structure n
process of finding a Deep Structure which is identical in form to the recovered
Deep Structure with nouns with referential indices relevant to his ongoing
the construction of statements containing generalized referential indices is
experience, substituted into the positions of the nouns which are in the recovered
Deep Structure but which have no referential index relevant to his experience of quite easy. In a step-by-step format, the process can be modeled as follows:

the moment. The recovered Deep Structure contains two nouns which have no
referential index relevant to the client's ongoing experience; therefore, the newly Step 1 - Determine the message of which you, as the hypnotist, desire the client to

generated Deep Structures will be identical to the recovered one with new nouns have an unconscious understanding;

substituted in those positions. The client will generate, among others, the following Step 2- Make a sentence (or a series of sentences) which communicates that

103

[PAGE 104]

message directly; the suggested noun is inserted has different effects. This will be discussed under the
Step 3 - Replace every occurrence of nouns bearing referential indices which pick heading of Lesser Included Deep Structures.
out the client and occurrences of nouns bearing referential indices which pick out
the present situation and problem, with nouns which have no relevance to the Selectional Restriction Violations
client, the present situation or the problem with which you are dealing. In every natural language there are words called predicates which describe
relationships or processes. These words pick out specific categories of
As mentioned earlier, the extent to which the nouns referring to the client, present experience in the models of the speakers of that language. Certain processes or
situation and problem being dealt with are replaced depends upon factors such as relationships occur only between specific parts of the models of the speakers'
the depth of the client's trance state. The general principle is that the intended experience. For example, using English, we are certain that the process named
meaning should not be recognized consciously by the client. Here Erickson's by the predicate drink has never occurred in any reader's experience associated
phenomenal visual and auditory abilities to detect minute changes in the client's with the object designated by the word nominalization, as in the sentence:
body and voice are his primary ways of determining how extensive the
replacement of relevant nouns should be. The nominalization drank two quarts of orange juice.


Transderivational Search - Generalized Referential Index with Suggested Noun Linguists have characterized the kind of oddity displayed by this sentence as the
Substitution violation of a selectional restriction. Specifically, the predicate drink is said to have
Erickson will sometimes use the generalized referential index method of a selectional restriction which requires that it be used only with nouns which name
activating transderivational search with all addition. sentient beings. Since the word nominalization does not refer to a sentient being,
the sentence above contains a selectional restriction viola tion, thus explaining its
The following examples are of this type: oddity.
Erickson uses selectional restriction violations to force the client into a

People can, Susan, make the most of learning opportunities transderivational search for meaning. Erickson says, for example:
People, Susan, can make the most of learning opportunities
...a tomato plant canfeel good. ...
People can make the most of learning opportunities, Susan

In the standard usage of the predicatefeel, there is a selectional restriction violation
Here Erickson is employing the same technique as that covered in the
which requires that the noun which appears as its subject be an animal or a human.
last section with the addition of also supplying the noun which he wishes the
For most speakers of English, the sentence quoted above is peculiar; specifically,
client to substitute into the noun position when he (the client) generates the set
of related Deep Structures - namely, the noun-bearing referential index of the the selectional restriction on the predicate feel has been violated. The sentence

client himself. The construction procedure for the generalized referential index doesn't quite make sense. In the context of hypnosis, this selectional restriction

with suggested noun violation is puzzling to the client who, in order to make sense out of Erickson's
substitution
is identical to the procedure for the
communication, activates a transderivational search for possible relevant
construction of the generalized referential index itself with the addition of Step
meanings. In this case, the set of Deep Structures generated by the transderivational
4:
search
process will be identical to the recovered Deep Structures except with a noun
Step 4 - Insert into the sentence which results from the first three steps the noun
substituted into the position(s) occupied by the noun(s) which caused the
which you, as the hypnotist, wish the client to substitute into the set of related
selectional restriction violation(s). Using the above sentence as an example, we
Deep Structures generated by the transderivational search process.
have:

This addition of the desired noun referential index increases the probability that the
POSSIBLE (FEEL
client will select the related Deep Structure the one which carries the message
GOOD (tomato plant) deep structure 2.............. deep structure n
which is the hypnotist's intended message. The position in the sentence into which


104

[PAGE 105]

feeling good, isn't it, Joe. ...
by transderiva-
tional search This kind of meta-commenting insures that the client will activate a
processes transderivational search. Erickson is calling the client's attention to the selectional
restriction violation.


Deletions
a tomato plant can surface structure 2 ....... surface structure n
fell good In the example given early in this section:

The window was broken
One of the Deep Structures generated by the transderivational search process will
be the Deep Structure associated with the Surface Structure:
we pointed out that the Deep Structure associated with this Surface Structure was
. . .I (the client) canfeel good. ... more complete, contained more elements:

PAST (BREAK [someone, the window, with something})
Once again, as in the case of the generalized referential index technique,
Erickson will sometimes supply the noun with the referential index which he
Specifically, in the process of the derivation as the Deep Structure
wishes the client to select out of the set of additional Deep Structures generated in
the transderivational search. For example, Erickson will say: representation is mapped onto the Surface Structure, several portions of the Deep
Structure representation were deleted or removed and do not appear in the Surface
...a tomato plant can, Joe, feel good. ... Structure. In the example we are using here, both the agent - the person or thing
that broke the window - and the instrument - the thing that was used to break the
window - have no representation in the Surface Structure. This example
In a step-by-step format, a hypnotist can use Erickson's selectional restriction
demonstrates the linguistic process of deletion.
violation technique with the following construction:
Erickson employs deletion processes to induce the client to activate a
transderivational search for meaning. For example, Erickson might say:
Step 1 - Determine the message of which you, as the hypnotist, desire the client to
have an unconscious understanding;
... itis so satisfying. ...
Step 2 - Make a sentence (or series of sentences) which communicates that
message directly;
... you have learned so quickly. ...
Step 3 - Replace the occurrences of the nouns bearing referential indices which
pick out the client, the present situation, and the problem being dealt with, with
. . TI have understood so much from you... .
nouns which violate the selectional restrictions of the predicates with which they
occur;

Step 4 - This is an optional step - insert into the sentences which result from the In each of these examples, Erickson has used one of the grammatical deletion
first three steps the noun(s) which you, as a hypnotist, wish the client to substitute processes available in English to remove a portion of the Deep Structure
into the set of related Deep Structures generated by the transderivational search representation so that it does not appear in the Surface Structure. By skillfully
process. using these natural language processes, the hypnotist leaves the client the
maximum amount of freedom to interpret for himself the missing parts of the Deep

Erickson often will insert meta-comments regarding the very process which he Structure. Specifically, in the above examples, the following parts have been

is employing into the ongoing communication. For example, he might say: * deleted:


... It is so satisfying. ... Satisfying to whom?
...a tomato plant can, Joe, feel good. . . funny to talk about a tomato plant

105

[PAGE 106]

. . you have learned so What, specifically, has been hypnotist may:
much.... learned?
... 1] have understood so much What, specifically, have I (1) Identify the message which you, as a hypnotist, wish
from you.... understood from you?
the client to understand unconsciously;
(2) Form a sentence which conveys this message;
(3) Delete the nouns in the sentence formed until
Since Erickson's communication leaves these pieces of the Deep Structure
(a) The maximum number of nouns have been removed, consistent
associated with the Surface Structure he utters wholly unspecified, the client
with leaving the sentence well formed in English;
activates a transderivational search in which the set of Deep Structures generated
or
are identical with the recovered Deep Structure except that the nouns which have
(b) As many of the nouns have been deleted as the hypnotist
been deleted from the Surface Structure and which, thereby, have no referential
desires, independent of whether the resulting sentence is well
index in their Deep Structure representation’ are replaced with some noun which
formed or not.
has a referential index which is relevant to the client's ongoing experience.
The second kind of deletion which Erickson uses effectively in his work is
Nominalizations
deletion which results in a Surface Structure which is, itself, not well formed. For
Linguists use the term nominalization to refer to the result of the linguistic
example, Erickson might say:
process of turning a Deep Structure predicate into a Surface Structure noun. For
example, the words in italic type in the following list are nominalizations:
... and you want and need...

frustration frustrate
. . you fully realize so well... .
satisfaction satisfy

In each of these example cases, the resulting sequence of words is not a well-
The words which occur to the right of these nominalizations are the nonformed sentence of English - ungrammatical deletion. The client is faced with the
nominalized, Surface Structure predicate forms of these Deep Structure predicates.
task of making sense out of Erickson's communication. He may accomplish this by
In general, when a speaker of English uses a predicate in a Surface Structure in
activating the transderivational search process - in these cases, the set of Deep
predicate form, he must include information about the things or people between
Structures generated are identical to the recovered (partial) Deep Structure except
whom the predicate is describing the process. However, in the nominalized form,
that they are complete. The client generates a set of structures with the portions
there is no requirement that such information be provided when the predicate is
which were missing in the recovered (partial) Deep Structure (which rendered it
used. This allows the speaker to avoid specifying what he is talking about. This
ungrammatical) filled in:
also provides the listener with a large number’s of choices of how he will interpret

... and you want and need. ... What do you want and need or assign meaning to the communication.
In the context of hypnotic work, the nominalization assumes a positive value
in that it provides an occasion for the client to activate the transderivational
... you fully realize so well. . .. What do you fully realize so well
processes in his search for meaning for the communication coming from the
hypnotist. For example, the client hears the hypnotist say:
That is, the client generates Deep Structures with nouns with referential indices
relevant to his ongoing experience in t he positions in which Erickson makes the ... the satisfaction... .
ungrammatical deletions. Our experience has been that, when a client is presented
with a large number of these ungrammatical deletions he appears to give up the The Deep Structure representation of this nominalization is:
task of making sense out of the communication altogether and his normal linguistic
processing mechanisms seem to jam.
SA TISFY (someone/something, someone, with some
To construct sentences utilizing these deletion principles, the
one/something)

106

[PAGE 107]

In words, the Deep Structure process of SATISFY involves a person or thing doing
the satisfying action, a person who is experiencing the satisfaction, and someone or
Ambiguity
something which is the occasion for the process of satisfying (the instrument).
Since none of these nouns appears in the Surface Structure of Erickson's In the course of normal communication in natural language, there is, usually, a
communication, the client's recovered Deep Structure has no referential indices for premium placed upon producing sentences which are non-ambiguous - sentences
the nouns which are the parts of the Deep Structure representation. He, therefore, which carry only one meaning. In the context of hypnosis, the inverse is often the
activates the transderivational search processes, literally, to make meaning for case. The skill with which the hypnotist can produce sentences which are
himself, thereby selecting the most appropriate and relevant meaning from the set ambiguous serves him well in his task of pacing and leading the client in his trance
of Deep Structures generated. Nominalizations are particularly useful in pacing work. Linguists have characterized the linguistic phenomenon of ambiguity
and leading a client's experience when the experience is of the kind which has little formally as the situation in which a single sound sequence or Surface Structure is
manifestation in the client's body movements, actions and speech. associated with more than one derivation and, therefore, more than one Deep
To construct sentences utilizing this technique, the hypnotist Structure. In visual form, we can represent ambiguity as:
may:


deep structure 1, deep structure 2,................ deep structure n
(1) Identify the type of behavior into which he wishes to pace or lead the
client;
(2) Form a sentence which uses the predicate which describes the
experience;
(3) Delete all nouns and change the predicate into its nominalized form.
NL
surface structure

In selecting the experience to be paced or induced in the client's ongoing We now move directly into the construction of the four different types of
experience, the hypnotist should be aware that there arc certain predicates which ambiguity.
describe or easily induce experiences in clients in the context of hypnosis. As in
the case of mind reading, the selection of one of these predicates will insure a Phonological Ambiguity
successful communication between the hypnotist and the client. Examples of these Phonological ambiguity depends upon the fact that, in natural languages, the
predicates are: distinct meaning of certain words or phrases is represented by the slime sound
sequence. Take, for example, the word duck. Without any further context, the sound
wonder, satisfy, learn, think, feel, etc. sequence duck has two meanings - the noun meaning, which identifies a class of
birds, and a verb meaning, which describes a quick movement of a certain type. In
order for the hypnotist to make use of phonological ambiguities, he may:

Step 1 - Identify the message he wishes the client to receive;
Step 2 - List the words which are involved in the message;
Step 3 - Check each word on the list to determine whether any of them are
phonologically ambiguous (note here that it is critical for the hypnotist either to say
the words on the list aloud or to use an internal auditory dialogue to say them as
words which, in their written, visual form are non-ambiguous, are sometimes
ambiguous when presented auditorily - e.g., here/ hear).
Step 4 - Use the ambiguous words in his Surface Structures to the client, marking
the words analogically (see techniques of analogical marking in the section on
Lesser Included Deep Structure).

107

[PAGE 108]

Syntactic Ambiguity
Syntactic ambiguities occur when the syntactic function of a word cannot be I want you to draw me a picture ofyourself in the nude
uniquely determined from the immediate context. For example, in the sentence:
Here, the communication is ambiguous, as the phrase in the nude could apply
They are visiting relatives equally well to the way in which Erickson wants the listener to dress (or, rather, not
dress) when drawing the picture or to the way in which the listener is to portray
it is not possible to determine whether the word visiting is functioning as a Surface himself in the picture he draws.
Structure verb to be grouped with the verb are as in the example: One of Erickson's favorite scope ambiguities is that associated with age
regression. He will, in the course of an induction, look meaningfully at the client
They are visiting orange groves and say:

or whether it is functioning as a Surface Structure adjective to be ... Speaking to you as a child. ..
grouped with relatives, as in the example: Here, of course, the ambiguity is whether the phrase as a child refers to Erickson or
to the client, thus, the effect is a scope ambiguity which induces age regression on
They are relatives who are visiting here with us the part of the client.
or

They are traveling relatives Punctuation Ambiguity
In this book, we have identified punctuation ambiguity as the cases in which
There are two forms of syntactic ambiguity which we have found in Erickson's Erickson uses a sequence of words which is the result of an overlap of two wellwork. These are: formed Surface Structures sharing a word or phrase. For example, Erickson might
say:

(1)... Verb + ing + Noun
.. . Flying planes can be dangerous I want you to notice your hand me the glass

... Investigating FBI agents can be dangerous They are
murdering peasants. .. . This ill-formed Surface Structure can be decomposed into two well-formed
They are walking dogs... . Surface Structures with the shared pivot word hand: °

(2)... Nominalization of Noun... . I want you to notice your hand Hand me the glass

... The touch of the man. .. .
... The feeling of the couch. .. . All cases of punctuation ambiguity result in ill-formed Surface Structures. Our
experience in using this technique is that it is very effective and that the client,
Each of these syntactically ambiguous forms may be utilized by the hypnotist by typically, either responds immediately to the command given or stops processing
using the following construction procedure: with the normal linguistic processes almost immediately. The hypnotist may
Step 1 - Identify the message that you, as a hypnotist, wish the client to receive; construct sentences using this technique by:
Step 2 - Place the message into one of the syntactically ambiguous forms listed
above. Step 1 - Identify the message you, as a hypnotist, desire that the client receive;
Step 2 - Check each of the words in the message to determine whether they are
Scope Ambiguity phonologically ambiguous;
Scope ambiguity occurs when it cannot be determined from an inspection of Step 3 - Form two sentences, one of which has the phonologically ambiguous word
the immediate linguistic context low much is applied to that sentence by some as the last word in the sentence, the second, a command, in which the ambiguous
other portion of that sentence. For example, Erickson might say: word occurs as the first word in the sentence;

108

[PAGE 109]

Step 4 - Delete the first word of the second sentence and say the entire sequence to In English, there are a number of predicates which, naturally, have as their
the client. objects a complete sentence which is characterized as a question. For example, the
predicates wonder, ask, question, am curious, know, understand - all take a whether
You will help yourself to acquire this skill (as well as the others presented here) by complement clause:
generating a set of phonologic ally ambiguous words which occur naturally in your
work. One set which we have found very useful are organ language (words which I wonder whether. ...

identify body parts and functions, e.g., hand, shoulder), phonologically ambig uous
words such as those listed in Part II of this book in the section on ambiguity. I ask myself whether. . . .


Iam curious whether. .


When a native speaker of English is asked the question:


Do you know where your knee is?


he, typically, responds either yes or no, and the communication is complete at that
point. However, when the native speaker of English hears the embedded question:

Lesser Included Structures
I wonder whether you really know where your knee is.


since no response is asked for (no question was asked; therefore, there is no need to
The linguistic analysis of Surface Structures claims that there is another level of respond), he, typically, makes no direct response. Our experience is that clients do,
representation available to native speakers/ listeners of the language - the meaning however, respond covertly. In other words, when they hear an embedded question,
representation, or Deep Structure. For example, the Surface Structure:
they tend to respond internally as though the embedded question were asked
directly. There are several ways in which the hypnotist can utilize this covert
I hope that you feel better
response. First, since he knows that the client is responding to the embedded
questions covertly, he knows about a portion of the client's experience which the
includes two complete clauses in Deep Structure, one ofwhich corresponds to the
client is unaware that he knows about - a perfect situation for effective mind
sentence:
reading. Second, by skillfully selecting the question which he embeds, the
hypnotist can lead the client in a direction which will accomplish the objectives of
I hope X
the hypnotic work. The following procedure will allow you to generate embedded
questions:
and one which corresponds to the sentence:

Step 1 - Identify the message which you, as a hypnotist, wish the client to receive;
you feel better
Step 2 - Form a question which will lead the client to the message which you wish
him to receive;
We refer to this Ast clause as a lesser included structure of the entire sentence.
Step 3 - Embed the question within one of the verbs listed above to form an
Erickson has succeeded in making extensive and skillful use of this pattern in his
embedded or indirect question.
hypnotic work. There are three major types of lesser included structures: Embedded
Questions, Embedded Commands, and Quotes.


Embedded Questions
109

[PAGE 110]

This technique is rendered much more effective if combined with presuppositions delivered the command directly to the listener except that the listener responds
and analogical marking. unconsciously. This tendency depends upon the listener's tendency to commit an
error of logical typing at the unconscious level - that is, to respond to a metaEmbedded Commands statement (the quoted material) as though it were at a different logical level (see
As a hypnotist, one of the ways to determine how responsive a client is at any Bateson). This technique is extremely easy to use:
given point in time is to present him with a command to respond in some way
visible to you without the client's being aware that you have given such a Step 1 - Identify the message which you, as a hypnotist, desire the client to
command. Presenting the command in a covert way has all the other advantages receive;
which we have mentioned previously; e.g., avoids the authoritarian issue and, Step 2 - Form the message into a command;
thereby, resistance; engages active participation on the part of the client at the Step 3 - Make up a story in which one of the characters says the command(s)
unconscious level of behavior: emphatically.


Step 1 - Identify some message to which you, as a hypnotist, wish the client to Common to ach of these three techniques is a dramatic increase in their
respond; effectiveness when they are combined with analogical marking. Erickson typically
Step 2 - Form a command with the message; uses both his own movements and tempo and tonality changes to mark different
Step 3 - Find a Surface Structure which the command will fit into without making portions of the Surface Structures he is uttering as a separate message. In this way,
the result ungrammatical. he is able to present several messages - to activate several Deep Structures
simultaneously. Analogical marking of verbal communication and analogical
Again, the effectiveness of this technique is increased dramatically communication more generally is a topic of Volume II of this series. We will
when it is combined with analogical marking. Examples of the result of this leave a fuller discussion of the powerful techniques of Erickson until then.
process are: The most basic strategy for analogical marking as it is used by Erickson can be
presented here however:
...atomato can, Joe, feel better. .. .

Step 1 - Identify the message which you, as a hypnotist, wish the client to receive;
. . people are able to learn quickly. . . .
Step 2 - Make up a series of sentences which include as a proper subset all of the
words which, if they were extracted, would communicate the message directly;
Quotes Step 3 - Mark the subset of words included in the communication analogically (by
In recounting our experiences to one another in verbal communication, we tonal shifts, body shifts, tempo shifts, etc.) to communicate the included meaning.
sometimes choose to present verbatim some of the conversation or verbal exchange Derived Meanings
which we had with a person in the course of our experiences. For example, in
telling a story, we may
say something such as the following:

As we stated before, when each of us uses a natural language system to
. .. Yeah, and then he said to me, "Scratch your communicate, we assume that the listener can decode complex sound sequences
nose"....
into meanings, i.e., the listener has the ability to derive the Deep Structure meaning
from the Surface Structure we present to him auditorily. In addition to the recovery
The language material inside the quotes (marked by voice change in the auditory
of Deep-Structure meaning from Surface-Structure communication, we also
presentation is quoted material. It is understood by the listener at the conscious
assume the complex skill of listeners to derive extra meaning from some Surface
level to be a command directed at someone in the story not at the listener.
Structures by the nature of their form. Even though neither the speaker nor the
However, the consistent effect which Erickson obtains with quoted material (as
listener may be aware of this process, it goes on all of the time. For example, if
well as our own consistent experience with it) is the same as though he had
someone says:


110

[PAGE 111]

Procedure of Constructing Presuppositions
Step 1 - Identify the suggestion you, as a hypnotist, wish to make;
I want to watch Kung Fu tonight on TV
Step 2 - Form a sentence with the suggestion in it. Call this A;
we must understand that Kung Fu is on TV tonight in order to process the sentence Step 3 - Pick one of the syntactic environments from the Appendix on
I want to watch. . . to make any sense. These processes are called presuppositions Presuppositions at the end of this volume. There are 32 from which to choose;
of natural language. Step 4 - Imbed the sentence from Step 2 into the syntactic environment you chose
Another example of derived meaning is conversational postulate: If you from the Appendix.
answer the phone and someone says to you, "Is Jane there?" you are expected to
derive the meaning that they wish to speak to her. This is part of our ongoing The result will be a presupposition. Erickson uses presuppositions in almost every
experience of processing language. It also offers a resource for hypnotists to give aspect of his work, and they arc most useful and effective:
suggestions in an indirect manner.
Will your unconscious mind let your conscious [mind] know what this
Construction of Presuppositions terrible thing is in five minutes or in ten minutes?
The formal representation of what constitutes presuppositions in natural
language is as follows: Message A is a presupposition of Message B when Construction of Conversational Postulates
Message A must be a true statement necessary for both Message B and the There are two classes of conversational postulates. The first class is formally
Message Not B: represented as follows:
A 1s a presupposition of B
A is a conversational postulate when A is a Yes/No question constructed
if B implies A from a presupposition, B
and ~ B implies A
B is the sentence, "I want you to open the door," or "Open the door" B has
I want to watch the presuppositions:
B (1) You can open the door.
Kung Fu on TV tonight (2) The door is closed.
A
So a conversational postulate can be constructed by changing (1) or (2) into a
I don't want to watch Yes/No question form.
Not B
Kung Fu on TV tonight (1) Can you open the door?
A (2) Is the door closed?
where ~ means negation
The conversational postulate derived meaning is B, "Open the door."
Both statements imply that Kung Fu is on TV tonight. Therefore, A is a
presupposition of B and not B. Conversational postulate examples, first type:


I want to know whether B you'll quit smoking on Sunday or Monday command
A (3) Can you focus your eyes on Focus your eyes on that spot.
that spot?
I don't want to know whether B you'll quit smoking on Sunday or Monday
A (4) Will your eyes dose tightly? Close your yes tightly.

111

[PAGE 112]

Construction procedures, first type: Construction of negatives:


Step 1 - Identify suggestion you want to give; Step 1 - Identify suggestion; Keep arm suspended in air
Step 2 - Make the suggestion a command; after it has been lifted;
Step 3 - Pick out one of the presuppositions of the command;
Step 4 - Form a Yes/No question from one of the presuppositions of the command. Step 2 - Form a command; Don't put your arm down;


The result will be a conversational! postulate. Step 3 - Embed command by Not necessary to put your arm
The second class of conversational postulates are Surface inserting modal operator down.
Structures such as: of necessity between
negation and command.
(1) There's no need to move.
(2) You don't have to talk. Construction procedure for positives:
(3) You can see her.
(4) You may go now. Step 1 - Identify suggestion; Open eyes.


Examples (1) and (2) are slightly different in form from (3) and (4). The first two Step 2 - Make command out of Open your eyes, Steve.
are examples of negative conversational postulates represented formally as: suggestion;


Any negation followed by a modal operator of necessity and then X is Step 3 - Imbed modal operator You can open your eyes,
understood to mean not X; of possibility. Steve.


Not X Further examples of this class:
No need to move then implies don't move
No need to remember Negative: no remember any
It isn't necessary to talk = don't talk
thing

The modal operator is dropped and the negation plus X are the derived meaning. You can forget this. Positive: forget this


Examples (3) and (4) are positive conversational postulates which can be It can be a boring task to Positive: boring task to re
represented formally as: remember. member

Any modal operator of possibility followed by X implies X
It's not necessary to hear anyone Negative: no hear anyone
else's voice. else's voice
You can smile implies smile
You don't have to listen me. Negative: no listen
You may speak now implies speak now

Your unconscious minds can Unconscious: hear me
Both are similar in that they carry the same meaning with or without the modal hear me.
operators.


112

[PAGE 113]

Conversational postulates are an extremely effective form of suggestion when
used by Erickson (or by you). They utilize the processing of information at nonconscious levels in ways to which people are very used to responding. And,
although they do not sound like commands, they are a form of command to which Summary of Part III
we all respond almost every day.
The common features of the two categories of presuppositions
and conversational postulates are:
The linguistic patterns presented in a step-by-step manner in this part of
Volume I constitute the basic foundations of Milton Erickson's use of language in
(a) They allow the hypnotist to instruct the client without directly stating the
his work with hypnosis. The next level of patterning is the way these lower level
instructions;
patterns are used in combination with each other to achieve the desired level of
(b) They allow the client to respond selectively without reducing the
trance and the desired outcome of the suggested phenomenon (anastesia, control of
effectiveness of the hypnotist's induction or deep trance instruction's;
pain, access to memory, weight loss, age regression, psychotherapeutic goals, etc.).
(c) They depend for their effectiveness upon an additional processing on the
Erickson's use of these patterns in combination demonstrates creative, consistent,
part of the client - involving him even more actively in the process.
and effective use at this meta-level of organization. The basic meta-patterns of:


(1) Pace and then lead
(2) Distract and utilize dominant hemisphere
(3) Access non-dominant hemisphere


have been presented already and are useful principles for organizing your own
hypnotic work. There are an infinite number of choices of how the first order
patterns may be put together. Erickson's creative use of these patterns in a large
variety of contexts demonstrates his sensitive and ingenious use of these infinite
complexities. The various ways in which all of these patterns can be put together,
and how Erickson has put them together, arc too numerous to mention in this first
volume. However, there are some simple meta-patterning principles which will
assist you in organizing your experience in combining these lower level patterns in
a way which will most effectively assist you in achieving your desired purpose,
while at the same time leaving you maximal room to use your own creativity to
construct inductions which will fit your own style and needs as a practitioner of
hypnosis.


Most Highly Valued Induction and Suggestion
The notion of most highly valued induction and suggestion is that the induction
and suggestion which use the lower level patterns to achieve the maximal amount
of:


(1) Pacing
(2) Distracting
(3) Utilization of dominant hemisphere functions
(4) Accessing of non-dominant hemisphere

113

[PAGE 114]

the same paragraph again for the convenience of the reader.
with the least amount of words, at the same time being consistent with the client's
model of the world. Any verbalizations meeting these criteria will be most highly
The writer immediately seized upon this last comment as the basis for the initial
valued. Of course, this depends upon the context and purpose of the hypnotic
cooperation with him. He was told, "Please proceed with an account of your ideas
induction and suggestion. There are two principal ways to construct a highly
and understanding, permitting me only enough interruptions to insure that I
valued induction and suggestion.
understand fully and that Ifollow along with you. For example, you mentioned the
chair but obviously you have seen my desk and have been distracted by the objects
1. Intersection of Unconscious Meanings on it. Please explain fully.
The principle of intersection of non-conscious meanings is that inductions and
He responded verbosely with a wealth of more or less connected comments
suggestions will be most effective when the Deep Structure meanings that are about everything in sight. At every slight pause, the writer interjected a word or
activated (not the ones represented consciously) by transderivational search, phrase to direct his attention anew. These interruptions, made with increasing
ambiguity, lesser included structure, derived meanings, analogical marking, and frequency, were as follows:
causal modeling statements interact, i.e., all give the same suggestion. As a result, And that paperweight; the filing cabinet; your foot on the rug; the ceiling
the suggestion is most likely to be accepted and acted upon by the client. For light; the draperies; your right hand on the arm of the chair; the pictures on
example: the wall; the changing focus of your eyes as you glance about; the interest
of the book titles; the tension in your shoulders; the feeling of the chair;
If one of the Deep Structures from an ambiguity is message P, one of the the disturbing noises and thoughts; weight of hands and feet; weight of
lesser included Deep Structures is P, one of derived Deep Structures is P, problems, weight of desk; the stationary stand; the records of many
an analogically marked message is P, and a Deep Structure activated trans- patients; the phenomena of life, of illness, of emotion, of physical and
derivational is P, then the unconscious meanings maximally intersect and mental behavior; the restfulness of relaxation; the need to attend to one's
message P will be accepted and acted upon by the client. needs; the need to attend to one's tension while looking at the desk or the
paperweight or the filing cabinet; the comfort of withdrawal from the
2. Maximal Direction
environment; fatigue and its development; the unchanging character of the
The principle of maximal direction is that the unified action of combining desk; the monotony of the filing cabinet; the need to take a rest; the
lower level patterns will serve to pace the client's experience while distracting the comfort of closing one's eyes; the relaxing sensation of a deep breath; the
dominant hemisphere by utilizing the modeling processes of that hemisphere and, delight of learning passively; the capacity for intellectual learning by the
simultaneously, also serving to access the non-dominant hemisphere. This principle unconscious.
is stated as: If the hypnotist uses the levelone patterns to activate a set of Various other similar brief interjections were offered, slowly at first and then with
unconsciously generated and accepted meanings represented by messages PI, P2, increasing frequency.
P3,.... Pn for each pair of messages, P2 and Pj, there is no conflict (they are
Initially, these interjections were merely supplementary to the patient's own
consistent), then the overall effect is maximal direction. The set of unconscious train of thought and utterances. At first, the effect was simply to stimulate him to
messages reinforce one another and should proceed in an increasingly meaningful further effort. As this response was made, it became possible to utilize his
direction toward the desired goal; that is, Pj should not only not negate any other acceptance of stimulation of his behavior by a procedure of pausing and hesitating
Pk, but PI should be the logical step leading to P2. This is probably the most in the completion of an interjection. This served to effect in him an expectant
important factor in expediating hypnotic work. dependency upon the writer for further and more complete stimulation. (1967, p.
The reader will have noticed that, following each of the patterns of Erickson's 33)
work which we extract in Part II of this volume, we have included the same short
Clearly, the medical practitioner will have a different purpose in mind than
paragraph, with, in italic type, the expressions which were examples of the patterns psychotherapists, who will have a different goal than the dental practitioner, and so
which we had just finished describing. This paragraph, then, is an excellent on. However, the notion of most highly valued induction will exist in each context.
example of the higher level patterning - the principles of the most highly valued Faster inductions will make hypnosis a more practical tool for every practitioner
induction and suggestion, especially intersection and maximal overlap. We repeat and deeper trances, although not always required, will open new horizons for the

114

[PAGE 115]

application of hypnosis in other fields. The form o highly valued inductions will
... isn't it (pause) Joe. ..
remain constant, although the content will vary in relationship to your purposes and
the client with whom you are working. Explicit patterns of these inductions will be
or a direct meta-comment:
presented in Volume II. As we stated before, this work constitutes only a few of the
many patterns of behavior used so effectively by Milton Erickson in his work with . isn't it Joe....
hypnosis. Although this work may represent only a part of what Erickson has to
offer, the patterns presented here arc effective in and of themselves. Study and That is,

experimentation in your own experience will reveal that the preceding patterns
isn't it Joe whom I'm talking about feeling good.
offer you a vast resource to enrich your skill in hypnotic activity and a foundation
for you to further explore your own potentials. Volume II is on the way. The study
4. In the standard linguistic analysis, Deep Structure nouns may only be deleted
of Erickson's work has been an incredible learning experience for us - we hope it
(grammatically) if they either have another noun in the same Deep Structure which carries
will prove to be fascinating and useful for you. the same referential index (and is in certain specified structural relations to the one being
deleted) or they carry no referential index in the Deep Structure representation.
FOOTNOTES FOR PART II
5. This type of punctuation ambiguity is mentioned in Grinder and Elgin, 1973, under
the name of Overlap Deletion, a technique sometimes employed in literary language and
1. The name of this class of phenomena, transderivational, with its marvelous poetry.
phonological ambiguity, refers to the process which our model claims the listener goes
through to make meaning. Upon hearing a Surface Structure and recovering its associated
Deep Structure, which has little or no obvious meaning relationship to the listener's ongoing
experience, the listener activates additional Deep Structures, with their associated
derivations, which are obtained from the original recovered Deep Structure by some
specifiable formal characteristic. Thus, the listener searches across Deep Structures and
their associated derivations at the unconscious level of language processing to extract some
meaning relevant to his ongoing experience - therefore, transderivational.
Transderivational phenomena were first proposed in liguistic theory by Postal, Perlmutter,
and Grinder (see Lakoff, G., Some Thoughts on Transderivational Constraints,
mimeograph, 1970).

2. The Deep Structure which we present here is a very crudely simplified version of
what the actual Deep Structure is from a linguistic analysis. For example, the reader will
notice that the words learning and opportunities are, themselves, complex; each of them is
a nominalization (derived from a Deep Structure representation in which they originally
occurred as predicates). Thus, while the actual Deep Structure from a linguistic analysis is
much more complex, the processes which are being represented here in this simplified
example apply to the more complex structure in the same way.

3. There is an excellent example of intonation ambiguity in this passage: Erickson first
meta-comments


... funny to talk about a tomato plant feeling good. ..


and then again comments:


... isn't it Joe...


Depending upon the intonation pattern which the hypnotist uses here, the
client will hear a simple tag question:

115

[PAGE 116]

himself. Erickson has made this point over and over again in his work and writings
- we endorse completely his statement:
Another common oversight in hypnotic psychotherapy lies in the
Epilogue lack of appreciation of the separateness or the possible mutual
exclusiveness of the conscious and the unconscious (or sub-
conscious) levels of awareness. Yet, all of us have had the
experience of having a word or a name "on the tip of the tongue"
This volume is the first in a series of studies of the patterns of hypnotic
but being unable to remember it so that it remained unavailable
techniques employed by Milton H. Erickson. In this first volume, we have focused
and inaccessible in the immediate situation. Nevertheless, full
primarily on the verbal patterns which~ Erickson uses in his work. Furthermore,
knowledge actually existed within the unconscious, but
our emphasis here has been on the portions of his work dealing with the induction
unavailably so to the conscious mind.
of trance and the use of suggestion for assisting the client in accomplishing the
In hypnotic psychotherapy, too often, suitable therapy may be
objectives of trance work. We intend to shift the emphasis of the future volumes to
given to the unconscious but with the failure by the therapist to
other patterns - the Table of Contents which we include for Volume II of Patterns
appreciate the tremendous need of either enabling the patient to
will give the reader some notion of this future emphasis.
integrate the unconscious with the conscious, or, of making the
The patterns of Erickson's work which we make explicit in this first volume are
new understandings of the unconscious fully accessible, upon
neutral with respect to their application that is, they are of equal value and potency
need, to the conscious mind. Comparable to this failure would be
in their medical, dental and psychotherapeutic forms. Common to the use of
an appendectomy with failure to close the incision. It is in this
hypnosis in each of these three areas is that, during a trance induction and the
regard hat many arm-chair critics natively denounce hypnotic
subsequent trance work employing the powerful Erickson patterns which we have
psychotherapy as without value since "it deals only with the
modeled in this volume, the client is assisted in achieving an altered state of
unconscious." Additionally, there is even more oversight of the
consciousness in which communication between the hypnotist and the client occurs
fact, repeatedly demonstrated by clinical experience, that in some
and dramatic and far-reaching changes may be initiated by the client without the
aspects of the patient's problem direct reintegration under the
awareness of the client's conscious mind. From our work both in therapy and in
guidance of the therapist is desirable; in other aspects, the unconhypnosis we understand and accept the value of sorting or separating portions of
scious should merely be made available to the conscious mind,
the client's consciousness which assists the client in making the changes which he
thereby permitting a spontaneous reintegration free from any
desires. However, will work in both arcas, we insist upon working with the client
immediate influence by the therapist. Properly, hypnotherapy
to integrate the changes made in one state of consciousness with his skills and
should be oriented equally about the conscious and unconscious,
resources in other states of consciousness, thereby leaving the client with a
since the integration of the total personality is the desired goal in
coordinated, unified and integrated model of the world on which to make choices
psychotherapy.
which guide his behavior. In Chapter Six of Magic J and Part Two of Magic IT, we
Milton H. Erickson, Hypnotic Psychotherapy, 1948, pp. 575
go into great detail in presenting both examples and principles which underlie the
and 576
integration of changes which clients succeed in making in therapy. Thus, what we
wish to point out clearly to those who intend to use the powerful patterns which we
We are aware that simply pointing out the necessity of integration as the final
have extracted and modeled from Erickson's work is that the use of these patterns
step in the use of hypnosis is not adequate; rather, an explicit model of the way in
includes the presupposition that the client may communicate and initiate changes of
which the hypnotist may assist the client in integration is required. This is the point
which one portion of his consciousness has no awareness; in other words, the use
of the references to the portions of Magic I and JI and a portion of the focus of
of these hypnotic patterns includes the disassociation of a portion of the client's
Volume II of Patterns. We wish to be clear here regarding integration - one of the
model of the world. The use of these powerful techniques requires that the
advantages of the use of hypnosis in the therapeutic context is that through
hypnotist assist the client in reintegrating his model fully before the hypnotic
disassociation the client is able to cope with and initiate changes in portions of his
relationship is ended. In this way, the client truly comes to control his behavior and
model of the world which are so heavily laden with negative emotional associa
has available the choices which he entered the hypnotic relationship to secure for
116

[PAGE 117]

tions that the client in the normal state of consciousness panics or feels
overwhelmed. Thus, while integration in our model of hypnotic and therapeutic
work is a necessary component, there is no need to require that the integration
occur immediately; this would run counter to one of the most powerful advantages
of hypnosis. Erickson, once again, states the case clearly: Appendix
However, the above does not necessarily mean that integration
must constantly keep step with the progress of the therapy. One of
the greatest advantages of hypnotherapy lies in the opportunity to SYNTACTIC ENVIRONMENTS FOR IDENTIFYING NATURAL
work independently with the unconscious without being hampored LANGUAGE PRESUPPOSITIONS IN ENGLISH
by the reluctance, or sometimes actual inability, of the conscious
mind to accept therapeutic gains. For example, a patient had full Our purpose in presenting the material in this Appendix is to indicate the scope
unconscious insight into her periodic nightmares of an incestuous and complexity of the natural language phenomenon of presuppositions. In
character from which she suffered, but, as she spontaneously addition, by listing some of the more common syntactic environments in which
declared in the trance, "I now understand those horrible dreams, presuppositions occur, we provide an opportunity to practice for those students
but I couldn't possibly tolerate such an understanding who are interested in sharpening their intuitions in recognizing presuppositions.
consciously." By this utterance, the patient demonstrated the The list of syntactic environments is not exhaustive, and we will not attempt to
protectiveness of the unconscious for the conscious. Utilization of present any of the theories which have been proposed by different linguists,
th is protectiveness as a motivating force enabled the patient logicians, semanticists, or philosophers to account for presuppositions. Our
subsequently to accept consciously her unconscious insights. objective, rather, is more practical.
Experimental investigation has repeatedly demonstrated At the present time, presuppositions are a major focus of study for a number of
that good unconscious understandings allowed to become linguists, especially linguists who consider themselves Generative Semanticists. In
conscious before a conscious readiness exists will result in compiling this list of syntactic environments, we have borrowed heavily from the
conscious resistance, rejection, repression and even the loss, work of Lauri Kartunnen. See the Bibliography for sources.
through repression, of unconscious gains. By working
separately with the unconscious there is then the opportunity to I. Simple Presuppositions. These arc syntactic environments in which the
temper and to control the patient's rate of progress and thus to existence of some entity is required for the sentence to make sense (to the
effect a reintegration in the manner acceptable to the conscious either true or false).
mind.
M. Erickson, Hypnotic Psychotherapy, 1948, p. 576. (a) Proper Names: (George Smith left the party early.)
(there exists someone named George Smith)
where —————— means presupposes


NOWWWWWWW
WWW W W ( b) Pronouns: her, him, they,y etc.
(I saw him leave.)
(There exists some male [1.e., him].)


c) Definite Descriptions: complex
pP noun arguments
8
(I liked the woman with the silver earrings.)
______ (There exists a woman with silver earrings.)

(d) Generic Noun Phrases: noun arguments standing for a


117

[PAGE 118]

whole class: (If Fredo wears his new ring, I'll be blown away.)
(If wombats have no trees to climb in, they are sad.) — (Fredo had/has an old ring.)
(There are wombats.)
(g) Ordinal Numerals: first, second, third, fourth, another,
(e) Some Quantifiers: all, each, every, some, many, few, etc.
none, etc. (If you can find a third clue in this letter, I'll make you a mosquito pie.)
(If some of the dragons show up, I'm leaving.) (There are two clues already found.)
(There are dragons.)
(h) Comparatives: -er, more, less
(If you know better riders than Sue does, tell me who they are.)
II. Complete Presuppositions. Cases in which more than the simple existence of (Sue knows [at least] one rider.)
an element is presupposed. (If you know better riders than Sue is, tell me who they are.)
(Sue is a rider.)
(a) Relative Clauses: complex noun arguments, with a noun
followed by a phrase beginning with who, which, or (i) Comparative as: ...asxas...
that. (If her daughter is as funny as her husband is, we'll all enjoy ourselves.)
(Several of the women who had spoken to you left the shop.) (Her husband is funny.)
(Several women had spoken to you.)
(j) Repetitive Cue Words: too, also, either, again, back, etc. (If she tells me
(b) Subordinate Clauses of Time: clauses identified by the cue words before, that again, I'll kiss her.)
after, during, as, since, prior, when, while, etc. (She has told me that before.)
(If the judge was home when I stopped by her house, she didn't
answer her door.) (k) Repetitive Verbs and Adverbs: verbs and adverbs begin ning with re-,
___ (I stopped by the judge's house.) e.g., repeatedly, return, restore, retell,
replace, renew, etc.

(c) Cleft Sentences: sentences beginning with /t a (If he returns before I leave, I want to talk to him.)

is ——— (He has been here before.)

noun argument.

(It was the extra pressure which shattered the window.) (1) Qualifiers, such as: only,
Y even, except, Jjust, etc.
(Something shattered the window.) (Only Amy saw the bank robbers.)
(Amy saw the bank robbers.)

(d) Pseudo-Cleft Sentences: identified by the form What
(m) Change-ofPlace Verbs: come, go, leave, arrive, depart,
<Sentence> is <sentence>
enter, etc.
(What Sharon hopes to do is to become well liked.) (Sharon
hopes to do something.) (If Sam has left home, he is lost.)
(Sam has been at home.)

(e) Stressed Sentences voice stress
(If it was THE POLICE Margaret talked to, we're finished.) (n) Change-of Time Verbs and Adverbs: begin, end, stop,

(Margaret has talked to someone.) start, continue, proceed, already, yet, still, anymore,
etc.

(f) Complex Adjectives: new, old, former, present, previous, etc. (My bet is that Harry will continue to smile.)

118

[PAGE 119]

(Harry has been smiling.) (Who cares whether you show up or not?)
(0) Change-of State Verbs: change, transform, turn into, -————— (Nobody cares whether you show up or not.)
become, etc.
(If Mae turns into a hippie, I'll be surprised.) (x) Spurious not:
(Mae is not nowa hippie.) (I wonder if you're not being a little unfair.)
— (I think that you're being unfair.)
(p) Tactive Verbs and Adjectives: odd, aware, know, realize
regret, etc.

(It is odd that she called Maxine at midnight.)
(She called Maxine at midnight.)


(q) Commentary Adjectives and Adverbs: lucky, fortunately, far out, out of
sight, groovy, bitch in, innocently, happily, necessarily, etc.
(It's far out that you understand your dog's feelings. )
(You understand your dog's feelings.)


(r) Counterfactual Conditional Clause,s: verbs having subjunctive tense.
(Ifyou had listened to your father and me you wouldn't be in the
wonderful position you in now.)
(You didn't listen to your father and me)


(s) Contrary-to-Expectation should:
(Ifyou should [happen to] decide you want to talk to me, I'll be hanging
out in the city dump)
(I don't expect you to want to talk to me~)


(t) Selectional Restrictions:
(If my professor gets pregnant, I'll be disappointed.)
—_______ (My professor is a woman.)


(u) Questions:
(Who ate the tapes?)
(Someone ate the tapes.)
(I want to know who ate the tapes.)
—___ (Someone ate the tapes.)


(v) Negative Questions:
(Didn't you want to talk to me?)
(I thought that you wanted to talk to me.)


(w) Rhetorical Questions:


119

[PAGE 120]

Bibliography Lyons, J. Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
McCawley, J. "Lexical Insertion in a Transformational Grammar," in Papers From the
I. General
4th Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society. Chicago: University of
Chicago, 1968.
Bach, E. Syntactic Theory. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1974.
Plath, W., and Bever, T. Specification and Utilization of a Transformational
Bach-y-Rita, P. Brain Mechanisms in Sensory Substitution. New York: Academic
Grammar. Bedford, Mass.: Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, July 1968.
Press, 1972.
Polya, G. Patterns of Plausible Inference. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univ. Press, 1954.
Bandler, R., and Grinder, J. The Structure of Magic I. Palo Alto, Calif.: Science and
Postal, P. "On the Derivation of Pseudo-Adjectives," paper delivered to the 44th
Behavior Books, 1975.
Annual Meeting of the LSA, 1969.
Bandler, R., and Grinder, J. The Structure ofMagic II. (forthcoming) 1975.
Postal, P. "On the Surface Verb Remind," in Linguistic Inquiry. (1; 1:37-120) 1970.
Bever, T. G. "The Cognitive Basis of Linguistic Structure," in J. Hayes (ed.),
Ross, J. R. "On Declarative Sentences," in R. Jacobs and P. Rosenbaum, Readings in
Cognition and the Developments of Language. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1970.
English Transformational Grammar. Waltham, Mass.: Ginn/Blaisdell, 1970.
Chomsky, N. Syntactic Structures. Mouton, The Hague, 1957. Chomsky, N. Aspects of
Sapir, E. The Selected Writing of Edward Sapir. Berkeley: University of California
the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1965.
Press, D. Mandelbaum (ed.), 1963.
Chomsky, N. Language and Mind. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 1968.
Searle, J. Speech Acts. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1969.
Dimond, S., and Beaumont, K. Hemisphere Function in the Human Brain. New York:
Weizenhoffer, A. General Techniques of Hypnotism. New York: Grune and Stratton,
John Wiley & Sons, 1974. Dimond, S. The Double Brain. London: Churchill
1957.
Livingstone, 1972. Eccles, J. Brain and Conscious Experience. New York: Springer-
Whorf, B. "Grammatical Categories," in J. E. Carroll (ed.), Language, Thought and
Verlag, 1966. Fillmore, c., "The Case for Gse," in E. Bach and R. Harms Reality. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1956.
(cds.), Universals in Linguistic Theory. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1968
Gardner, II. The Shattered Mind. Knopf, 1975
II. Modeling/Formal Systems/Epistemology
Gazzainga, M. The Bisected Brain. New York: Appleton Century Croft, 1974. Greene,
Ashby, W. R. An Introduction to Cybernetics. Chapman and Hall, Ltd., and University
G. "How to Get People to Do Things With Words," in Papers From the 8th Regional
Paperbacks, 1956.
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1970.
Bateson, G. Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine Books, 1972. Boyd,
Grinder, J. On Deletion Phenomena in English. Mouton, The Hague, 1974.
D. Introduction to Systems Analysis. (in press) 1975.
Grinder, J., and Elgin, S. A Guide to Transformational Grammar. New York: Holt,
Carnap, R. The Logical Syntax of Language. Totowa, New Jersey: Littlefield, Adams
Rinehart and Winston, 1973.
and Company. 1959.
Gruber, J. "Studies in Lexical Relations." Unpublished doctoral dissertation, MIT,
Copi, I. Introduction to Logic. New York: Macmillan, 1961.
1965.
Herzberger, H. "The Logical Consistency of Language," in Harvard Educational
Haley,1 J. Advanced Techniques of Hypnosis and Therapy. New York: Grune and
Review, 35:469-480, 1965.
Stratton, 1967. Haley, J. Uncommon Therapy. New York: Grune and Stratton. Horn, L.
Hume, D. Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Oxford, England: Oxford
"A Presuppositional Analysis of Only and Even,” in Papers From the 5th Regional
University Press.
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1969.
Korzybski, A. Science and Sanity. Lakeville, Conn.: The International Non-
Jacobs, R., and Rosenbaum, P. English Transformational Grammar. Waltham, Mass.:
Aristotelian Library Publishing Company, 4th Edition, 1933.
Ginn/Blaisdell, 1968. Jeffress, J. A. Cerebral Mechanisms in Behavior. New York:
Miller, G. A.; Galanter, E.; and Pribram, K. Plans and the Structure of Behavior. New
Hafner Co., 1967.
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1960.
Kartunnen, L. "Remarks on Presuppositions," at the Texas Conference on
Newell, A.; and Simon, H. A. Human Problem Solving. Englewood Cliffs, New
Performances, Conversational Implicature and Presuppositions, March 1973,
Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1972.
mimeograph. Katz, J. Semantic Theory. New York: Harper and Row, 1972.
Lakoff, G. Linguistics and Natural Logic. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 1970. Pribram, K. Language of the Brain. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall,

Langacker, R. Language and Its Structure. New York: Harcourt Brace bvanovich, 1971.

Inc., 1967. Russell, B. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London, England: George Allen

Levy, J. "Psychobiological Implications of Bilateral Asymmetry," article in and Unwin, Ltd., 2nd Edition, 1921.

Hemisphere Function in the Human Brain. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1974. Schank, R.; and Colby, K. Computer Models of Thought and Language. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman and Company, 1973.

120

[PAGE 121]

Tarski, A. Introduction to Logic. New York: Oxford University Press, 1941.
Vaihinger, II. The Philosophy of "As If" London, England: Routledge, Kegan and Paul,
Ltd., 1924.
1. References labelled "(Milton II. Erickson) 1967" refer to Haley (cd.), 1967


121
