[PAGE 001]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


Effects of LSD on music-evoked brain activity
Mendel Kaelen!*, Romy Lorenz23*, Frederick Barrett*, Leor Roseman"?, Csaba Orban?”,
Andre Santos-Ribeiro!, Matthew B Wall’, Amanda Feilding?, David Nutt’, Suresh
Muthukumaraswamy’, Robin Carhart-Harris?, Robert Leech?

1Centre for Neuropsychopharmacology, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London W12 ONN,
UK
2Computational, Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience Laboratory (C3NL), Department of Medicine, Imperial
College London, London W12 ONN, UK
3Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, UK
4Behavioral Pharmacology Research Unit, John Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA
5Imanova Centre for Imaging Sciences, Hammersmith Hospital, London W12, UK
6The Beckley Foundation, Oxford OX3 9SY, UK
7Schools of Pharmacy and Psychology, University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand

* These authors contributed equally to the work.


Correspondence: m.kaelen@imperial.ac.uk

[PAGE 002]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


Abstract

Music is a highly dynamic stimulus, and consists of distinct acoustic features, such as pitch, rhythm and timbre.
Neuroimaging studies highlight a hierarchy of brain networks involved in music perception. Psychedelic drugs
such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) temporary disintegrate the normal hierarchy of brain functioning, and
produce profound subjective effects, including enhanced music-evoked emotion. The primary objective of this
study was to investigate the acute effects of LSD on music-evoked brain-activity under naturalistic music
listening conditions. 16 healthy participants were enrolled in magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while
listening to a 7-minute music piece under eyes-closed conditions on two separate visits (LSD (75 mcg) and
placebo). Dynamic time courses for acoustic features were extracted from the music excerpts, and were
entered into subject-level fMRI analyses as regressors of interest. Differences between conditions were
assessed at group level subsequently, and were related to changes in music-evoked emotions via correlation
analyses. Psycho-physiological interactions (PPIs) were carried out to further interrogate underlying music-
specific changes in functional connectivity under LSD. Results showed pronounced cortical and subcortical
changes in music-evoked brain activity under LSD. Most notable changes in brain activity and connectivity
were associated with the component timbral complexity, representing the complexity of the music’s spectral
distribution, and these occurred in brain networks previously identified for music-perception and music-
evoked emotion, and showed an association with enhanced music-evoked feelings of wonder under LSD. The
findings shed light on how the brain processes music under LSD, and provide a neurobiological basis for the
usefulness of music in psychedelic therapy.


1. Introduction

The capacity of music to elicit emotions has been utilised by humans across cultures for
millennia (Morley, 2013; Nettl, Bruno, 1956). Music is a highly dynamic and multi-
dimensional stimulus, consisting of distinct acoustic features, such as pitch, loudness,
tempo, rhythm and timbre. Within the field of cognitive neuroscience, the study of music
has provided valuable insights into the functional organization of the human brain due to
music’s recruitment of large-scale brain networks involved in attention (Janata, 2005),
working memory (Kumar et al., 2016; Zatorre et al., 1994), episodic memory (Janata, 2009;
Watanabe et al., 2008), motor function (Zatorre et al., 2007) and emotion (Koelsch, 2014;
Trost et al., 2012). As such, neuroimaging studies with music highlight a hierarchy of
processes involved in music perception: ascending from the cochlear, the auditory system
analyses increasingly complex acoustic features which are subsequently integrated via
multi-modal and higher-order cortical regions that facilitate associations with mental
representations, memories and emotions (Kumar et al., 2007; Stewart et al., 2008). While
the majority of neuroimaging studies have used controlled auditory experiments to study
acoustic features in isolation, recent studies advocate the use of more naturalistic
paradigms in which participants listen to real, extended pieces of music to increase the
ecological validity and obtain a more comprehensive description of the brain mechanisms
involved in processing naturalistic stimuli (Alluri et al., 2012; Burunat et al., 2016).


Advances in understanding the human brain can be made not only by studying its normal
functioning, but also by experimentally perturbing it. For the study of music, perturbations
that may be of particular significance are the effects of classic psychedelic drugs such as
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and psilocybin (i.e. psychedelics). Psychedelics activate the
serotonin 2A receptor (Glennon et al., 1984; Titeler et al., 1988; Vollenweider et al., 1998),
and produce an altered state of consciousness that is characterised by marked reductions in
functional coupling within high-level brain networks (Carhart-Harris et al., 2012, 2016a;

[PAGE 003]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


Palhano-Fontes et al., 2015), but simultaneous increased cross-talk between low-level areas
(Tagliazucchi et al., 2014, 2016). This network “collapse” is thought to be a core mechanism
underlying their subjective effects, that include a dissolving of the usual sense of self-hood,
increased emotionality and vivid mental imagery (Carhart-Harris et al., 2014; Lebedev et al.,
2015) and a profoundly altered subjective experience of music (Kaelen et al., 2015).


Studying psychedelics and music in combination may therefore represent a unique
Opportunity to improve our understanding of changes in the brain’s processing of complex
naturalistic stimuli, accompanying the changes in functional brain hierarchies that are
reported under psychedelics, and to investigate how these changes are related to reported
changes in the subjective experience of music. In addition, increasing numbers of studies
assess the therapeutic potential of these subjective effects within “psychedelic therapy” - a
therapeutic approach that is characterised by lengthy periods of introspective music-
listening during drug effects (Carhart-Harris et al., 2016b; Gasser et al., 2014; Griffiths et al.,
2016; Grob CS et al., 2011; Johnson et al., 2014; Ross et al., 2016). Despite the prominence
of music in psychedelic therapy, the effects of psychedelics on the subjective experience of
music have only been empirically investigated recently (Kaelen et al., 2015, 2016). Studying
how psychedelics and music work together in the brain, may therefore also be important to
advance our understanding of the use of music in psychedelic therapy.


The primary objective of this study was to investigate the acute effects of the classic
psychedelic LSD on music-evoked brain activity under naturalistic music listening conditions.
In addition, music can reliably evoke emotions (Trost et al., 2012), and psychedelic drugs are
shown to reliably facilitate emotionally intense “peak-experiences”! under music-listening
conditions (Griffiths et al., 2011, 2006). Hence, the secondary objective of the study was to
investigate the neural correlates of “peak” emotions such as feelings of wonder and
transcendence evoked by music under LSD. These objectives were studied as part of a larger
project examining the effects of LSD on brain activity in healthy volunteers using multimodal
neuroimaging (reported elsewhere (Carhart-Harris et al., 2016a; Lebedev et al., 2016;
Tagliazucchi et al., 2016)).


2. Materials and Methods

2.1 Ethical approvals

The study received approvals by the National Research Ethics Service (NRES) committee
London — West London and was conducted in accordance with the revised declaration of
Helsinki (2000), the International Committee on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice
guidelines and National Health Service (NHS) Research Governance Framework. Imperial


1 The term peak experience was firstly coined by the psychologist Abraham Maslow (Maslow, 1964,
1971). Peak-experiences are characterized by a transcending of the usual sense of self, and are typically
accompanied by feelings of wonder, bliss, union and awe. Peak experiences have also been referred to as
mystical-type of spiritual experiences, and can occur under natural conditions such as when being deeply moved
by a work of art or a moment of creative inspiration but are frequently reported with psychedelics (Garcia-
Romeu et al., 2014; Griffiths et al., 2016; Ross et al., 2016)

[PAGE 004]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


College London sponsored the study, which was conducted under a Home Office license for
research with schedule | drugs.


2.2 Participants


Twenty participants (16 males and 4 females) were recruited for the study after successful
screening and written informed consent. Screening consisted of physical and mental health
assessments. Physical health assessments included electrocardiogram (ECG), routine blood
tests, disclosure of full medical history and urine test for recent drug use and pregnancy.
Mental health assessment consisted of psychiatrics interview. All participants provided full
disclosure of their drug use history. Exclusion criteria included: being younger than 21 years
of age, having a personal history of diagnosed psychiatric illness, having an immediate
family history of a psychotic disorder, having used illicit drugs within 6 weeks of the first
scanning day, having experienced a persistent adverse reaction to a psychedelic drug,
pregnancy, problematic alcohol-use (i.e. > 40 units consumed per week), and having a
medical condition rendering them unsuitable for the study. All participants were required to
have at least one previous experience with a classic psychedelic drug (e.g. LSD, mescaline,
psilocybin or dimethyltryptamine (DMT)). One participant did not complete the MRI scans
due to anxiety and three participants were excluded from analyses due to technical
problems with the sound delivery. This resulted in the data of 16 participants (13 males, 3
female) being included in the data-analysis; with preserved counterbalanced experimental
design.


2.3 Stimuli

Two excerpts (A and B) from two songs by ambient artist Robert Rich were selected for the
study. The stimuli were both 7.3 min long and were balanced in their acoustic properties,
and rich in timbre, but not in rhythm (see Appendix: Table 1 and Figure 1). Pre-study
assessments in a separate group confirmed balance for their emotional potency. To reduce
interference of fMRI scanning noise with the music experience, volume-maximization and
broadband compression was carried out using Ableton live 9 software. Each participant
listened to both stimuli, in a balanced order across conditions.


2.4 Experiment overview and procedures

All participants attended two study days that were separated by at least 14 days. LSD was
received on one of the study days, and placebo (saline) on the other. The condition-order
was balanced across participants, and participants, but not the researchers, were blind to
the condition-order.

All participants received 75 ug of LSD intravenously via a 10ml solution infused over a two-
minute period via an inserted cannula. Administration was always followed by an
acclimatization period of approximately 60 min, in which participants were encouraged to
relax. Drug effects were noticed between 5 to 15 min post-dosing, approached maximum

[PAGE 005]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


intensity between 60 to 90 min post-dosing, and maintained peak intensity for
approximately four hours post-dosing. Blood-Oxygen-Level Dependent (BOLD) MRI scanning
was performed during peak drug intensity, starting approximately 120 minutes post-dosing,
and lasted for approximately 60 minutes. Once the subjective effects of LSD had sufficiently
subsided, the study psychiatrist assessed the participant’s suitability for discharge.

Each fMRI scanning session involved three eyes-closed resting state scans, each lasting
seven minutes and twenty seconds. The music-listening scan (220 TRs, 7.3 min) always
occurred after the first resting state (no music) scan and before a final resting-state scan (no
music). Prior to each scan, participants were instructed via a display screen to close their
eyes and relax. The music itself was triggered by the first TR, and listened to via MR
compatible headphones (MR Confon). Music volume was adjusted to a personal level that
was “loud, but not unpleasant” and maintained for both conditions.


2.5 Qualitative measurements

The intensity of different types of music-evoked emotion was assessed via the 25-item
Geneva emotional music scale (GEMS)(Zentner et al., 2008), and was administered under
placebo and under LSD immediately after fMRI scanning was completed. The GEMS assesses
music-evoked or directly “personally felt” emotion, and not the perception of musical
emotion in the music. For example: a piece of music may sound sad to the listener, but the
listener may not necessarily feel sad him or herself in response to this music. The GEMS is
designed to assess the latter. The 25 items of the GEMS were averaged into nine distinct
factors of emotions: wonder, transcendence, power, tenderness, nostalgia, peacefulness,
joyful activation, sadness, and tension. A paired t-test was performed to compare ratings
between conditions (LSD versus placebo) for each emotion. Non-parametric permutation
testing (10,000 permutations, two-tailed) was carried out to correct for multiple
comparisons.


2.6 Acoustic feature extraction

Acoustic features from excerpt A and B were extracted separately using the Music
Information Retrieval (MIR) toolbox (version 1.6.1), implemented in MATLAB (Lartillot and
Toiviainen, 2007). Selection of acoustic features was based on Alluri et al (2012, 2013), who
identified 25 features that broadly capture the dynamics of the timbral, tonal and rhythmic
properties present in the music stimuli (Alluri et al., 2012, 2013). Following Alluri et al, from
the original 25 features, we excluded fluctuation entropy and fluctuation centroid because
they have not been studied in the literature and did not carry any valid perceptual meaning
(Alluri et al. 2012, Alluri 2016 personal communication). The 23 acoustic features used in our
analyses were categorized into short-term features and long-term features (for an overview
see Table 1). The short-term features were extracted with a sliding window of 25 ms, with
50% overlap between each segment while for the computation of the long-term features a
longer sliding window of 3 s was employed, with 33% overlap between each segment
(following the approach in Alluri et al. 2012, 2013). Subsequently, principle component
analysis (PCA) on the acoustic features (combined for excerpt A and B) was performed to (1)

[PAGE 006]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


identify acoustic properties that are present in both excerpts and (2) to reduce the number
of regressors entered into the general linear model (GLM) for fMRI analyses. To prepare the
acoustic features for the PCA, we first resampled short and long-term features to the same
sampling rate of 1 s. We then rescaled (between O and 1) the acoustic features. The
resulting timecourses for excerpt A and B were then concatenated, to undergo the PCA. We
performed varimax rotation on the first eight principal components (PCs) that explained
over 90% of the variance (see Fig. 1 for rotated PCs and their respective loadings).

In order to validate that the first eight PCs explained the two excerpts equally well (i.e., that
PCs were not driven by either one excerpt or the other), we correlated (Pearson r) each of
the 23 predicted timeseries (by multiplying the eight rotated PC loadings with the 23 PC
timecourses) with the corresponding acoustic features for the two excerpts separately.
Across all 23 acoustic features, we found a mean + std r of 0.9098 + 0.0919 for excerpt A
and 0.8835 + 0.1037 for excerpt B (for correlation values per acoustic feature, see Appendix
Fig. 1). As the difference in variance explained between the two excerpts was negligible, we
used the timecourses of the first eight rotated components for our subsequent analyses.

Next, we split the timecourses of the rotated PCs to obtain timeseries corresponding to
excerpt A and B, respectively. Those were then convolved with a double-gamma
hemodynamic response function (HRF) to account for the hemodynamic delay, down-
sampled to 2 s, to match the sampling rate of the fMRI data and high-pass filtered at the
cut-off frequency of 0.01 Hz (same as fMRI data). The first 10 seconds (5 TRs) of each
excerpt’s timeseries were excluded for subsequent analysis in order to avoid any artefacts
caused by the convolution operation. The timeseries were then entered as regressors of
interest into subject-level GLMs of the fMRI analysis.


Table 1. Acoustic features from the Music Information Retrieval toolbox that were used in the analysis.


Short-term features

Zero crossing rate, spectral centroid, high energy—low energy ratio, spectral spread, spectral roll-off, spectral
entropy, spectral flatness (Wiener entropy), roughness, RMS energy, spectral flux, and Sub-Band Flux (10
coefficients).


Long-term features
Pulse clarity, fluctuation centroid, fluctuation entropy, mode and key clarity.


2.7 MRI scanning


Neuroimaging was performed on a 3T GE HDx system. An initial 3D FSPGR anatomical scan
was obtained in an axial orientation, with field of view = 256x 256x 192 and matrix = 256 x
256x 192 to yield 1-mm isotropic voxel resolution (TR/TE = 7.9/3.0 ms; inversion time = 450
ms; flip angle = 20°). This was used for registration and segmentation of functional images.
Functional images were acquired using a gradient echo planar imaging sequence, TR/TE =
2000/35ms, field-of-view = 220mm, 64 x 64 acquisition matrix, parallel acceleration factor =
2, 90° flip angle. 35 oblique axial slices were acquired in an interleaved fashion, each 3.4mm
thick with zero slice gap (3.4mm isotropic voxels). The precise length of each of the BOLD
scans was 7 minutes and 20 seconds.

[PAGE 007]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


2.8 fMRI pre-processing

The fMRI pre-processing pipeline was assembled from four complementary imaging
software packages. Specifically, FMRIB Software Library (FSL) (Smith et al., 2004), AFNI (Cox,
1996), Freesurfer (Dale et al., 1999) and Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTS) (Avants et al.,
2009) were used. The following pre-processing stages were performed: 1) de-spiking
(3dDespike, AFNI); 2) motion correction (3dvolreg, AFNI) by registering each volume to the
volume most similar, in the least squares sense, to all others (in-house code); 3) brain
extraction (BET, FSL); 4) rigid body registration to anatomical scans (eleven subjects with
FSL’s BBR, one subject with Freesurfer’s bbregister and four subjects manually); 5) non-
linear registration to 2mm MNI brain (Symmetric Normalization (SyN), ANTS); 6) scrubbing
(Power et al., 2012) - using a framewise displacement (FD) threshold of 1.0 mm; 7) spatial
smoothing (FWHM) of 5mm (3dBlurinMask, AFNI) and high-pass filtering at a cut-off
frequency of 0.01 Hz to remove baseline signal drifts. In addition, nine nuisance regressors
were obtained: six were motion-related (3 translations, 3 rotations) and three were
anatomically-related (not smoothed). Specifically, the anatomical nuisance regressors were:
I) ventricles (Freesurfer, eroded in 2mm space), Il) draining veins (DV) (FSL’s CSF minus
Freesurfer’s Ventricles, eroded in 1mm space) and Ill) white matter (WM) (FSL’s WM minus
Freesurfer’s subcortical grey matter (GM) structures, eroded in 2mm space). In order to cut
the fMRI data and nuisance regressors to the same length as the PC timecourses, we
removed the first 5 TRs.


2.9 fMRI data analysis

We applied a standard analysis pipeline from FSL FEAT GLM to determine the effect of PC
timecourses on BOLD activation. All eight PC timecourses were entered as regressors of
interest into subject-level GLMs in addition to their temporal derivatives and all nine
nuisance regressors (resulting in 27 regressors in total). We then analysed the fMRI data
with respect to eight contrasts (one contrast for each PC). The resulting individual subject-
level contrasts were then entered into a group averaged higher-level (mixed-effects) cluster-
corrected FEAT analysis (FLAME 1+2) to obtain the paired t-test contrasts of LSD > Placebo
and Placebo < LSD. In order to model out any potential effect of the order in which subjects
listened to the different music excerpts under the different conditions, respectively, we
included an interaction term in the higher-level FEAT as a regressor of no interest. We
repeated the higher-level analysis without the interaction term and obtained qualitatively
similar results (not reported). All final group-level images were thresholded using a cluster
correction threshold of Z > 2.3 and a cluster significance threshold of p = 0.05. Group-level
images were visualized on an average surface brain using MRIcron(Rorden et al., 2007).


2.10 ROI selection and extraction for correlation with individual variability in reported
music-evoked peak emotions

Region of interest (ROI) analysis was constrained to the group-level contrast LSD>Placebo
for timbral complexity (i.e., PC3, see Results). ROI selection was based on previous literature

[PAGE 008]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


and encompassed structures that have been commonly identified for music-evoked emotion
(striatum, precuneus and insula) (Koelsch, 2014; Trost et al., 2012), auditory perception
(planum temporale and IFG) (Alluri et al., 2012, 2013; Griffiths and Warren, 2002; Zatorre
and Salimpoor, 2013) and the subjective effects of psychedelics (precuneus and insula)
(Carhart-Harris et al., 2016a; Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2013a; Tagliazucchi et al., 2016).
ROIs were created by first selecting corresponding binarized structural areas from the
Harvard-Oxford atlas (using a probability threshold of 10%) and then multiplying these with
the group-level results to guarantee anatomical and functional specificity of the ROIs. Note
that only the largest consecutive cluster of voxels was considered within each ROI. This
procedure led to nine ROls: right planum temporale, left planum temporale, right precunes,
right putamen, left putamen, right caudate, left caudate, right inferior frontal gyrus and
right anterior insula. The mean parameter estimates within each ROI were extracted for
each participant, and Spearman’s rank correlation tests were used to relate the changes in
parameter estimates (LSD > Placebo) with changes in GEMS-ratings for music-evoked
emotions for the factors wonder and transcendence (LSD > Placebo). Non-parametric
permutation testing (10,000 permutations, one-tailed) was carried out to correct for
multiple comparisons (9 ROIs x 2 GEMS scales).


2.11 Psychophysiological interaction analysis

In order to assess timbral-specific changes in functional connectivity for the brain regions
that showed a significant relationship with music-evoked feelings of wonder (i.e., precuneus
and right inferior frontal gyrus, see Results), we conducted two separate
psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analyses. For this, we first extracted subject-specific
timecourses from those ROls and then applied the standard FSL FEAT GLM analysis pipeline.
In addition to regressors that were included in the initial fMRI analysis (eight PC
timecourses, their temporal derivatives and nine nuisance regressors), we included the ROI
timecourse (physiological regressor) and the PPI regressor that consisted of the element-
wise multiplication of the physiological regressor with the timecourse encoding timbral
complexity (psychological regressor, i.e. PC 3). The resulting individual subject-level
contrasts were then entered into the same higher-level (mixed-effect) cluster-corrected
FEAT analysis as described above (with an interaction term to model out the effect of
“group”, see fMRI analysis section).


3. Results

3.1 Acoustic feature extraction

The first eight principal components that together explained more than 90% of the variance,
showed consistency with the components identified in other musical genres using the same
method (tango, classic and pop (Alluri et al., 2012, 2013; Burunat et al., 2016)), supporting
their reliability for representing fundamental acoustic properties in music. Importantly,
perceptual validation and labelling for similar components has been demonstrated (Alluri et
al., 2012). In the present study, we therefore adopted a comparable labelling for the
identified principle components (PCs) (Fig. 1). In fact, when quantitatively comparing our
and Alluri et al.’s PCs, we find medium to very high correlations (Pearson r) for fullness (r =

[PAGE 009]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


0.37), brightness (r =.96), timbral complexity (r = .91), key clarity (r = .96) and pulse clarity (r
= .96).


Z7CR -
Mich E Spectral Centroid
3 Shectral Spread
i ne ow Energy


Spectral oll-off
Spectral Entropy
Flatness
Roughness
RMS Eneray
Spectral Flux
TVYSIIL AJA IDO
Sub-Band No.1 Flux
3511d
Sub-Band No.2 Flux -
Sub-Band No.3 Flux

Id WO3
Sub-Band No.4 Flux
£ONWaans
Sub-Band No.5 Flux SSINTINa
Sub-Band No.6 Flux SSINLHOIYE LLIYW1D
Sub-Band No.7 Flux ALIYV19
Sub- Band No.8boat: F HLONIYLS
ALIXI
Sub-Band No.10 Flux
Pulse Clarity
Mode -
Key Clarity

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Principal Components

Figure 1. Principle Component Analysis (PCA) of acoustic features. Loadings of the acoustic features on the
first 8 PCs obtained from PCA followed by varimax rotation explained more than 90% of the variance. The x-
axis shows the ordering of principal components, with the components ordered by explained variance. The
colour bar corresponds to the strength of the loading for each acoustic feature for that components: warm
colours indicates a positive loading, and cold colours a negative loading.


3.2 Effects of LSD on music-evoked brain activity

Following pre-processing (see Methods), the time courses of the first eight PCs were
entered into subject-level fMRI analyses as regressors of interests. Resulting individual
subject-level contrasts were then entered into high-level analyses to obtain paired t-test
contrasts of LSD > Placebo and Placebo < LSD.

These analyses revealed altered BOLD responses under LSD for different acoustic
components and within distinct cortical and sub-cortical areas. For the component
brightness, decreases under LSD were observed in the left lateral occipital cortex (Fig. 2A).
For fullness, LSD increased activation in the bilateral thalamus, and decreased activation in
the occipital cortex and right middle and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) (Fig. 2B). For timbral
complexity widespread increases under LSD were found in cortical and subcortical networks,
including auditory and auditory association cortices such as Heschl’s Gyrus, superior
temporal gyrus (STG), and planum temporale as well as higher-level heteromodal cortices
such as the precuneus, the right insula and the right IFG, bilateral striatum, as well as the
occipital cortex and the supplementary motor cortex (see Supplementary Table 3 for a
complete list). Increased BOLD activations to timbral complexity appeared more evident for
left auditory cortices and more extensive in the right IFG and right anterior insula, although
this was not directly compared (Fig. 2C). For the component Subband 3, LSD significantly
increased activation in occipital cortices while decreasing activation in the cerebellum (Fig.

[PAGE 010]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


2D). For key clarity, significant increases under LSD were observed in the right lateral
occipital cortex, and decreases were found in the left striatum (Fig. 2E). For the component
Subband 2, LSD-related increases were observed in the right lateral occipital cortex (Fig. 2F).

A) Brightness


Figure 2. Brain regions showing altered BOLD response to the acoustic features under LSD. Increases
(LSD>placebo) are displayed in yellow, and decreases (placebo>LSD) are displayed in blue. Cluster-correction
was applied to all images with a threshold of Z > 2.3. Significant effects were observed in: A) brightness, with
decreases in the occipital cortex, in B) fullness, with decreases in occipital cortex and right inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG) and increases in bilateral thalamus, in C) timbral complexity, with increases in bilateral striatum, occipital
cortex, supplementary motor cortex, auditory cortices, right insula and right IFG, in D) subband 3, with
decreases in the cerebellum, and increases in the occipital cortice, in E) key clarity, with decreases in the left
striatum and the right lateral occipital cortex, and finally, in F) subband 2, with increases in the right occipital
cortex.

[PAGE 011]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


3.3 Effects of LSD on music-evoked emotion

Alongside investigating changes in music-evoked brain activity under LSD, our study also
assessed the effects of LSD on music-evoked emotions. We measured nine different music-
evoked emotions using the Geneva Emotional Music Scale (GEMS) that was completed by
each participant after listening to music in each condition(Zentner et al., 2008). Paired t-
tests on the GEMS scales revealed that, compared to placebo, music-evoked emotions were
significantly higher under LSD for wonder (t(1s)=4.47, p=.002), transcendence (ti1s)=4.17,
p=.004), power (t(15,=3.82, p=.008), tenderness (ti1s=3.78, p=.008), nostalgia (t(13)=3.94,
p=.006), peacefulness (t(1s,=4.45, p=.003), and joyful activation (t(ıs)=4.86, p=.001), but not
for sadness (t(15,=1.93, p=.25) or tension (ti1s)=1.42, p=.63) (Fig. 3). P-values reported here
are corrected for multiple comparisons using two-sided permutation testing with a set to
.05. These results replicate our previous work (Kaelen et al., 2015) demonstrating an
intensified emotional experience with music under LSD.


strongly felt - . . . . .


1 ' . . « Placebo

moderatelyfelt} > * | . ” bo


not felt at all


Figure 3. The average scores (thick line) + standard deviation (error bars) for each condition, including
individual values (dots) for each participant, for nine factors of music-evoked emotions assessed with the 25-
item Geneva Emotional Music Scale (GEMS). Blue = placebo and red = LSD. Asterisks on the x-axis by the factor
labels indicate a statistically significant difference for this emotion between condition (p<0.05) after multiple
comparison correction.

[PAGE 012]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


3.4 Correlation analyses between music-evoked brain activity and peak emotions

Having established that psychedelics intensify the emotional experience of music and alter
the music-evoked BOLD response, we subsequently explored interactions between peak
emotions (as captured by the GEMS scales wonder and transcendence) and associated
increases in music-evoked brain activity. We conducted correlation analyses (Spearman’s
rank) between changes in music-evoked peak emotions (LSD > Placebo) and music-evoked
BOLD activity (LSD > Placebo) for nine ROls. This correlation analysis was constrained to the
contrast for timbral complexity (i.e., PC3) as related BOLD changes were most pronounced
and occurred in brain networks commonly identified for music perception and emotion
(Alluri et al., 2012; Koelsch, 2014). ROI selection was based on previous literature and
encompassed structures that have been commonly identified for music-evoked emotion
(striatum, precuneus and insula)(Koelsch, 2014; Trost et al., 2012), auditory perception
(planum temporale and IFG) (Alluri et al., 2012, 2013; Griffiths and Warren, 2002; Zatorre
and Salimpoor, 2013) and regions previously associated with the subjective effects of
psychedelics (precuneus and insula) (Carhart-Harris et al., 2016a; Muthukumaraswamy et
al., 2013a; Tagliazucchi et al., 2016). We found significant positive correlations between
changes in music-evoked feelings of wonder and music-evoked BOLD activation to timbral
complexity within the precuneus (r = 0.67, p = .034) as well as within the right inferior
frontal gyrus (r = 0.65, p = .045) (Fig. 4). In addition, we found trend-level positive
correlations between changes in feelings of transcendence and the right inferior frontal
gyrus (r = 0.61, p = .066). P-values reported were corrected for multiple comparisons using
one-sided permutation testing with a set to .05.


Table 2. MNI coordinates for the centres of gravity of ROIs


Region Coordinates (X,Y Z) # voxels

R Planum Temporale 54.8 -22.6 | 11 290

L Planum Temporale -48.8 | -33 15.2 658

Precuneus 14.6 -62.6 19 414

R Putamen 22.8 10.2 -0.4 308

L Putamen -25.6 | 1.4 3.8 364

Right Caudate 15.2 14 8 158

Left Caudate -14.2 | 17.8 3.4 76

Right IFG (Broca area) 58.8 9.8 14.6 60

Right Anterior Insula 31.2 13.8 9 48

[PAGE 013]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


A)
A Planum Temporale


L Planum Temporale

Precuneus


R Putamen


L Putamen

A Caudate


L Caudate

RIFG (Broca area)

R Anterior Insula


Wonder Transcendence precuneus right IFG


C) Precuneus activation D) Right IFG activation
5 versus wonder 81 versus wonder


o an a +

4 wonder
awonder


0
2 r=0.67 r=0.65
p = .034 p=.045
01 Y ' 11) ' ' ’
50 50@ 100 150 200 250 -100 -50 30 50 100 150 200
. —— e —>
2 e A activation Ze A activation


4 A


Figure 4. The correlation analysis comparing subjective experience with BOLD activity. A) Correlation matrix
of parameter estimates with music-evoked peak emotions: wonder and transcendence. Asterisks indicate a
statistically significant correlation (p < 0.05) after multiple comparison correction. B) Location of masks for the
precuneus and right inferior frontal gyrus (right IFG). C) Correlation plot showing a positive correlation
between changes in parameter estimates in the precuneus and increases in music-evoked emotions of wonder
under LSD (r = 0.67, p = .034). D) Correlation plot showing a positive correlation between changes in
parameter estimates in the right IFG and increases in music-evoked emotions of wonder under LSD (r = 0.65, p
= .045).


3.5 Effects of psychedelics and music on functional connectivity

The relationship between feelings of wonder and music-evoked activation to timbral
complexity in the precuneus and the right IFG informed subsequent PPI analyses with the
aim of gaining insight into underlying music-specific changes in functional connectivity
under LSD. Two separate PPI analyses were conducted, using either the precuneus or right
IFG as a seed ROI, in order to identify brain areas for which the activation time course during
the LSD condition was more or less coupled with the seed regions depending on the level of
timbral complexity in the music. Under LSD, we found significantly increased coupling of the
precuneus with the right superior frontal gyrus (SFG) for passages when the music exhibited

[PAGE 014]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


high timbral complexity (See fig. 5A). In addition, we found significantly decreased coupling
of the precuneus with the right IFG as well as the right auditory cortex under LSD when
timbral complexity in the music increased (See fig. 5B). No significant timbral-specific
changes in functional connectivity were found for the right IFG as seed.


B) Altered timbral-specific functional connectivity
of the precuneus under LSD

1.5- * Placebo ° LSD


1 0. .*


0.5. e. YY :
m baja?
2 vs
00 A ha * = F 1 +
“iu p

[vw * y

0.5. .


1 o right SFG right auditory cortex
£ FG


Figure 5. Brain regions showing altered timbral-specific functional connectivity under LSD. A). Group level
results from the PPI analysis using the right precuneus ROI (displayed in red). Increased coupling (LSD>placebo)
with the precuneus was observed in the right superior frontal gyrus (right SFG) (displayed in hot/orange), and
decreased coupling (placebo>LSD) with the precuneus was observed in the right auditory cortex and right
inferior frontal gyrus (right IFG) (displayed in blue). Z < 2.3. B) Connectivity values of each individual participant
and for each condition (Blue = placebo, red = LSD) for the precuneus with the right SFG (left), and for the
precuneus with the right IFG and auditory cortex (right).


3.6 Effect of head motion

In order to investigate potentially confounding effects of motion on our results, we
investigated frame-wise displacement (FD) between the drug and placebo condition as well
as conducted correlation analyses between changes in FD (LSD>placebo) and extracted
parameter estimates from the nine ROIs. The mean + std FD for placebo and LSD was 0.091
+ 0.037 and 0.174 +0.1, respectively, which was found to be statistically significant using a
paired t-test (t(1s) = -3.28, p=0.005). However, we did not find any significant correlations
(Spearman's rank) between changes in FD (LSD>Placebo) and changes in music-evoked
BOLD activity for the contrast timbral complexity (LSD > Placebo) in any of the nine ROls:
right planum temporale (r=0.04, p=0.88), left planum temporale (r=-0.01, p=0.97),
precuneus (r=0.02, p=0.93), right putamen (r=-0.29, p=0.27), left putamen (r=-0.21, p=0.42),
right caudate (r=-0.2, p=0.45), left caudate (r=-0.28, p=0.3), right IFG (r=0.29, p=0.27) and
right insula (r=0.28, p=0.28). We therefore concluded that the effect of motion for our
results seem negligible. P-values reported here are uncorrected for multiple comparisons.

[PAGE 015]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


4. Discussion

This study investigated the effects of the classic psychedelic drug LSD on music-evoked brain
activity and emotion under naturalistic listening conditions. Widespread BOLD activity
changes under LSD in cortical and subcortical areas were associated with distinct acoustic
features in the music. The BOLD signal increases observed under LSD to the component
timbral complexity are particularly noteworthy, as the regions lie within brain networks
commonly identified for music-perception and music-evoked emotion. These include
bilateral auditory cortices, right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), right insula, precuneus, bilateral
striatum and supplementary motor area (SMA). Music-evoked emotions were rated higher
under LSD, and increased feelings of wonder correlated with increased BOLD activation to
timbral complexity in the right precuneus and in the right IFG. The functional connectivity
analysis revealed decoupling under LSD of the right precuneus with a network that includes
auditory cortices and the right IFG with increased timbral complexity, as well as increased
coupling under LSD of the precuneus with the superior frontal gyrus (SFG).


4.1 Timbral complexity and the auditory-IFG network

Timbral complexity corresponds to the complexity in the shape and the spread of the
music’s spectral envelope. Spectral properties are thought to be processed by the planum
temporale (Kumar et al., 2007), a central “computational hub” of the auditory cortex that
segregates incoming spectral signals into distinct spectrotemporal patterns (Griffiths and
Warren, 2002). Subsequent information exchange with higher cortical regions such as the
IFG, is thought to facilitate the linking of the perceived spectrotemporal patterns with
learned representations and associations (Hackett, 2011; Zatorre and Salimpoor, 2013). The
auditory cortex and IFG are anatomically (Plakke and Romanski, 2014) and functionally
(Tomasi and Volkow, 2012) well-connected, and considered an important pathway for the
perception of auditory objects (Griffiths and Warren, 2004; Zatorre and Salimpoor, 2013),
musical melody (Zatorre et al., 1994), musical harmony (Opitz et al., 2002; Schónwiesner et
al., 2007), musical syntax (Koelsch et al., 2002), and the encoding of musical expectation
(Osnes et al., 2012; Zatorre, 2015) as well as musical imagination (Herholz et al., 2012).
Damage and abnormal functioning in the auditory-IFG network has been linked to impaired
music perception (Hyde et al., 2007, 2011; Leveque et al., 2016) and auditory hallucinations
(Looijestijn et al., 2013). Therefore, the marked BOLD signal changes under LSD to timbral
complexity within this network suggests how LSD may modulate the brain’s processing of
timbral and spectrotemporal information in music.

Apart from a key role in music perception, converging evidence describes the IFG’s
involvement in the evaluation of emotional valence in acoustic information. Happy
emotional vocalisations produce increased IFG activity compared to angry vocalisations
(Frúhholz et al., 2016; Schirmer and Kotz, 2006; Wiethoff et al., 2008) - an effect that has
been observed as early in development as 7-months old (Grossmann et al., 2010). The brain
has been shown to more closely track the time-varying tonal structure of music in the IFG
during the experience of music-evoked nostalgia than during the experience of music that
does not evoke nostalgia (Barrett and Janata, 2016). Brain damage and experimentally
disrupting brain activity in the IFG, by using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), is
linked with impairments in identifying emotional valence in voice (Hoekert et al., 2010).

[PAGE 016]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


However, the IFG is associated with emotionally salient information from different sensory
modalities (Lee and Siegle, 2012), and has been more generally conceptualised as being part
of a cognitive control network (Irlbacher et al., 2014; Marklund and Persson, 2012) that is
associated with the allocation of attentional resources for emotionally salient information
(Vuilleumier, 2005). Paying attention to the emotional valence of visual (Critchley et al.,
2000; Schindler and Kissler, 2016) and auditory (Bach et al., 2008) stimuli is associated with
increases in IFG activity, and emotionally salient information can produce marked
attentional biases (Vuilleumier, 2005). Increased right IFG activation to music’s timbral
complexity under LSD, and the positive correlation of this increase with music-evoked
emotion, may therefore indicate increased allocation of attentional resources for emotional
information conveyed via music’s timbre that is processed within the auditory-IFG circuitry.

The view that the auditory-IFG network may play a role in LSD’s effects on musical
information processing receives further support from the functional connectivity analyses.
The PPI analysis revealed significant decoupling of the right precuneus with the right
auditory cortex and the right IFG under LSD, in interaction with timbral complexity. The
precuneus is a highly connected hub region that plays an important role in self-referential
cognition (Buckner et al., 2008; Cavanna and Trimble, 2006) and emotion-regulation
(Cavanna and Trimble, 2006; Schilbach et al., 2012), and shows desynchronized activity
under psychedelics (Carhart-Harris et al., 2016a; Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2013a; Riba et
al., 2002). This disorganising effect of psychedelics on precuneus activity has been
associated with “ego-dissolution”, characterised by increased emotional lability (Carhart-
Harris et al., 2016a; Lebedev et al., 2015; Tagliazucchi et al., 2014, 2016). Although the
precuneus is activated by music-evoked emotion (Baumgartner et al., 2006; Koelsch, 2014;
Trost et al., 2012), the region shows poor anatomical (Cavanna and Trimble, 2006) and
resting state functional connectivity (Tomasi and Volkow, 2012) with auditory regions. The
precuneus is, however, well-connected with frontal regions such as the IFG and SFG (Zhang
and Li, 2012), and this circuit is thought to provide top-down guidance (Cavanna and
Trimble, 2006). As such, decreased precuneus-auditory/IFG coupling under LSD may reflect
a reduced regulatory influence of the precuneus over emotion processing within the IFG,
and this in turn may facilitate an intensified emotional response to music.


4.2 Timbral complexity and the limbic system

LSD produced marked increases in BOLD activation to timbral complexity in the striatum and
in the insula; regions that have both been consistently associated with music-evoked
emotion. The striatum has been implicated in brain mechanisms underlying music-evoked
pleasure (Blood and Zatorre, 2001; Salimpoor et al., 2011), likely via the encoding of
auditory expectation and reward in interaction with auditory cortices (Salimpoor et al.,
2013, 2015). The insula is a high-level hub region that is thought to facilitate emotional
awareness (Craig, 2009), the attribution of emotional meaning to music, sound and human
voice (Frúhholz et al., 2016; Koelsch, 2014; McGettigan et al., 2013; Petrini et al., 2011; Trost
et al., 2012), and the subjective effects of classic psychedelics(Carhart-Harris et al., 2016a;
Lebedev et al., 2015; Tagliazucchi et al., 2014, 2016). Interestingly, the present study did not
find a relationship between music-evoked emotion and the striatum. One implication of this
could be that the striatum is predominantly concerned with the processing of “simple”

[PAGE 017]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


affect states characterised by reward and pleasure, whereas more complex emotional
states, such as feelings of wonder, may require more complex cognition, and thus more
complex cortical mechanisms. The selective positive correlation between increased feelings
of wonder and BOLD signal changes in higher-level brain regions such the IFG and precuneus
support this idea.

Taken together, these observations suggest that LSD alters the dynamic interplay between
the analysis of “low-level” spectral properties in the music, and the subsequent “high-level”
regulation and processing of the emotional associations. The precuneus, the IFG and the
insula may play a particularly important role in facilitating music-evoked peak emotion, due
to their involvement in processing of emotional awareness (Craig, 2009) and “complex”
music-evoked emotion (Frúhholz et al., 2016; Koelsch, 2014; McGettigan et al., 2013; Petrini
et al., 2011; Trost et al., 2012). A disintegration or weakening of the mechanisms that
normally regulate emotion (Lebedev et al., 2015; Tagliazucchi et al., 2016), may be one
mechanism underlying the strong emotional experiences associated with music under
psychedelics.


4.3 Possible brain mechanisms

Classic psychedelics such as LSD stimulate serotonin 2A receptors (Kometer et al., 2013; Riga
et al., 2016; Titeler et al., 1988), which are primarily expressed on deep layer V pyramidal
cells (Celada et al., 2013). Upon activation of serotonin 2A receptors, the cell’s membranes
depolarize, reducing the neuron’s threshold for firing (Andrade, 2011). Over-activation of
the serotonin 2A receptor underlies desynchronised activity within high-level brain
networks (Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2013b), leading to impaired top-down control and an
increased information exchange between brain modules that are usually more strictly
functionally segregated (Carhart-Harris et al., 2016a; Tagliazucchi et al., 2016). Deep layer V
pyramidal cells are believed to encode learned mental representations or “predictions” that
are matched with incoming sensory stimuli in a top-down fashion (Bastos et al., 2012), anda
disruption of this process via over-activation of the serotonin 2A receptor system by
psychedelics is believed to produce disorganised or “entropic” activation of these mental
representations (Carhart-Harris et al., 2014).

The high density of serotonin 2A receptors within the precuneus, insula and the planum
temporale (Erritzoe et al., 2009; Ettrup et al., 2014) suggests that psychedelics can alter
auditory information processing at different stages of the processing hierarchy. Since the
planum temporale is functionally specialised for processing distinct spectrotemporal
patterns (Griffiths and Warren, 2002), the particularly pronounced BOLD increases under
LSD for “timbral complexity” in this region may reflect an increased activation of intrinsic
deep-pyramidal neurons that encode predictions for music’s spectral properties. In addition,
altered planum temporale activity may also be driven by increased input from top-down
projecting deep layer V pyramidal cells from the IFG and insula. In turn, decoupling of the
auditory/IFG circuitry with the precuneus could indicate an unregulated (“entropic”)
activation of emotional associations attributed to the music by this circuit (Frühholz et al.,
2016; Koelsch, 2014; McGettigan et al., 2013; Petrini et al., 2011; Trost et al., 2012), hence
yielding an intensified emotional response to music.

[PAGE 018]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


4.4 The significance of timbre

This discussion leads to the question of why LSD produced especially prominent modulation
of neural processing of music’s timbral complexity. Timbre-perception is present in early
infancy (Dalla Bella et al., 2001), and the infants’ ability to memorise and recognize their
mother’s voice as early as two days after birth has been argued to be due to the infant’s
innate tuning to timbral properties common to speech and music (Tsang and Trainor, 2002).
Timbre is shown to convey emotion cross-culturally (Egermann et al., 2015), independently
of other acoustic features (Hailstone et al., 2009). Timbre has been conceptualised to
function as an interface, that connects distinctive spectral features within a sound with
meaningful emotional associations (Hailstone et al., 2009). The findings of this study suggest
that LSD may target this interface, thereby “tuning” the brain to acoustic properties that
communicate emotionally significant information. The resulting heightened responsiveness
for music’s “non-verbal language” may be at the core of the intensifying effects of LSD for
music-evoked emotion.


4.5 Effects of LSD on the brain’s processing of other acoustic features

The previous discussion centred around the changes observed for timbral-complexity,
because these changes were most pronounced and appeared to be localised to networks
commonly associated with music-perception and music-evoked emotion. However, several
other findings must be highlighted. Increased thalamus and decreased IFG activation was
observed under LSD in response to “fullness”, i.e., the loudness of the sound. Loudness
reflects a less complex acoustic property (the amplitude of the signal), and has previously
been associated with a preferential activation of lower auditory regions (Reiterer et al.,
2007). Significant BOLD signal changes were also observed in occipital cortices for various
acoustic features. Since the serotonin 2A receptor is densely expressed in the visual cortex
and LSD produces significant alterations in the intrinsic functional organisation of the visual
cortex (Roseman et al., 2016), these occipital changes could reflect effects of LSD on music-
induced mental imagery, such as reported elsewhere (Kaelen et al., 2016).


4.6 Therapeutic implications

Music listening is considered an important component of psychedelic-assisted
psychotherapy for the treatment of depression (Carhart-Harris et al., 2016b), addiction
(Bogenschutz et al., 2015; Johnson et al., 2014) and end-of-life care (Gasser et al., 2014;
Griffiths et al., 2016; Grob CS et al., 2011; Ross et al., 2016). The present study supports the
usefulness of music in facilitating emotions associated with peak-experiences, which are
associated with positive therapy outcomes (Garcia-Romeu et al., 2014; Griffiths et al., 2016;
Ross et al., 2016), and is the first to ground this framework into a neurobiological basis. The
findings also suggest that knowledge of the ways musicians utilise timbre to convey emotion
may be a particularly fruitful avenue to empirically inform the design of playlists for
psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy.

[PAGE 019]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


4.7 Study limitations

The study focused on LSD’s effects on the neurophysiological processing of acoustic
properties in music, but did not include perceptual measures for these features. Future
studies may address questions such as whether features are perceived differently, whether
certain acoustic features are experienced differently than others and whether perceptual
changes reflect real acoustic details that have been previously unnoticed. Studies assessing
these issues will be particularly important for our understanding of how psychedelics alter
the subjective experience of music, and more broadly, salient sensory information.

Another study limitation was that only a single musical genre was used. The music used was
rich in timbre and pitch variation, but low in tempo. The music choice may therefore have
resulted in restricted description of LSD’s effect on timbral features in music, since it could
be hypothesised that other brain networks will be engaged when more rhythmic and
arousing music is used. However, the component for which LSD showed most pronounced
neurophysiological changes (i.e. “timbral complexity”), was not the component that
explained most of the variance within the music (i.e., the third component), supporting the
validity of the method in identifying brain changes to distinct and diverse musical dynamics
within a naturalist music listening experience.


5. Conclusion

The present study revealed altered brain activity and connectivity to acoustic features in
music under LSD. Most pronounced changes in brain activity and connectivity were
associated with the component timbral complexity, representing the complexity of the
music’s spectral distribution, and these occurred in brain networks previously identified for
music-perception and music-evoked emotion, and showed an association with enhanced
music-evoked feelings of wonder under LSD. The findings are the first to shed light on how
the brain processes music under LSD, and provide a new perspective on brain processes
underlying music perception and peak emotion under naturalistic listening conditions.


Acknowledgements

This research received financial and intellectual support from the Beckley Foundation (Grant
number: P41825) and was conducted as part of a wider Beckley-Imperial research
programme. The researchers would like to thank supporters of the Walacea.com crowd-
funding campaign who played a crucial role in securing funds to complete the study.

[PAGE 020]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


References

Alluri, V., Toiviainen, P., Jääskeläinen, I.P., Glerean, E., Sams, M., and Brattico, E. (2012). Large-scale brain
networks emerge from dynamic processing of musical timbre, key and rhythm. Neurolmage 59, 3677-3689.


Alluri, V., Toiviainen, P., Lund, T.E., Wallentin, M., Vuust, P., Nandi, A.K., Ristaniemi, T., and Brattico, E. (2013).
From Vivaldi to Beatles and back: Predicting lateralized brain responses to music. Neurolmage 83, 627-636.


Andrade, R. (2011). Serotonergic regulation of neuronal excitability in the prefrontal cortex.
Neuropharmacology 61, 382-386.


Bach, D.R., Grandjean, D., Sander, D., Herdener, M., Strik, W.K., and Seifritz, E. (2008). The effect of appraisal
level on processing of emotional prosody in meaningless speech. Neurolmage 42, 919-927.


Barrett, F.S., and Janata, P. (2016). Neural responses to nostalgia-evoking music modeled by elements of
dynamic musical structure and individual differences in affective traits. Neuropsychologia 91, 234—246.


Bastos, A.M., Usrey, W.M., Adams, R.A., Mangun, G.R., Fries, P., and Friston, K.J. (2012). Canonical
Microcircuits for Predictive Coding. Neuron 76, 695-711.


Baumgartner, T., Lutz, K., Schmidt, C.F., and Jancke, L. (2006). The emotional power of music: How music
enhances the feeling of affective pictures. Brain Res. 1075, 151-164.


Blood, A.J., and Zatorre, R.J. (2001). Intensely pleasurable responses to music correlate with activity in brain
regions implicated in reward and emotion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 98, 11818-11823.


Bogenschutz, M.P., Forcehimes, A.A., Pommy, J.A., Wilcox, C.E., Barbosa, P.C.R., and Strassman, R.J. (2015).
Psilocybin-assisted treatment for alcohol dependence: A proof-of-concept study. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.)
269881114565144.


Buckner, R.L., Andrews-Hanna, J.R., and Schacter, D.L. (2008). The Brain’s Default Network. Ann. N. Y. Acad.
Sci. 1124, 1-38.


Burunat, I., Toiviainen, P., Alluri, V., Bogert, B., Ristaniemi, T., Sams, M., and Brattico, E. (2016). The reliability
of continuous brain responses during naturalistic listening to music. Neurolmage 124, Part A, 224-231.


Carhart-Harris, R.L., Erritzoe, D., Williams, T., Stone, J.M., Reed, L.J., Colasanti, A., Tyacke, R.J., Leech, R.,
Malizia, A.L., Murphy, K., et al. (2012). Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as determined by fMRI
studies with psilocybin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109, 2138-2143.


Carhart-Harris, R.L., Leech, R., Hellyer, P.J., Shanahan, M., Feilding, A., Tagliazucchi, E., Chialvo, D.R., and Nutt,
D. (2014). The entropic brain: A theory of conscious states informed by neuroimaging research with
psychedelic drugs. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8.


Carhart-Harris, R.L., Muthukumaraswamy, S., Roseman, L., Kaelen, M., Droog, W., Murphy, K., Tagliazucchi, E.,
Schenberg, E.E., Nest, T., Orban, C., et al. (2016a). Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed by
multimodal neuroimaging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 201518377.


Carhart-Harris, R.L., Bolstridge, M., Rucker, J., Day, C.M.J., Erritzoe, D., Kaelen, M., Bloomfield, M., Rickard, J.A.,
Forbes, B., Feilding, A., et al. (2016b). Psilocybin with psychological support for treatment-resistant depression:
an open-label feasibility study. Lancet Psychiatry 3, 619-627.


Cavanna, A.E., and Trimble, M.R. (2006). The precuneus: a review of its functional anatomy and behavioural
correlates. Brain 129, 564-583.


Celada, P., Puig, M.V., and Artigas, F. (2013). Serotonin modulation of cortical neurons and networks. Front.
Integr. Neurosci. 7.

[PAGE 021]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


Craig, A.D. (2009). How do you feel — now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10,
59-70.


Critchley, H., Daly, E., Phillips, M., Brammer, M., Bullmore, E., Williams, S., Van Amelsvoort, T., Robertson, D.,
David, A., and Murphy, D. (2000). Explicit and implicit neural mechanisms for processing of social information
from facial expressions: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Hum. Brain Mapp. 9, 93-105.


Dalla Bella, S., Peretz, I., Rousseau, L., and Gosselin, N. (2001). A developmental study of the affective value of
tempo and mode in music. Cognition 80, B1-B10.


Egermann, H., Fernando, N., Chuen, L., and McAdams, S. (2015). Music induces universal emotion-related
psychophysiological responses: comparing Canadian listeners to Congolese Pygmies. Emot. Sci. 5, 1341.


Erritzoe, D., Frokjaer, V.G., Haugbol, S., Marner, L., Svarer, C., Holst, K., Baaré, W.F.C., Rasmussen, P.M.,
Madsen, J., Paulson, O.B., et al. (2009). Brain serotonin 2A receptor binding: Relations to body mass index,
tobacco and alcohol use. Neurolmage 46, 23-30.


Ettrup, A., da Cunha-Bang, S., McMahon, B., Lehel, S., Dyssegaard, A., Skibsted, A.W., Jórgensen, L.M., Hansen,
M., Baandrup, A.O., Bache, S., et al. (2014). Serotonin 2A receptor agonist binding in the human brain with
[11C]Cimbi-36. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 34, 1188-1196.


Frúhholz, S., Trost, W., and Kotz, S.A. (2016). The sound of emotions—Towards a unifying neural network
perspective of affective sound processing. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 68, 96-110.


Garcia-Romeu, A., R. Griffiths, R., and W. Johnson, M. (2014). Psilocybin-Occasioned Mystical Experiences in
the Treatment of Tobacco Addiction. Curr. Drug Abuse Rev. 7, 157-164.


Gasser, P., Kirchner, K., and Passie, T. (2014). LSD-assisted psychotherapy for anxiety associated with a life-
threatening disease: A qualitative study of acute and sustained subjective effects. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.)
269881114555249.


Glennon, R.A., Titeler, M., and McKenney, J.D. (1984). Evidence for 5-HT2 involvement in the mechanism of
action of hallucinogenic agents. Life Sci. 35, 2505-2511.


Griffiths, T.D., and Warren, J.D. (2002). The planum temporale as a computational hub. Trends Neurosci. 25,
348-353.


Griffiths, T.D., and Warren, J.D. (2004). What is an auditory object? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5, 887-892.


Griffiths, R., Johnson, M., Richards, W., Richards, B., McCann, U., and Jesse, R. (2011). Psilocybin occasioned
mystical-type experiences: immediate and persisting dose-related effects. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 218,
649-665.


Griffiths, R.R., Richards, W.A., McCann, U., and Jesse, R. (2006). Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type
experiences having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual significance.
Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 187, 268-283.


Griffiths, R.R., Johnson, M.W., Carducci, M.A., Umbricht, A., Richards, W.A., Richards, B.D., Cosimano, M.P.,
and Klinedinst, M.A. (2016). Psilocybin produces substantial and sustained decreases in depression and anxiety
in patients with life-threatening cancer: A randomized double-blind trial. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 30, 1181-
1197.


Grob CS, Danforth AL, Chopra GS, and et al (2011). Pllot study of psilocybin treatment for anxiety in patients
with advanced-stage cancer. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 68, 71-78.


Grossmann, T., Oberecker, R., Koch, S.P., and Friederici, A.D. (2010). The Developmental Origins of Voice
Processing in the Human Brain. Neuron 65, 852-858.

[PAGE 022]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


Hackett, T.A. (2011). Information flow in the auditory cortical network. Hear. Res. 271, 133-146.


Hailstone, J.C., Omar, R., Henley, S.M.D., Frost, C., Kenward, M.G., and Warren, J.D. (2009). It’s not what you
play, it’s how you play it: Timbre affects perception of emotion in music. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 62, 2141-2155.


Herholz, S.C., Halpern, A.R., and Zatorre, R.J. (2012). Neuronal Correlates of Perception, Imagery, and Memory
for Familiar Tunes. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 24, 1382-1397.


Hoekert, M., Vingerhoets, G., and Aleman, A. (2010). Results of a pilot study on the involvement of bilateral
inferior frontal gyri in emotional prosody perception: an rTMS study. BMC Neurosci. 11, 93.


Hyde, K.L., Lerch, J.P., Zatorre, R.J., Griffiths, T.D., Evans, A.C., and Peretz, |. (2007). Cortical Thickness in
Congenital Amusia: When Less Is Better Than More. J. Neurosci. 27, 13028-13032.


Hyde, K.L., Zatorre, R.J., and Peretz, |. (2011). Functional MRI Evidence of an Abnormal Neural Network for
Pitch Processing in Congenital Amusia. Cereb. Cortex 21, 292-299.


Irlbacher, K., Kraft, A., Kehrer, S., and Brandt, S.A. (2014). Mechanisms and neuronal networks involved in
reactive and proactive cognitive control of interference in working memory. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 46, Part
1, 58-70.


Janata, P. (2005). Brain Networks That Track Musical Structure. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1060, 111-124.


Janata, P. (2009). The Neural Architecture of Music-Evoked Autobiographical Memories. Cereb. Cortex bhp008.


Johnson, M.W., Garcia-Romeu, A., Cosimano, M.P., and Griffiths, R.R. (2014). Pilot study of the 5-HT2AR
agonist psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 28, 983-992.


Kaelen, M., Barrett, F.S., Roseman, L., Lorenz, R., Family, N., Bolstridge, M., Curran, H.V., Feilding, A., Nutt, D.J.,
and Carhart-Harris, R.L. (2015). LSD enhances the emotional response to music. Psychopharmacology (Berl.).


Kaelen, M., Roseman, L., Kahan, J., Santos-Ribeiro, A., Orban, C., Lorenz, R., Barrett, F.S., Bolstridge, M.,
Williams, T., Williams, L., et al. (2016). LSD modulates music-induced imagery via changes in parahippocampal
connectivity. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol.


Koelsch, S. (2014). Brain correlates of music-evoked emotions. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 170-180.


Koelsch, S., Gunter, T.C., v. Cramon, D.Y., Zysset, S., Lohmann, G., and Friederici, A.D. (2002). Bach Speaks: A
Cortical “Language-Network” Serves the Processing of Music. Neurolmage 17, 956-966.


Kometer, M., Schmidt, A., Jancke, L., and Vollenweider, F.X. (2013). Activation of Serotonin 2A Receptors
Underlies the Psilocybin-Induced Effects on a Oscillations, N170 Visual-Evoked Potentials, and Visual
Hallucinations. J. Neurosci. 33, 10544-10551.


Kumar, S., Stephan, K.E., Warren, J.D., Friston, K.J., and Griffiths, T.D. (2007). Hierarchical Processing of
Auditory Objects in Humans. PLOS Comput Biol 3, e100.


Kumar, S., Joseph, S., Gander, P.E., Barascud, N., Halpern, A.R., and Griffiths, T.D. (2016). A Brain System for
Auditory Working Memory. J. Neurosci. 36, 4492-4505.


Lartillot, O., and Toiviainen, P. (2007). A Matlab toolbox for musical feature extraction from audio. In
International Conference on Digital Audio Effects, pp. 237-244.


Lebedev, A. v., Kaelen, M., Lóvdén, M., Nilsson, J., Feilding, A., Nutt, D. j., and Carhart-Harris, R. |. (2016). LSD-
induced entropic brain activity predicts subsequent personality change. Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 3203-3213.

[PAGE 023]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


Lebedev, A.V., Lóvdén, M., Rosenthal, G., Feilding, A., Nutt, D.J., and Carhart-Harris, R.L. (2015). Finding the self
by losing the self: Neural correlates of ego-dissolution under psilocybin. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 3137-3153.


Lee, K.H., and Siegle, G.J. (2012). Common and distinct brain networks underlying explicit emotional
evaluation: a meta-analytic study. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 7, 521-534.


Leveque, Y., Fauvel, B., Groussard, M., Caclin, A., Albouy, P., Platel, H., and Tillmann, B. (2016). Altered intrinsic
connectivity of the auditory cortex in congenital amusia. J. Neurophysiol. jn.00663.2015.


Looijestijn, J., Diederen, K.M.J., Goekoop, R., Sommer, I.E.C., Daalman, K., Kahn, R.S., Hoek, H.W., and Blom,
J.D. (2013). The auditory dorsal stream plays a crucial role in projecting hallucinated voices into external space.
Schizophr. Res. 146, 314-319.


Marklund, P., and Persson, J. (2012). Context-dependent switching between proactive and reactive working
memory control mechanisms in the right inferior frontal gyrus. Neurolmage 63, 1552-1560.


Maslow, A.H. (1964). Religions, Values, and Peak-Experiences (Kappa Delta Pi).


Maslow, A.H. (1971). The Farther Reaches of Human Nature (The Viking Press).


McGettigan, C., Eisner, F., Agnew, Z.K., Manly, T., Wisbey, D., and Scott, S.K. (2013). T’ain’t What You Say, It’s
the Way That You Say It—Left Insula and Inferior Frontal Cortex Work in Interaction with Superior Temporal
Regions to Control the Performance of Vocal Impersonations. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 25, 1875-1886.


Morley, |. (2013). The Prehistory of Music: Human Evolution, Archaeology, and the Origins of Musicality (OUP
Oxford).


Muthukumaraswamy, S.D., Carhart-Harris, R.L., Moran, R.J., Brookes, M.J., Williams, T.M., Errtizoe, D., Sessa,
B., Papadopoulos, A., Bolstridge, M., Singh, K.D., et al. (2013a). Broadband Cortical Desynchronization
Underlies the Human Psychedelic State. J. Neurosci. 33, 15171-15183.


Muthukumaraswamy, S.D., Carhart-Harris, R.L., Moran, R.J., Brookes, M.J., Williams, T.M., Errtizoe, D., Sessa,
B., Papadopoulos, A., Bolstridge, M., Singh, K.D., et al. (2013b). Broadband Cortical Desynchronization
Underlies the Human Psychedelic State. J. Neurosci. 33, 15171-15183.


Nettl, Bruno (1956). Music in Primitive Culture (Harvard University Press).


Opitz, B., Rinne, T., Mecklinger, A., von Cramon, D.Y., and Schróger, E. (2002). Differential Contribution of
Frontal and Temporal Cortices to Auditory Change Detection: fMRI and ERP Results. Neurolmage 15, 167-174.


Osnes, B., Hugdahl, K., Hjelmervik, H., and Specht, K. (2012). Stimulus expectancy modulates inferior frontal
gyrus and premotor cortex activity in auditory perception. Brain Lang. 121, 65-69.


Palhano-Fontes, F., Andrade, K.C., Tofoli, L.F., Santos, A.C., Crippa, J.A.S., Hallak, J.E.C., Ribeiro, S., and de
Araujo, D.B. (2015). The Psychedelic State Induced by Ayahuasca Modulates the Activity and Connectivity of
the Default Mode Network. PLoS ONE 10, e0118143.


Petrini, K., Crabbe, F., Sheridan, C., and Pollick, F.E. (2011). The Music of Your Emotions: Neural Substrates
Involved in Detection of Emotional Correspondence between Auditory and Visual Music Actions. PLoS ONE 6,
e19165.


Plakke, B., and Romanski, L.M. (2014). Auditory connections and functions of prefrontal cortex. Front.
Neurosci. 8.


Reiterer, S., Erb, M., Grodd, W., and Wildgruber, D. (2007). Cerebral Processing of Timbre and Loudness: fMRI
Evidence for a Contribution of Broca’s Area to Basic Auditory Discrimination. Brain Imaging Behav. 2, 1-10.

[PAGE 024]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


Riba, J., Anderer, P., Morte, A., Urbano, G., Jané, F., Saletu, B., and Barbanoj, M.J. (2002). Topographic
pharmaco-EEG mapping of the effects of the South American psychoactive beverage ayahuasca in healthy
volunteers. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 53, 613-628.


Riga, M.S., Bortolozzi, A., Campa, L., Artigas, F., and Celada, P. (2016). The serotonergic hallucinogen 5-
methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine disrupts cortical activity in a regionally-selective manner via 5-HT1A and 5-
HT2A receptors. Neuropharmacology 101, 370-378.


Rorden, C., Karnath, H.-O., and Bonilha, L. (2007). Improving Lesion-Symptom Mapping. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 19,
1081-1088.


Roseman, L., Sereno, M.l., Leech, R., Kaelen, M., Orban, C., McGonigle, J., Feilding, A., Nutt, D.J., and Carhart-
Harris, R.L. (2016). LSD alters eyes-closed functional connectivity within the early visual cortex in a retinotopic
fashion. Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 3031-3040.


Ross, S., Bossis, A., Guss, J., Agin-Liebes, G., Malone, T., Cohen, B., Mennenga, S.E., Belser, A., Kalliontzi, K.,
Babb, J., et al. (2016). Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilocybin treatment for anxiety and
depression in patients with life-threatening cancer: a randomized controlled trial. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.)
30, 1165-1180.


Salimpoor, V.N., Benovoy, M., Larcher, K., Dagher, A., and Zatorre, R.J. (2011). Anatomically distinct dopamine
release during anticipation and experience of peak emotion to music. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 257-262.


Salimpoor, V.N., Bosch, I. van den, Kovacevic, N., McIntosh, A.R., Dagher, A., and Zatorre, R.J. (2013).
Interactions Between the Nucleus Accumbens and Auditory Cortices Predict Music Reward Value. Science 340,
216-219.


Salimpoor, V.N., Zald, D.H., Zatorre, R.J., Dagher, A., and Mcintosh, A.R. (2015). Predictions and the brain: how
musical sounds become rewarding. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19, 86-91.


Schilbach, L., Bzdok, D., Timmermans, B., Fox, P.T., Laird, A.R., Vogeley, K., and Eickhoff, S.B. (2012).
Introspective Minds : Using ALE Meta-Analyses to Study Commonalities in the Neural Correlates of Emotional
Processing, Social &amp; Unconstrained Cognition. PLOS ONE 7, e30920.


Schindler, S., and Kissler, J. (2016). Selective visual attention to emotional words: Early parallel frontal and
visual activations followed by interactive effects in visual cortex. Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 3575-3587.


Schirmer, A., and


z, S.A. (2006). Beyond the right hemisphere: brain mechanisms mediating vocal emotional processing. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 10, 24-30.


Schönwiesner, M., Novitski, N., Pakarinen, S., Carlson, S., Tervaniemi, M., and Näätänen, R. (2007). Heschl’s
Gyrus, Posterior Superior Temporal Gyrus, and Mid-Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex Have Different Roles in the
Detection of Acoustic Changes. J. Neurophysiol. 97, 2075-2082.


Stewart, L., Overath, T., Warren, J.D., Foxton, J.M., and Griffiths, T.D. (2008). fMRI Evidence for a Cortical
Hierarchy of Pitch Pattern Processing. PLOS ONE 3, e1470.


Tagliazucchi, E., Carhart-Harris, R., Leech, R., Nutt, D., and Chialvo, D.R. (2014). Enhanced repertoire of brain
dynamical states during the psychedelic experience. Hum. Brain Mapp. 35, 5442-5456.


Tagliazucchi, E., Roseman, L., Kaelen, M., Orban, C., Muthukumaraswamy, S.D., Murphy, K., Laufs, H., Leech, R.,
McGonigle, J., Crossley, N., et al. (2016). Increased Global Functional Connectivity Correlates with LSD-Induced
Ego Dissolution. Curr. Biol. 26, 1043-1050.

[PAGE 025]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/153031; this version posted June 25, 2017. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


Titeler, M., Lyon, R.A., and Glennon, R.A. (1988). Radioligand binding evidence implicates the brain 5-HT2
receptor as a site of action for LSD and phenylisopropylamine hallucinogens. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 94,
213-216.


Tomasi, D., and Volkow, N.D. (2012). Resting functional connectivity of language networks: characterization
and reproducibility. Mol. Psychiatry 17, 841-854.


Trost, W., Ethofer, T., Zentner, M., and Vuilleumier, P. (2012). Mapping Aesthetic Musical Emotions in the
Brain. Cereb. Cortex 22, 2769-2783.


Tsang, C.D., and Trainor, L.J. (2002). Spectral slope discrimination in infancy: Sensitivity to socially important
timbres. Infant Behav. Dev. 25, 183-194.


Vollenweider, F.X., Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen, M.F.l., Babler, A., Vogel, H., and Hell, D. (1998). Psilocybin
induces schizophrenia-like psychosis in humans via a serotonin-2 agonist action. [Miscellaneous Article].
Neuroreport 9, 3897-3902.


Vuilleumier, P. (2005). How brains beware: neural mechanisms of emotional attention. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9,
585-594.


Watanabe, T., Yagishita, S., and Kikyo, H. (2008). Memory of music: Roles of right hippocampus and left inferior
frontal gyrus. Neurolmage 39, 483-491.


Wiethoff, S., Wildgruber, D., Kreifelts, B., Becker, H., Herbert, C., Grodd, W., and Ethofer, T. (2008). Cerebral
processing of emotional prosody—influence of acoustic parameters and arousal. Neurolmage 39, 885-893.


Zatorre, R.J. (2015). Musical pleasure and reward: mechanisms and dysfunction. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1337,
202-211.


Zatorre, R.J., and Salimpoor, V.N. (2013). From perception to pleasure: Music and its neural substrates. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 10430-10437.


Zatorre, R.J., Evans, A.C., and Meyer, E. (1994). Neural mechanisms underlying melodic perception and
memory for pitch. J. Neurosci. 14, 1908-1919.


Zatorre, R.J., Chen, J.L., and Penhune, V.B. (2007). When the brain plays music: auditory-motor interactions in
music perception and production. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 547-558.


Zentner, M., Grandjean, D., and Scherer, K.R. (2008). Emotions evoked by the sound of music:
Characterization, classification, and measurement. Emotion 8, 494-521.


Zhang, S., and Li, C.R. (2012). Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI.
Neurolmage 59, 3548-3562.
