[PAGE 001]

Psychopharmacology
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-017-4820-5


ORIGINAL INVESTIGATION

(® CrossMark

The hidden therapist: evidence for a central role of music
in psychedelic therapy

Mendel Kaelen' - Bruna Giribaldi' - Jordan Raine? - Lisa Evans' - Christopher Timmerman"? - Natalie Rodriguez” -
Leor Roseman’? - Amanda Feilding* - David Nutt' - Robin Carhart-Harris|


Received: 22 June 2017 /Accepted: 21 December 2017
© The Author(s) 2018


Abstract
Rationale Recent studies have supported the safety and efficacy of psychedelic therapy for mood disorders and addiction. Music
is considered an important component in the treatment model, but little empirical research has been done to examine the
magnitude and nature of its therapeutic role.
Objectives The present study assessed the influence of music on the acute experience and clinical outcomes of psychedelic
therapy.
Methods Semi-structured interviews inquired about the different ways in which music influenced the experience of 19 patients
undergoing psychedelic therapy with psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression. Interpretative phenomenological analysis was
applied to the interview data to identify salient themes. In addition, ratings were given for each patient for the extent to which they
expressed “liking,” “resonance” (the music being experienced as “harmonious” with the emotional state of the listener), and
“openness” (acceptance of the music-evoked experience).
Results Analyses of the interviews revealed that the music had both “welcome” and “unwelcome” influences on patients’
subjective experiences. Welcome influences included the evocation of personally meaningful and therapeutically useful emotion
and mental imagery, a sense of guidance, openness, and the promotion of calm and a sense of safety. Conversely, unwelcome
influences included the evocation of unpleasant emotion and imagery, a sense of being misguided and resistance. Correlation
analyses showed that patients’ experience of the music was associated with the occurrence of “mystical experiences” and
“insightfulness.” Crucially, the nature of the music experience was significantly predictive of reductions in depression 1 week
after psilocybin, whereas general drug intensity was not.
Conclusions This study indicates that music plays a central therapeutic function in psychedelic therapy.


Keywords Psychedelic therapy - Depression - Psilocybin - Music


The original version of this article was revised due to a retrospective Open Introduction
Access order.

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article The capacity of psychedelic drugs to facilitate emotional re-
(https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-017-4820-5) contains supplementary lease, peak- or mystical experiences, and autobiographical
material, which is available to authorized users. insight was a primary motivation for their therapeutic use in
the 1950s and 1960s in the form of “psychedelic therapy”
><] Mendel Kaelen (Busch and Johnson 1950). Music was introduced within the
m.kaelen@ imperial.ac.uk therapeutic framework as a way to support patients’ experi-
ences non-verbally (Bonny and Pahnke 1972; Grof 1980;
' Psychedelic Research Group, Department of Medicine, Imperial Hoffer 1965) and has thence remained a staple component
College London, London W12 ONN, UK of the treatment model. Recent clinical trials have rekindled
* School of Psychology, Sussex University, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK interest in psychedelic therapy (Carhart-Harris and Goodwin
> Computational, Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience Laboratory 2017), with positive findings for depression (Carhart-Harris
(C3NL), Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, et al. 2016a; de Osorio et al. 2015), addiction (Bogenschutz
London W12 ONN, UK et al. 2015; Johnson et al. 2014, 2016), end-of-life care
* The Beckley Foundation, Oxford OX3 9S
Y, UK (Gasser et al. 2014; Griffiths et al. 2016; Grob et al. 2011;


Published online: 02 February 2018 A Springer

[PAGE 002]

Psychopharmacology


Ross et al. 2016), and post-traumatic stress disorder mystical experiences have been associated with positive therapy
(Mithoefer et al. 2011, 2013). outcomes to psychedelic therapy (Garcia-Romeu et al. 2014;
Psychedelic therapy sessions do not adhere to one specific Griffiths et al. 2016; Roseman et al. 2017; Ross et al. 2016).
psychotherapeutic model; however, music-listening is a consistent feature. In psychedelic therapy sessions, during drug effects,
patients are encouraged to focus their attention inwards while
Methods
lying down in a relaxed position and listening to a carefully
designed music playlist for the duration of the session. In this
Approvals
way, it is believed that music can help facilitate experiences that
have therapeutic import. Studies have shown that psychedelics
The National Research Ethics Service London (West London)
significantly modulate music-evoked emotion (Kaelen et al.
provided a favourable opinion for this study. The study was
2015, 2017), music-evoked mental imagery (Kaelen et al.
sponsored and approved by Imperial College London’s Joint
2016), and perceived personal meaningfulness of music (Preller
Research and Compliance Office (JRCO), and the National
et al. 2017). In addition, patients undergoing psychedelic therapy
Institute for Health Research Clinical Research Network adopted
often refer to music as influencing their experience significantly
the study. The National Institute for Health Research/Wellcome
(Belser et al. 2017; Swift et al. 2017; Watts et al. 2017). Although
Trust Imperial Clinical Research Facility provided approval for
these studies support the hypothesis that the subjective response
the study site. The study was performed in accordance with the
to music is intensified under psychedelics, no studies to date have
ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki.
focussed on the therapeutic functions of music in the context of
A Home Office Licence for storing and dispensing Schedule One
psychedelic therapy. The present study sought to address this
drugs was obtained.
knowledge gap by studying the ways music is experienced during psychedelic therapy sessions, and what variables are most
Participants
influential in driving positive therapeutic outcomes.
We conducted interviews with patient’s who underwent psy-
Nineteenpatients with treatment-resistant major depressive disorchedelic therapy for treatment-resistant depression with psilocy-
der where included in the study. Inclusion criteria for the study
bin, 1 week after the second of two treatment sessions. In these
were moderate to severe major depression, as determined by a
interviews, we inquired about patients’ experiences with the mu-
score of 17 or higher on the 21 -item Hamilton Depression Rating
sic heard during their therapy sessions and the specific different
scale (HAM-D), with absence of improvements despite at least
ways in which the music influenced their subjective experiences.
two different pharmaceutical antidepressant treatments for a minAccording to present theories (Bonny and Pahnke 1972), we
imum of 6 weeks within the current depressive episode.
hypothesised that music would promote so-called mystical expe-
Exclusion criteria included current or previously diagnosed psyriences! (Maclean et al. 2012; Maslow 1964; Stace 1960), which
chotic disorder, diagnoses of psychotic disorders in immediate
would subsequently predict long-term therapeutic outcomes.
family members, history of suicide attempts that required
Endorsing this view, both music (Gabrielsson and Wik 2003)
hospitalisation, history of mania, having a blood or needle phoand psychedelics (Griffiths et al. 2006) have separately been
bia, pregnancy, and current drug or alcohol dependence.
associated with the facilitation of mystical experiences, and


' The term mystical experience is derived from writings on religious mysti- Experiment overview and procedures
cism and should not be confused with the terms “mystery” or
“mysteriousness”: Mystical experiences refer in essence to a direct felt expe- This study was part of a larger study assessing safety and efficacy
rience of “union” and a sense of transcending one’s usual sense of self (Stace
for using psilocybin to treat depression (Carhart-Harris et al.
1960). Although we initially considered using the more secular term “peak
experience” coined by the psychologist Abraham Maslow (Maslow 1964, 2016a). Psilocybin was synthesised and obtained from THC1971), which essentially refers to a comparable and if not identical phenome- Pharm (Frankfurt, Germany) and formulated into 5-mg capsules
nological state, we have decided after discussion with our reviewers to employ
of psilocybin, by Guy’s and St. Thomas’ Hospital's Pharmacy
the term mystical experience. This term is currently the most used in the
academic field (Garcia-Romeu et al. 2014; Ross et al. 2016; Griffiths et al. Manufacturing Unit (London, UK). Screening consisted of eval2016), and we do not wish to cause any unnecessary confusion over used uating the patient’s current and past physical and mental health.
terminologies. Mystical experiences are by definition not specific to any reli-
The 16-item Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptoms (QIDS)
gion and can occur spontaneously, such as when being deeply moved by a
work of art, encounters with nature, during sex, or a moment of creative patient-rated scale for the severity of depressive symptoms was
inspiration, but are frequently reported with psychedelics. In the present study, completed during the screening visit and served as baseline- and
although we did not employ the Mystical Experience Questionnaire (Maclean
post-treatment measure. Written informed consent was obtained
et al. 2012), our use of the term was defined by the items from the Altered State
of Consciousness Scale(ASC), “experiences of unity,” “spiritual experience,” from patients, and by the end of the screening, eligible patients
and “blissful state” (Dittrich 1998; Studerus et al. 2010), that loaded on one met with the two therapists that would support them through the
primary factor using principle component analysis.
remainder of the trial.


Y Springer

[PAGE 003]

Psychopharmacology


A subsequent visit functioned as preparation for the session. encouraged to relax on the bed and wear Mindfold eye-shades.
This included conversations with the therapists about the pa- Two therapists were present on either side of the bed and
tient’s personal history, expectations for the sessions, and educa- “checked in” with the patient approximately every 30-60 min,
tion about the effects of psilocybin. The patient also had an to obtain insight into how their subjective experience was
opportunity to listen to samples of session music while wearing unfolding and to determine whether psychological support might
eye-shades, as a simulation experience in preparation for their be needed. Calming ambient music was played on entrance, but
first session. The preparation visit lasted approximately 4 h in the session playlist (see Supplementary material) was started on
total. Following the preparation session, patients received two ingestion of psilocybin. Patients had the option of listening to the
different dosages of psilocybin on two separate subsequent oc- music via high quality in-ear headphones (Sennheiser IE 800) or
casions, each separated by | week. In the first session, all patients via a high fidelity standing stereo speaker (Meridian DSP3200).
received an oral dose of 10-mg psilocybin. This lower dose was Both headphones and speakers received the same audio signal,
intended to function like a “taster,” a preparation for the higher which allowed the music be played in synchrony and continudose administered 1 week later. In the second session, all patients ously through both channels. This set-up was considered helpful
received 25 mg. Prior work demonstrated that high doses of for (1) providing a sense of continuity in case the headphones
psilocybin are linked with greater positive behaviour changes were abruptly removed or muted, (2) enabling the therapists to
in healthy volunteers (one month prior sessions), when partici- empathise with the patient’s current state, as well as observe how
pants received an ascending sequence of doses, compared to they were responding to a particular piece of music, and (3)
volunteers who received a high dose first (Griffiths et al. 2011). allowing a deeper immersion in the music and depth of sound.
Each session included only one patient and two therapists and
took place in a specially designed therapeutic environment. Each
session started with arrival at the research facility at 9 am, with Music selection
psilocybin being administered at 10.30 am. The majority of patients were ready to leave the facility approximately 7 h after The central purpose of the use of music in the present theraadministration. Transport from the research facility to home peutic study was consistent with that of early psychedelic
was organised ahead of the sessions and consisted of being ac- therapy studies, i.e. to facilitate personally meaningful expecompanied by a close friend or relative. Patients also had the riences that can lead to sustained changes in behaviour and
option of staying overnight in accommodation adjacent to the outlook. In order to achieve this, researchers often emphasised
research facility, the night before and the night after the session. the importance of adapting the music to individual patient’s
Clinical improvement was defined as reductions in depression changing therapeutic needs, as their therapeutic experience
severity, measured via the QIDS, completed by all patients at unfolds dynamically (Bonny and Pahnke 1972; Grof 1980;
baseline and 1 week after the second and final psilocybin session. Hoffer 1965). For the present study, however, a standardised
The different aspects of the subjective experience of psilocybin playlist was created to control for music as a potential conwere measured with the 11-dimensional Altered States of founding variable. Therefore, all patients were intended to
Consciousness Scale (11D-ASC) (Dittrich 1998) at the end the listen to the same music playlist. In one rare case where the
session. After each session, drug intensity was self-rated on a music selection was strongly disliked by one patient (#6) in
visual analogue scale (VAS). The question was formulated as the first session (a strong preference was expressed to only
“How intense were the peak drug effects?”, with the following listen to classical music), a music playlist used by Johns
anchors on the response scale: “O =no effects,” “100 = most Hopkins University was used for the second session
imaginable.” The interview assessing the patient’s experience (Richards 2015), which includes music originally suggested
of the music was always conducted 1 week after the high dose by Bonny and Pahnke (1972).
(25 mg) session. For a detailed report on the clinical outcomes Several of the musical works originally included in playsee Carhart-Harris et al. (201 6a). lists for psychedelictherapy are very familiar today. Examples
include “Samuel Barber—Adagio for strings” and
Therapeutic setting “Beethoven—Piano Concerto 5.” Such high familiarity may
reduce the opportunity for patients to have a new experience
In consideration of the importance of the therapy environment with the music, unfettered by prior associations. In addition, a
(Johnson et al. 2008), all sessions took place in a specially de- strong emphasis on music with “Christian religious” content
signed therapy room within the Clinical Research Facility at may not be appropriate for individuals that are either nonImperial College London. All unnecessary medical equipment religious or practice a different religion. Therefore, a music
was either removed or hidden; light quality was adjusted using playlist was designed for the present study, containing prePhilips livingcolors and Imageo lights. Cushions, plants, art dominantly contemporary music such as the ambient, neopaintings, and artefacts were introduced to engender a cosy and classical, contemporary classical, as well as traditional/ethnic
comfortable climate. After receiving psilocybin, patients were music styles. The intention with this music selection was to


Y Springer

[PAGE 004]

Psychopharmacology


minimise religious associations and to support mystical expe- music therapy interventions in cancer care settings
riences within a secular framework. (Pothoulaki et al. 2012).


Playlist design
Interview data analysis: coding


Interviews were transcribed verbatim in Microsoft Word and
The design of the music playlist was informed by Bonny and
checked for accuracy. A step-by-step coding analysis of the
Pahnke (1972), William Richards (2015), and the psychedelic
interview data followed. All coding was done by at least two
therapist StanislavGrof (1980), who defined different phases
researchers. This was initially done independently, and at later
in psychedelic therapy sessions, where each phase is associat-
staged compared between researchers and integrated in a final
ed with a distinguishable set of psychological needs the music
coding for each transcript. All transcripts were first read
can serve. These phases are, in chronological order: “pre-
through twice, before carrying out the coding analysis.
onset,” “onset,” “building towards peak,” “peak,” “re-entry,”
During the third reading, any phrases considered pertinent in
and “return.” In the present study, the durations of the phases
terms of how the music influenced the patients” subjective
were adjusted to the shorter duration of psilocybin’s effects,
experience were highlighted and coded into initial interpretacompared with LSD. Furthermore, onset and building towards
tions in Microsoft Excel.At this stage, sometimes more than
peak were grouped together as “ascent,” and re-entry was
one interpretation was assigned when more than one interprenamed “descent.” Music with strong evocative emotional sen-
tation could be made, and queries about the meaning of what
timents was only played during peak, on the assumption that
was being said were recorded in a separate column.
an important pre-requisite is for the individual to first feel calm
Keywords, phrases, and initial interpretations from the first
and safe and that more evocative music would enable an acti-
four completed transcripts were then comprehensively exvation of autobiographical and therapeutically significant
plored, leading to the creation of themes in a separate column.
when played at peak (Bonny and Pahnke 1972). See
These themes were then used as guidelines for subsequent
Supplementary material for the full playlist.
transcripts. As new themes emerged from these subsequent
transcripts, all data were iteratively scrutinised and the list of
The semi-structured interview
themes refined. Throughout the process of analysis, codes
were examined and discussed among the authors to decide
The semi-structured interview was always conducted 1 week
which themes were the most accurate reflections of particiafter the final session, by the same researcher, apart from on
pants” experiences.
one occasion, and always in reference to the music experience
Following further discussion between authors,a final masfor both sessions. The interview consisted of four open ques-
ter list of themes emerged. The final stage of analysis involved
tions: (1)“Did the music influence your experience? And if so:
the organisation of the list of themes into a more concise list of
in what ways?”, (2)“Can you comment on how the different
overarchingsuperordinate “clusters” or domains representing
styles of music influenced your experience? And which music
the patient experience of musiceach of which contained a
did you prefer?”, (3)“Were there any aspects in the music that
number of subsidiary themes. After all transcripts were coded
influenced your experience in a positive way?”, and (4)“Were
into themes and clusters,the presence of each unique theme
there any aspects in the music that influenced your experience
and cluster across all patients’ responses was calculated. This
in a negative way?”. Additional questions were sometimes
lead to a percentage index describing the frequency to which
asked to clarify patient’s responses if the interviewer felt the
the themes and clusters were present within the total study
need to do so (for example “Can you explain what you mean
population
with x?” or “Can you tell me more about x?”).

Ratings for music experience
Theoretical approach of interview data analysis
Three variables that displayed a notable polarity were identiInterpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA) was chosen to fied from the coding analysis and were hypothesised as preanalyse the interviews (Smith et al. 1997). IPA is an approach dictors for therapy response: (1) “liking,” referring to the deincreasingly used in healthcare research (Biggerstaff and gree to which the music styles and the music quality were
Thompson 2008; Smith 2011) via which researchers examine liked, (2) “resonance,” referring to the degree to which the
the meanings particular experiences have for people. It is par- music matched with or was “harmonious” with the intrinsic
ticularly appropriate for ascertaining the complexity (i.e. the emotional state of the patient, and (3) “openness,” referring to
quality and phenomenology of experience) of patients’ sub- the degree in which the patient was open to, or accepting of the
jective experience of music during the therapeutic sessions music-evoked experience. The concept of openness has been
and has previously been used to investigate the benefits of more generally discussed in prior literature as an important


Y Springer

[PAGE 005]

Psychopharmacology


psychological variable in psychedelic therapy (Grof 1980; ratings for drug intensity were correlated with each music
Richards 2015). experience value. The three music experience variables were
Four researchers that were blind to patient identifiers and correlated with each other to test for their discriminative value.
treatment outcomes rated these variables independently for all Inter-rating reliability of researcher’s ratings was tested by
19 patients based on their interview transcripts, to ensure inter- correlating ratings of all researchers with each other. False
rating reliability. Ratings were done via a VAS, with five an- discovery rate (FDR) control was used to correct for multiple
chors presented. For liking, the question was formulated as comparisons (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995).
“To what extent did the patient like or dislike the music?”,
with the following anchors on the response scale: “0 = strong
disliking,” “25 = major disliking, some liking,” “50 = mixed Results
disliking and liking,” “75 = major liking, some disliking,” and
“100 = major liking.” For resonance, the question was formu- The 19 interview transcriptions were on average 1048 words
lated as “To what extent was the music experienced by the long each (standard error = 133). Coding analyses identified a
patient as in resonance with his/her subjective experience?”, total of four separate groups, each including different clusters
with the following anchors on the response scale: “0 = strong with related themes. These four different groups were (1)
dissonance,” “25 = major dissonance, some resonance,” “welcome influences,” including all influences of music on
“SO = mixed resonance and dissonance,” “75 = major reso- subjective experience that were described as welcome,
nance, some dissonance,” and “100 = strong resonance.” wanted, accepted, or appreciated (see Fig. 1, identified in 18
And finally, for the third, the question was formulated as out of 19 patients, i.e. 95% of total); (2) “unwelcome
“To what extent was the patient accepting of or open to the influences,” including all experienced influences of music that
music-evoked experience?”, with the following anchors on were described as unwelcome, unwanted, rejected, or unapthe response scale: “0 = strong resistance,” “25 = major resis- preciated (see Fig. 1, identified in ten out of 19 patients, 1.e.
tance, some openness,” “50 = mixed resistance and 53% of total); (3) “appreciated music styles and playlist
openness,” “75 = major openness, some resistance,” and features,” including all themes related to the liking and appre-
“100 = strong openness.” ciating of music genres, styles, and playlist design (see Fig. 2,
identified in all 19 patients, i.e. 100% of total); and (4)
Correlation analyses “unappreciated music styles and playlist design,” including
all themes related to the disliking and not appreciating of
The average of the scores from all researchers was calculated music genres, styles, and playlist design (see Fig. 2, identified
for each music variable and for each patient. Pearson correla- in 11 out of 19 patients, 1.e. 58% of total). Here, the term
tion tests were performed between the three music experience “music styles” refers broadly to the instrumentation, compovariables and ratings from the 11D-ASC. To reduce the num- sitional, genre, and acoustic features of the music. The term
ber of comparisons, a principle component analysis (PCA) “playlist design” refers to all aspects related to the selection
was performed on the 11 factors of the 11D-ASC. Varimax and structuring of the music into the full music playlist.
rotation was performed on the first fiveprincipal components The figures displaying the four groups (Figs. 1 and 2) in-
(PCs) that explained over 95% of the variance (see Fig. 3 for clude the clusters present in more than 30% of the respective
rotated PCs and their respective loadings). Subsequently, the groupand the themes present in more than 30% of the respecthree music experience variables (liking, resonance, and open- tive cluster. This threshold was chosen for display purposes
ness) were correlated with these five PCs. To test whether and emphasisesthe most dominant themes. However, all
music experience and drug intensity are associated differently themes are discussed, and all associated patient quotes are
with different aspects of subjective experience of psilocybin, presented in separate tables in Supplementary materials
drug intensity ratings were also correlated with all five PCs. (Tables 1—11). It is important to emphasise that the identifica-
Pearson correlation tests were applied to test for a relation- tion of a theme in a patient’s experience, and subsequently the
ship between the music experience variables and reductions in including of that theme in counting its presence in the total
depressive symptoms 1 week after the last session with 25-mg population, does not enable to make any statements on the
psilocybin. Reductions in depressive symptoms were defined duration that this theme was present in the patient’s total exas the percentage reduction in scoring on QIDS relative to perience. For example, one patient may have experienced a
baseline (i.e. ((baseline score — post-treatment-score) / base- sense of irritation in response to one particular song, and thereline score) x — 100).To test for the discriminative value of mu- fore the theme “irritation” under the cluster “intensification”
sic experience variables in predicting therapy response, com- in the group unwelcomed influences is present. But this does
pared with mere drug intensity, ratings for drug intensity were not imply that the patient experienced persistent feelings of
also correlated with reductions in depression. To test for dif- irritation during his or her experience: it may simply refer to
ferences between music experience and drug intensity effects, one short but memorable moment. In addition, the measure


Y Springer

[PAGE 006]

Psychopharmacology


Fig.1 Welcome and unwelcome Group Cluster Theme Theme Cluster Group
influences of the music.
Welcomed influences are
displayed on the left in green, and journey
unwelcomed influences are E
displayed on the right in red. All
clusters and themes that are
defined as an accepted or support
. 5 11
welcomed influence of the music
on subjective experience. The misguldänce
figure displays cluster present in resonance dissonance \
more than 30% of all participants \
and per cluster the themes that din \
were present in more than 30% of 5 \
the cluster. The numbers below \
mental \
the group-, cluster-, or theme- calming \
name refers to the total number of 5
patients that referred to this. The
size ofthe circle is proportional to general
the percentage of patients referring to the group, cluster, ortheme N
therapeutic
6


music facilitates music facilitates )
openness resistance /
4 9


general
8 irritation
4


imagination discomfort
9


emotionality emotionality
15

fear
3


also only allows the capturing of spontaneous mentioning and _ targeting (and biasing) specific facets of the experience. The
elaborations on the subjective experience of the music in re- only bias present within the interview that is important to
sponse to the open questions, as opposed to the questions acknowledge was the inquiry of both “positive” and


Fig.2 Appreciated and Group Cluster Theme Theme Cluster Group
unappreciated music styles and
playlist features. Appreciated
music styles and features are music music
displayed on the left, in green, and selection selection
un-appreciated influences are


figure only displays cluster pres- order plas design
displayed on the right, in red. The music


ent in more than 30% of all par- ° preference for e
ticipants and per cluster the music own Selection le
themes that were present in more Preece
than 30% of the cluster. The
numbers below the group-, cluster-, or theme-name refers to the . #
total number of patients that re- (nep) cal 4
ferred to this. The size of the circle
is proportional to the percentage
ethnic
of patients referring to the group, 7

cluster, or theme

vocal
8


Y Springer

[PAGE 007]

Psychopharmacology


“negative” influences of the music, leading to the subsequent experienced as “fitting,” “following,” or “matching” present
“welcome” and “unwelcome” groups. emotional states.
Finally, five out of 15 of patients (33% of cluster) referred
to the music as providing a “sense of continuity and
Welcome influences: intensification
direction,” this included statements of music providing a
sense of connection between different parts in the experience,
The most prominent cluster in the group welcome influences,
making the experience feel “driven” by the music and
including 17 out of 19 patients (89% of total), refers to themes
“flowing” into a certain direction (Fig. 1). See
that describe an intensification of the subjective experience by
Table 2(Supplementary materials) for a listing of all themes
the music. Within this cluster, themes that describe an
present in the cluster guidance.
“intensification of emotion” were identified in 15 out of 17
(82% of cluster), including descriptions of music enhancing or
Welcome influence of the music: calming
changing emotions. Importantly, the emotion-evoking effects
that were welcomed showed diverse emotional valence and
Ten out of 19 patients (53% of total) described calming effects
included descriptions of the music facilitating “happiness” or
of the music. From this cluster, nine out ten(90% of cluster)
strong “ecstatic” experiences, as well experiences of the mu-
described “general calming” effects, whereas five out of ten
sic intensifying “tearfulness.”
patients (50% of cluster) described the music as providing
Themes describing an “intensification of imagination”
“mental calming” effects, including sensations of peacefulwere identified in nine out of 17 (53% of cluster). This includ-
ness and of the music calming and “slowing the mind.” One
ed statements of the music-evoking vivid and complex mental
out of ten (10% of cluster) described that the music helped
imagery and of the concrete imagery relating to specific char-
them to feel more physically relaxed. Calming effects of muacteristics of the music, such as ethnic “Indian” style of the
sic often referred to ambient music by Brian Eno, Harold
music being associated with “seeing an Indian temple.” Eight
Budd, and Stars of the lid. See Table 3 (Supplementary mateout of 17 patients (47% of cluster) mentioned a “general
rials) for a listing of all themes present in the cluster
intensification” effect of the music, without specifically refer-
“calming.”
ring to this being an intensification of emotionality, imagery,
or others. Other themes, present below 30% in the cluster
Welcome influences of the music: openness
intensification, include effects of music on “personal thoughts
to music-evoked experience
or memories” (2/17, 12% of cluster), music facilitating a
“sense of transcendence” (2/17, 12% of cluster), and music
Seven out of 19 patients (37% of total) made statements about
enhancing “ego dissolution” (2/17, 12% of cluster) (Fig. 1).
their own attitude of openness towards the influences of the
See Table 1 (Supplementary materials) for a listing of all
music and in addition, about the effects of music on their attithemes present in the cluster intensification.
tude of openness. From this cluster, six out of seven (86% of
cluster) referred to the “importance” and the “purpose” of beWelcome influences of the music: guidance ing open to “challenging experience” evoked by the music, and
that this felt like an important part of the therapeutic process.
The second most prominent cluster of welcome influences This included statements of accepting being deeply emotionally
includes themes that depict the music as a source of moved by the music and the music helping to “face” or
“guidance.” This cluster was mentioned by 15 out of 19 pa- “connect with” the listener’s “unresolved” inner conflicts.
tients (79% of total). Within this cluster, statements that the Four out of seven (57% of cluster) described that some music
music provided a “sense of being on a journey” were identi- specifically helped to enhance their attitude of openness, such
fied in 11 out of 15 (73% of cluster). This included descrip- as statements that “the music opened (him/her) up” or that
tions of the music being experienced as a “vehicle” that because of the music was “well-chosen,” the listener “felt open
“transports” or “carries” the listener forward, providing a sen- to it all” (Fig. 1). See Table 4 (Supplementary materials) for a
sation of “travelling” to different psychological “places.” listing of all themes present in the cluster “openness to music-
Themes describing the music as a source for psychological evoked experience.”
“support” were identified in 11 out of 15 (73% of cluster). This
includes various statements of the music providing a sense of Unwelcome influences of the music: intensification
“srounding,” “help,” and “reassurance.” Descriptions of the
music being in tune with, or in resonance with the person’s The most prominent cluster, including five out of ten patients
intrinsic emotional state, were identified in six out of 15 (40% (50% of cluster), described music to “intensify” emotions they
of cluster). Rather than describing the music as evoking emo- did not want to feel, such as increased “fearfulness,”
tion, this theme is defined by statements of the music being “sadness,” or “fear.” In addition, five out of ten (50% of


A Springer

[PAGE 008]

Psychopharmacology


cluster) made statements about the music creating a sense of Most frequent were positive statements about “ethnic
“discomfort,” including “unpleasant” or “uncomfortable” ex- music,” present in eight out of 19 patients (42% of
periences, and four out of ten (40% of cluster) described irri- cluster), such as Indian, “Spanish,” or “African” music
tation as a consequence of the music. In less than 30% of the styles (e.g. Jon Hassel, Ry Cooder, and Ronu
cluster, the music was described as bringing mental imagery, majumdar). Positive statements about music with human
thoughts or memories that were unwelcome, a sense of puz- voice were mentioned by seven out of 19 patients (37%
zlement, inner conflict, tension, or a “dark atmosphere.” This of cluster). Importantly, this refers to vocal music either
cluster of unwelcome intensification influences forms a con- without lyrics or music with lyrics in a foreign language
trast with the cluster of themes describing intensification as a (e.g. The Journey by Ludovico Enaudi and Enya's
welcomed influence (Fig. 1 and Table 1 (Supplementary ma- sumiregusa). One other music style that was frequently
terials)). See Table 5 (Supplementary materials) for a listing of appreciated by seven out of 19 (37% of cluster) was
all themes present in the cluster unwelcomed intensification. neo-classical music (e.g. Max Richter or Olafur
Arnalds) or classical music (e.g. Henryk Gorecki or
Unwelcome influences of the music: resistance Arvo Part). Apart from these styles, the appreciated muto music-evoked experience sic styles showed a noticeable diversity. In less than
30%, positive statements were directed to “music with
Nine out of 19 patients (47% of total) described feelings of crescendo” (five out of 19, 26% of total), “powerful
“resistance to the music-evoked experience.” This includes state- music” (four out of 19, 21% of total), and only one
ments of “not liking” or “not wanting” the subjective effects of to two out of 19 made explicit statements about their
the music. This cluster of unwelcomed influences contrasts the appreciation for specific instruments, such as violin,
cluster of themes describing an openness to music-evoked expe- guitar, plano, or “music with a solid drone.” See
rience, as a welcomed influence (see Table 4 (Supplementary Table 8 (Supplementary materials) for a full listing of
materials) and Fig. 1). See Table 6 (Supplementary materials) all themes referring to music styles that were explicitly
for a full list of all themes in the cluster intensification. appreciated.


Unwelcome influences of the music: misguidance Appreciated music styles and playlist features: playlist
design
Six out of 19 (32% of total) made statements about the music
providing a sense of “misguidance”; this cluster primarily Seventeen out of 19 patients (89% of total) made stateincludes descriptions of the music being a “mismatch” or ments reflecting appreciation for the design of the playlist
being incongruent with the unfolding subjective experience. (Fig. 2). Most prominent were positive descriptions of the
This cluster, named “dissonance,” was present in four out of “music selection,” described by 12 out of 17 patients
six (67% of cluster) and forms a contrast with the welcome (71% of cluster), including descriptions of the music
influence resonance, when the music was experienced as har- “working well” or being “well-selected.” Secondly, nine
monious, or a good match, with the subjective experience. out of 17 patients (53% of cluster) provided positive deOther themes of misguidance, present in less than 30%, in- scriptions on the way the music was structured into the
clude descriptions of the “music feeling intrusive,” the music full playlist. This theme, named “music order,” is defined
being “unable to positively influence a challenging by statements of the “structure” and the “ordering” of the
experience,” the music giving a “sense of being music playlist, “aligned” well with the drug effects. The
manipulated,” the music giving a “sense of unmet potential,” third most prominent theme, present in six out of 17
or the music giving a sense of “foreboding,” as if something (35%), corresponds to the “music presence,” meaning
“bad” was going to happen. This cluster of unwelcome influ- the mere presence of the music itself. This includes deence contrasts the cluster of themes describing a sense of scriptions from the music being present as helpful, to
“supportive” and “helpful” guidance, as a welcome influence statements that it could not be imaginable doing the ses-
(see Table 2 (Supplementary materials) and Fig. 1). See sions without it and that the music presence felt
Table 7 (Supplementary materials) for a full list of all themes “necessary.” Finally, other themes include appreciation
in the cluster misguidance. for “calming music” to be played mainly during onset,
ascent, and return phases, whereas more emotive music
Appreciated music styles and playlist features: music (i.e. “sentimental” or “cinematic” music) to be better restyles served for late in the ascent phase and during peak phase.
See Table 9 (Supplementary materials) for a full listing of
All 19 patients referred to some music styles within the all themes describing playlist design features that were
music playlist that they especially appreciated (Fig. 2). appreciated.


Y Springer

[PAGE 009]

Psychopharmacology


Unappreciated music styles and playlist features: Experience of unity

music styles Spiritual experience

Blissful state

Eleven out of 19 patients (58% of total) referred to musical Insightfulness

styles that were not appreciated. These responses reflected Disembodiment

different degrees of the individual’s disliking of the music Impaired cognition

and were highly diverse, making no theme present in more Anxiety

than 30% of this cluster (Fig. 2). Some examples of themes in Complex Imagery

this cluster refer to “music with lyrics,”
99 66.
“vocal music,” “piano Elementary imagery

music,” “classical or neo-classical music,” and “cheesy Audio/visual synesthesia

music.” Often, vocal music and cheesy music referred to one Meaning

particular song played during the final return phase by Buffy
Saint Mary, up where we belong. See Table 10
(Supplementary materials) for a list of all themes present in
the cluster of un-appreciated music styles.


Unappreciated music styles and playlist features: Fig.3 Principle component analysis (PCA) of variables from the 11Dplaylist design ASC. Loadings of the 11 dimensions of the ASC (y-axis), on the first five
PCs obtained from PCA followed by varimax rotation explained more
than 95% of the variance. The x-axis shows the ordering of principal
Six out of 19 patients (32% of total) referred to aspects of the components, with the components ordered by explained variance (from
playlist design that were not appreciated. In 2 out of 6 (33% of left to right). The colour bar corresponds to the strength of the loading for
cluster), a clear disliking of the music selection was present, each acoustic feature for that components: warm colours indicatea posi-
tive loading and cold colours a negative loading
and a preference for “own music selection” was expressed
(Fig. 2). See Table 11 for a complete list of all themes present
in the cluster of un-appreciated playlist design features. as by drug intensity (r=0.65, p=0.002), but not by music
liking (r=0.44, p=.06). Impaired cognition (r=0.55,p =
Predictors in music experience for psilocybin 0.01) and audiovisual perception changes (r=0.71, p=
experience and therapy outcomes 0.0006) were only predicted by drug intensity and not by
any of the music variables. Anxiety was not predicted by
PCA reduced the dimensions of the 11-ASC to five factors, any of the variables. All reported significant pvalues refer to
explaining more than 95% of total variance. These PCs are (1) FDR-adjusted threshold for significance of 0.016. See Fig. 4.
“mystical experience” (loadings from “experiences of unity,”
“spiritual experience,” and “blissful state”), (2) “impaired
Inter-rating reliability and discriminative validity
cognition” (loadings from “disembodiment,” impaired cogni-
of musicexperience variables
tion, and “new meanings”), (3) “audiovisual perception”
(loadings from “audio/visual synaesthesia” and “elementary
Pearson correlation tests between the scores of all researchers
imagery”), (4)” anxiety” (primarily loaded by anxiety), and
(n=4), who rated the three musicexperience variables (liking,
(5) “insightfulness” (loadings from insightfulness and
resonance, and openness), demonstrated good inter-rater reliabil-
“complex imagery”) (see Fig. 3). Subsequently, music expe-
ity (average r= 0.6 + 0.1, from total of 18 correlations). Pearson
rience (liking, resonance, and openness) and drug intensity
correlation tests between the three music experience variables
scores were correlated with these five factors and ratings for
showed significant correlations (r= 0.9, r= 0.96, and r=0.91).
reductions in depression (1 week after psilocybin, defined by
Drug intensity did not correlate with any of the music experience
% reduction in QIDS score).
variables.
Reductions in depression 1 week after psilocybin were significantly predicted by the musicexperience variables, liking
(r= 0.60, p = .006), resonance (7 = 0.59, p = .008), and open- Discussion
ness (r= 0.57, p= .001), but not by drug intensity (r = 0.004,
p=0.98). Mystical experience during the psilocybin sessions Via an analysis of patient interviews, this study identified a
was significantly predicted by music variables, liking (r= number of ways in which music influenced the subjective
0.61, p=.006), resonance (r= 0.67, p = .002), openness (7 = experiences of patients receiving psilocybin with psychologi0.70, p = .0008), and by drug intensity (r= 0.58, p=0.009). cal support for treatment-resistant depression. The most freInsightfulness was predicted by music variables resonance quently reported themes relate to an intensification of emo-
(r=0.53, p=.016) and openness (7 = 0.59, p = .007), as well tions and mental imagery by music under psilocybin,


a Springer

[PAGE 010]

Psychopharmacology


you on a ride here, but I promise I wont abandon you.
Drug intensity
It’s just going to be tough, and you know, you're going
through the grinder here, but you won‘ be left in pieces.-
” That seemed to be... what the music was saying to me.
Music liking
(#14).


In contrast to the sense of guidance by the music were descripMusic resonance
tions of the music providing a sense of misguidance. In these
situations, the music was most often described as being disso-
nant with the patient’s emotions and thoughts. One example of
Music openness
the experience of misguidance and dissonance can be found in
the following excerpt:


$ The light music at one point took me to a place where I

$e
> thought I was safe, and it became unsafe, and the music
> ¿5 was playing a trick with me, you know, sort of giving
ho
me a false sense of security. I can remember thinking

Fig.4 Correlations between music experience and therapy experience “this is beautiful music, why am I going to this dark
and outcomes. Outcomes of Pearson correlation tests of drug intensity place?” It didn’t line up with what had gone on before.
ratings and music experience variables (on y-axis), with decreased I just felt as I was being manipulated, being duped aldepression (1 week after psilocybin) and the acute psilocybin
most. The music lured me to this beautiful place, and
experience (five PCs from ASC) (on x-axis). *=p<0.05 and **=
p<0.001, after FDR correction for multiple comparisons then things started to become dark even with this beau-
tiful music still playing. (#16)


complementing previous studies that demonstrated modulato- One important observation is that effects of the music
ry effects of LSD on music-evoked emotion (Kaelen et al. that were welcomed, included emotions such as in2015, 2017) and music-evoked mental imagery (Kaelen creased grieving or tearfulness, and that an attitude
et al. 2016) in healthy volunteers. By focussing on the phe- of openness towards negative music-evoked emotions
nomenology of the acute experience, the present study pro- was frequently described as helpful in bringing to exvided new insights into the role and importance of music in pression inner psychological conflicts that might then
the context of psychedelic therapy. For example, the music be resolved (Watts et al. 2017). These experiences
appeared to be a significant source of guidance, creating a were grouped under the theme “openness to challengsense of grounding, as well as a sense of carrying the listener ing experience feels therapeutic” and show similarities
into different psychological places. Specific examples of this with recent qualitative research showing perceived
can be found in the following two excerpts: therapeutic meaning in transient psychological strug-
gle during psychedelic therapy (Belser et al. 2017;
The sad songs would bring painful memories on, more Swift et al. 2017). One example of this attitude of
happy songs would make me think of a really good openness towards the music can be found in the fol-
period in my life. Every new song could bring a different lowing excerpt:
image. (#4)
I can even view the negative moments as positive in a
I feel the music in large part drove a lot of the experi- way because they served a purpose. The purpose was to
ence. Under the influence of psilocybin, the music ab- sort of let me face the darkness, and my demons, I guess.
solutely takes over. Normally when I hear a piece of sad It was beautiful at times, but also... yeah, the darker
music, or happy music I respond through choice... but moments really helped to reflect on and connect with
under psilocybin I felt almost that I had no choice but to your unresolved shadows. (#19)
go with the music. [...] I did feel I was being held. And
it did feel like the music opened [me] up to grief, and I Contrasting such an attitude of openness to challenging expe-
just was very happy for that to happen. It wasn’t partic- rience is an attitude of resistance to the intensification effects
ularly pleasant in any way, but extraordinarily powerful. of the music. This experience was characterised by not want-
It took my thinking and my experience to uncomfortable ing the music or its effects and was named “resistance to
places, but I was kind of reassured in the experience. intensification.” An example of this can be found in the fol-
There was something there that meant “P'm going to take lowing excerpt:


Y Springer

[PAGE 011]

Psychopharmacology


I worried that I let [the music] shape this sort of melan- disliked, the music being either resonant or dissonant with
choly. There was resistance, massively, to everything, the patient’s experience, and the patient being either open or
every sort of sensory input, I had a fearful response. I resistant to the influence of the music. These variables (liking,
was afraid to open my eyes, I was afraid to do anything, resonance, and openness) positively predicted the extent to
I was afraid that this sort of music was the last thing Pd which patients reported having mystical experiences (a factor
ever hear. (#5) defined as the experience of unity, blissful emotionality, and
spirituality). In addition, resonance and openness, but not lik-
ing, predicted the extent to which people reported
Music styles and playlist design insightfulness (a factor defined by having inventive ideas,
feelings of profoundness, insights, and the experience of vivid
The study also shed light on how different musical personal memories or mental images). Drug intensity, on the
styles and the design of the music playlist were experi- other hand, also correlated with other aspects of the
enced. The choice of the music and the design of the psilocybinexperience, such as impaired cognition and audiomusic playlist were overall well-appreciated, with the visual perception changes. It must be noted that liking, resomost frequently appreciated musical genres being eth- nance, and openness were highly correlated and thus likely
nic-, vocal-, and (neo-) classical music. Appreciation represent one construct. The absence of a significant correlawas also expressed for the design of the playlist, in tion between music liking and reported insightfulness may
particular for the calming (ambient) music, which was therefore be due to a lack of statistical power.
particularly present during the early (pre-onset and early The selective association of the music experience with
ascent) and the final (return) phases, and at periods mystical experience and insightfulness, and not with other
during peak, while more emotionally evocative music subjective experiences, supports the original motivations to
being reserved for the peak phase. This indirectly sup- include music in psychedelictherapy, i.e. to promote the ocports the therapists’ views that that an optimal playlist currence of therapeutically meaningful experiences. Modern
design is characterised by a music genre selection that studies have confirmed that psilocybin can reliably facilitate
is structured to match the different phases of drug ex- mystical experiences (Griffiths et al. 2011, 2016), and these
perience (Barrett et al. 2017; Bonny and Pahnke 1972; experiences have been associated with sustained positive
Grof 1980; Richards 2015). changes in behaviour and personality (MacLean et al. 2011)
Strong disliking of the music selection was rare, but when and with positive therapy outcomes (Garcia-Romeu et al.
this did occur it proved insightful about the possible functions 2014; Griffiths et al. 2016; Roseman et al. 2017; Ross et al.
of music selection: Typically, disliking of the music seemed to 2016). Although these studies incorporated music-listening in
be associated with either a “diminishment” of psilocybin’s combination with psilocybin, this study is the first to demonsubjective effects, accompanied by unpleasant feelings (such strate that the music experience during these sessions relates to
as discomfort and irritation), and with an attitude of resistance, the occurrence of mystical experiences. A positive relationcharacterised by an attempt to psychologically reject and dis- ship was also found between the music experience and reductance oneself from the music, such as detailed in the following tions in depression 1 week after the psilocybin experience.
excerpt: Importantly, reductions in depression were not related to the
intensity of the drug effects. This finding indicates that it is not
The music blocked my experience and feelings. A sense merely the drug effect in isolation, but an interaction between
of irritation, frustration, and sense of lowering mood. the drug and the music on subjective experience that promotes
The majority of the songs were not my kind of music, positive therapeutic outcomes.
I can’t sit with that music ... I have to leave the room. I
was sort of feeling bad, because I wanted to work with it. Possible therapeutic mechanisms of music
I sensed the potential for a really profound experience. I in psychedelic therapy
couldn’t meet that potential with music that I felt was
quite mediocre. To me it didn’t feel real, so I felt quite A principal effect of psychedelics is that they temporarily
torn. (#6) dysregulate brain mechanisms that normally regulate
emotion(Carhart-Harris et al. 2012a, 2016b;
Muthukumaraswamy et al. 2013; Tagliazucchi et al. 2016),
Music experience predicts experience and therapy and this could underlie the enhanced emotional responsiveoutcomes ness to emotionally evocative stimuli reported here as else-
where (Carhart-Harris et al. 2012b; Kaelen et al. 2015, 2017;
As outlined above, notable polarities were observed in the Quednow et al. 2012; Vollenweider et al. 2007). The notion
music experience, such as the music being either liked or that accepting and moving through challenging emotions are


Y Springer

[PAGE 012]

Psychopharmacology


important for psychotherapeutic change is central to many with the unfolding experience, disliked, and rejected (resispsychotherapeutic models (Greenberg and Pascual-Leone tance), therapeutic outcomes suffered. In contrast, when the
2006), has empirical support (Whelton 2004), and been noted music was in resonance with the patient's experience, liked,
by other psychedelic therapy studies (Belser et al. 2017; Swift and accepted (openness), therapeutic outcomes were most
et al. 2017; Watts et al. 2017). In psychedelic therapy, the positive.
function of psychedelics may be to ease the relinquishment These music experience variables in this study (resonance,
of psychological control (i.e. ego dissolution and enhanced liking, and openness) correlated with each other, suggesting
suggestibility (Carhart-Harris et al. 2014)), thereby allowing that they represent a single construct within the music experia fuller and freer (i.e. less inhibited) expression of emotional- ence that is associated with positive therapy outcomes. Liking
ity. The enhanced receptivity to music, in turn, may play the of music is usually characterised as a mixture of genre appreimportant function of activating emotionality, thoughts, and ciation and aesthetic judgements (Juslin 2013; Juslin and
memories that are most personally salient. Thereby, music Västfjäll 2008; Juslin et al. 2016; North and Hargreaves
can guide the patient’s experience into directions that are most 1997), and music liking may represent a basic pre-requisite
therapeutically significant. One key difference between psy- for music to evoke personally meaningful emotionality. In
chedelic therapy and other forms of psychotherapy (and con- addition, some music styles and acoustic properties may be
ventional pharmacotherapy) may be the capacity of psyche- more suitable for the conscious states induced by psychedelics
delics and music to rapidly facilitate deeply felt and personally than others. The patient’s attitude, in turn, appears to require a
meaningful emotionality (Carhart-Harris et al. 2016a; Gasser sufficient degree of openness to the music-evoked experience,
et al. 2014; Griffiths et al. 2016; Grob et al. 2011; Johnson and this may imply not only a state of surrender but also a proet al. 2014; Ross et al. 2016). active and curious engagement with the therapeutic content
It is worth considering that these findings show a remark- that emerges.
able congruency with the theoretical frameworks and patient This hypothetical framework holds that an optimal music
experiences of “introspective” forms of music therapy, where experience (style liking, music’s resonance, and openness to
music is utilised as the means to provide an experience that is music) creates an optimal climate for the expression of meanthought to help the listener examine and change his/her rela- ingful therapeutic content, characterised by the sensation of
tionship with themselves (Abbott 2005; Albornoz 2013; being on a personal journey, with a spontaneous and often
Summer 1992, 2011). This includes the use of music to evoke intense emergence of personally meaningful imagery,
intense emotional experiences (Albornoz 2013), as well as a thoughts, and emotionality. This optimal music experience
way to provide a “holding environment,” which feels “safe construct may be a critical pre-requisite, and when it is not
and secure” to express and experience new aspects of oneself met adequately, is likely to result in the patient to distance
(Carroll 2011; Schulberg 1999). Therapeutic effects of music from the music experience (resistance), characterised by feelare widely reported in literature and utilised across different ings of discomfort, and a diminishment of personally meanhealth care disciplines (Finch and Moscovitch 2016; ingful imagery, thoughts, and emotionality (i.e. the absence of
Mondanaro et al. 2017; Pavlov et al. 2017). The present find- the sense of being on a journey). Given the patient’s experiings therefore engender the view that psychedelic therapy uti- ence is highly individual and dynamic, this finding suggests
lises therapeutic effects of music that are enhanced via an that the adaptation of the music during psychedelic therapy
interaction between the drug and the music. sessions may be critical at times, in order to provide adequate
therapeutic support conditions, or prevent possible counterImplications for the use of music in psychedelic therapeutic experiences: an idea that was often emphasised
therapy by early pioneers of psychedelic therapy (Bonny and Pahnke
1972; Grof 1980; Hoffer 1965).
Due to the prominence of music-listening in psychedelic ther- In this framework, the experience of resistance and dislike
apy, increasing the knowledge of the appropriate therapeutic by the listener may be regarded as an important indicator for
use of music in psychedelic therapy is important. This be- the therapist of music’s failure to act therapeutically, and the
comes particularly critical when psychedelic therapy is imple- type of intervention needed to restore music’s therapeutic
mented on increasingly larger scales. The therapeutic influ- function may be determined by one central question the therence of music has been referred to as being of “profound apists may need to clarify, 1.e. what is the source of the resissignificance” (Bomny and Pahnke 1972), and several authors tance or dislike? The therapists bear a responsibility to ensure
emphasised the care needed in selecting appropriate music, the music styles are sufficiently liked, via thoughtful music
playing this music at the right circumstances, and within a selection, and that resonance is maximised by providing an
personalised patient-centred format (Grof 1980; Hoffer attunement of the music to the patient’s personal and dynam1965). The present study provides support for these views, ically unfolding experience, via thoughtful playlistdesign and
by showing that when the music was experienced as dissonant adaptation of the music when needed. However, in addition, it


Y Springer

[PAGE 013]

Psychopharmacology


may occur that the music-evoked experience is rich with ther- for further research to better understand how music interacts
apeutically meaningful content, yet the experience may be with certain personality traits and psychological states to inemotionally challenging, resulting in similar expressions of fluence the acute experience and longer-term outcomes of
resistance. In these scenarios, the therapists may instead need psychedelic therapy.
to provide adequate therapeutic support for the patient to feel
safe and motivated to engage in exploring and expressing the Compliance with ethical standards
present challenging feeling states, of which the meanings may
Conflict of interest Amanda Feilding is the director of the Beckley
not always be immediately clear.
Foundation, one of the sponsors of the study. David Nutt is an advisor
for the Beckley Foundation.
Limitations and future directions

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of theCreative
This study has a number of limitations. First of all, the data was
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
acquired without a placebocondition, making causal inferences creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),which permits use, duplication,
about the nature of the effects problematic. Secondly, the main adaptation, distribution and reproduction inany medium or format, as

body of data used for this study was qualitative in nature. long as you give appropriate credit to the originalauthor(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license andindicate if
Therefore, the experiment did not allow studying the magnitude
changes were made.
of the observed themes in the music experience. It should therefore be emphasised that the primary objective of this study was to
provide a patient perspective on the influence of music. We hope
References
that this work inspires new hypotheses for future studies, and that
it assists therapists and researchers in their use of music in psy-
Abbott E (2005) Client experiences with the music in the bonny method
chedelic therapy. Examples of future directions include testing of guided imagery and music (BMGIM). Qualitative inquiries in.
whether maximization of resonance could improve therapy out- Music Ther 2:36-61

comes, and whether the variables liking, resonance, and open- Albornoz Y (2013) Crying in music therapy: an exploratory study.
Qualitative Inquiries inMusic Therapy 8:31-50
ness represent one single factor or separate factors when larger
Barrett FS, Robbins H, Smooke D, Brown JL, Griffiths RR (2017)
sample sizes and more precise measurements are employed. Qualitative and quantitative features of music reported to support
A significant body of empirical work is required to advance peak mystical experiences during psychedelic therapy sessions.

the therapeutic use of music in psychedelic therapy. One im- Front Psychol 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01238
Belser AB, Agin-Liebes G, Swift TC, Terrana S, Devenot N, Friedman
portant focus of such work will be the establishing of baseline
HL, Guss J, Bossis A, Ross S (2017) Patient experiences of
measures that can reliably predict individual music experi-
psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy: an interpretative phenomenologences during psychedelic therapy sessions. Such predictive ical analysis. J Humanist Psychol 57(4):354-388. https://doi.org/10.
measures can range from personality traits (e.g. openness to 1177/0022167817706884
Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y (1995) Controlling the false discovery rate:
experience, absorption, or suggestibility) to measures of per-
apractical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Stat Soc
sonal music preferences. Furthermore, research that focuses
Ser B Methodol 57:289-300
on identifying reliable indicators of positive (welcome/sup- Biggerstaff D, Thompson AR (2008) Interpretative phenomenological
portive) and negative (unwelcome/unsupportive) influences analysis (IPA): a qualitative methodology of choice in healthcare

of music on the therapeutic processes during psychedelic ther- research. Qual Res Psychol 5:214-224
Bogenschutz, M.P., Forcehimes, A.A., Pommy, J.A., Wilcox, C.E.,
apy sessions may help therapists adapt music to individual
Barbosa, P.C.R., and Strassman, R.J. (2015). Psilocybin-assisted
patients. treatment for alcohol dependence: a proof-of-concept study.J
Psychopharmacol (Oxf) 269881114565 144
Bonny HL, Pahnke WN (1972) The use of music in psychedelic (LSD)
psychotherapy. J Music Ther 9(2):64-87. https://doi.org/10.1093/
Conclusions
jmt/9.2.64
Busch A, Johnson W (1950) L.S.D. 25 as an aid in psychotherapy; preIn patients with treatment-resistant depression treated with liminary report of a new drug. Dis Nerv Syst 11(8):241-243
psilocybin, music was described as having a substantial influ- Carhart-Harris, R.L., and Goodwin, G.M. (2017). The therapeutic poten-
tial of psychedelic drugs: past, present, and future.
ence on their therapeutic experience, and selective correlations
Neuropsychopharmacology
between the musicexperience and the occurrence of mystical
Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Williams T, Stone JM, Reed LJ, Colasanti
experiences and insightfulness during sessions support this. A, Tyacke RJ, Leech R, Malizia AL, Murphy K, Hobden P, Evans J,
Patients’ experience of the music, but not drug intensity, was Feilding A, Wise RG, Nutt DJ (2012a) Neural correlates of the

predictive of reductions in depression 1 week later, suggesting psychedelic state as determined by fMRI studies with psilocybin.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 109(6):2138-2143. https://doi.org/10.1073/
that music plays a central mediating role in psychedelic
pnas.1119598109
therapy. These findings motivate greater appreciation of music Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Williams TM, Erritzoe D, Abbasi N,
as a key variable in psychedelic therapy and highlight the need Bargiotas T, Hobden P, Sharp DJ, Evans J, Feilding A, Wise RG,


A Springer

[PAGE 014]

Psychopharmacology


Nutt DJ (2012b) Implications for psychedelic-assisted psychothera- Hoffer A (1965) D-Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD): a review of its
py: functional magnetic resonance imaging study with psilocybin. present status. Clin Pharmacol Ther 6(2):183-255. https://doi.org/
Br J Psychiatry 200(3):238—244. https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.111. 10.1002/cpt1 96562183
103309 Johnson MW, Richards WA, Griffiths RR (2008) Human hallucinogen
Carhart-Harris RL, Kaelen M, Whalley MG, Bolstridge M, Feilding A, research: guidelines for safety. J Psychopharmacol Oxf Engl 22(6):
Nutt DJ (2014) LSD enhances suggestibility in healthy volunteers. 603-620. https://doi.org/10.1177/026988 1108093587
Psychopharmacology 232:785—794 Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Cosimano MP, Griffiths RR (2014) Pilot
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, Day CMJ, Erritzoe D, Kaelen study of the 5-HT2AR agonist psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco
M, Bloomfield M, Rickard JA, Forbes B, Feilding A, Taylor D, addiction. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 28(11):983-992. https://doi.
Pilling S, Curran VH, Nutt DJ (2016a) Psilocybin with psycholog- org/10.1177/026988 1114548296
ical support for treatment-resistant depression: an open-label feasi- Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Griffiths RR (2016) Long-term follow-
bility study. Lancet Psychiatry 3(7):619-627. https://doi.org/10. up of psilocybin-facilitated smoking cessation. Am J Drug Alcohol
1016/S2215-0366(16)30065-7 Abuse 0:1-6
Carhart-Harris RL, Muthukumaraswamy S, Roseman L, Kaelen M, Juslin PN (2013) From everyday emotions to aesthetic emotions: towards
Droog W, Murphy K, Tagliazucchi E, Schenberg EE, Nest T, a unified theory of musical emotions. Phys Life Rev 10(3):235-266.
Orban C, Leech R, Williams LT, Williams TM, Bolstridge M, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2013.05.008
Sessa B, McGonigle J, Sereno MI, Nichols D, Hellyer PJ, Hobden Juslin PN, Västfjäll D (2008) Emotional responses to music: the need to
P, Evans J, Singh KD, Wise RG, Curran HV, Feilding A, Nutt DJ consider underlying mechanisms. Behav Brain Sci 31:559-575
(2016b) Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed by mul- Juslin PN, Sakka LS, Barradas GT, Liljestróm S (2016) No accounting for
timodal neuroimaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci 113(17):4853-4858. taste? Idiographic models of aesthetic judgment in music. Psychol
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1518377113 Aesthet Creat Arts 10(2):157-170. https://doi.org/10.1037/
Carroll, B. (2011). Pellitteri, J. (2009). Emotional processes in music aca0000034
therapy. Gilsum, NH: Barcelona Publishers. ISBN-10: Kaelen M, Barrett FS, Roseman L, Lorenz R, Family N, Bolstridge M,
1891278517. E-book. ISBN-13: 9781891278518. $44.00. Music Curran HV, Feilding A, Nutt DJ, Carhart-Harris RL (2015) LSD
Ther. Perspect29, 158-159 enhances the emotional response to music. Psychopharmacology
Dittrich A (1998) The standardized psychometric assessment of altered 232(19):3607-3614. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-015-4014-y
states of consciousness (ASCs) in humans. Pharmacopsychiatry Kaelen M, Roseman L, Kahan J, Santos-Ribeiro A, Orban C, Lorenz R,
31(S 2):80-84. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2007-979351 Barrett FS, Bolstridge M, Williams T, Williams L et al (2016) LSD
Finch K, Moscovitch DA (2016) Imagery-based interventions for music modulates music-induced imagery via changes in parahippocampal
performance anxiety: an integrative review. Med Probl Perform Art connectivity. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 26(7):1099-1109. https://
31(4):222—231. https://doi.org/10.21091/mppa.2016.4040 doi.org/10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.03.018
Gabrielsson A, Wik SL (2003) Strong experiences related to music: Kaelen M, Lorenz R, Barrett FS, Roseman L, Orban C, Santos-Ribeiro A,
adescriptive system. Music Sci 7(2):157-217. https://doi.org/10. Wall MB, Feilding A, Nutt D, Muthukumaraswamy S et al (2017)
1177/102986490300700201 Effects of LSD on music-evoked brain activity. BioRxiv 153031.
Garcia-Romeu A, Griffiths R, R., and W. Johnson, M. (2014) Psilocybin- https://doi.org/10.1101/153031
occasioned mystical experiences in the treatment of tobacco addic- MacLean KA, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR (2011) Mystical experiences
tion. Curr Drug Abuse Rev 7(3):157-164 occasioned by the hallucinogen psilocybin lead to increases in the
Gasser P, Holstein D, Michel Y, Doblin R, Yazar-Klosinski B, Passie T, personality domain of openness. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 25(11):
Brenneisen R (2014) Safety and efficacy of lysergic acid 1453-1461. https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881111420188
diethylamide-assisted psychotherapy for anxiety associated with Maclean KA, Leoutsakos J-MS, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR (2012)
life-threatening diseases. J Nerv Ment Dis 202(7):513-520. https:// Factor analysis of the mystical experience questionnaire: astudy of
doi.org/10.1097/NMD.0000000000000113 experiences occasioned by the hallucinogen psilocybin. J Sci Study
Greenberg LS, Pascual-Leone A (2006) Emotion in psychotherapy: a Relig 51(4):721-737. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5906.2012.
practice-friendly research review. J Clin Psychol 62(5):611-630. 01685.x
https://doi.org/10.1002/jelp.20252 Maslow, A.H. (1964). Religions, values, and peak-experiences (Kappa
Griffiths RR, Richards WA, McCann U, Jesse R (2006) Psilocybin can Delta Pi)
occasion mystical-type experiences having substantial and sustained Maslow, A.H. (1971). The farther reaches of human nature (the Viking
personal meaning and spiritual significance. Psychopharmacology Press)
187(3):268-283. https://doi.org/10.1007/s002 13-006-0457-5 Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, Jerome L, Doblin R (2011)
Griffiths R, Johnson M, Richards W, Richards B, McCann U, Jesse The safety and efficacy of + 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-
R (2011) Psilocybin occasioned mystical-type experiences: im- assisted psychotherapy in subjects with chronic, treatment-resistant
mediate and persisting dose-related effects. posttraumatic stress disorder: the first randomized controlled pilot
Psychopharmacology 218(4):649-665. https://doi.org/10.1007/ study. J Psychopharmacol (Oxf) 25(4):439-452. https://doi.org/10.
s00213-011-2358-5 1177/0269881110378371
Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Carducci MA, Umbricht A, Richards WA, Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, Jerome L, Martin SF, Yazar-
Richards BD, Cosimano MP, Klinedinst MA (2016) Psilocybin pro- Klosinski B, Michel Y, Brewerton TD, Doblin R (2013) Durability
duces substantial and sustained decreases in depression and anxiety of improvement in post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms and ab-
in patients with life-threatening cancer: a randomized double-blind sence of harmful effects or drug dependency after 3,4-
trial. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 30(12):1181-1197. https://doi.org/ methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted psychotherapy: a pro-
10.1177/0269881116675513 spective long-term follow-up study. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.)
Grob CS, Danforth AL, Chopra GS, Hagerty M, McKay CR, Halberstadt 27(1):28-39. https://doi.org/10.1177/026988 1112456611
AL, Greer GR (2011) Pilot study of psilocybin treatment for anxiety Mondanaro JF, Homel P, Lonner B, Shepp J, Lichtensztein M, Loewy JV
in patients with advanced-stage cancer. Arch Gen Psychiatry 68(1): (2017) Music therapy increases comfort and reduces pain in patients
71-78. https://doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.116 recovering from spine surgery. Am. J. Orthop.Belle Mead NJ 46:
Grof, S. (1980). LSD psychotherapy E13-E22


a Springer

[PAGE 015]

Psychopharmacology


Muthukumaraswamy SD, Carhart-Harris RL, Moran RJ, Brookes MJ, threatening cancer: a randomized controlled trial. J.
Williams TM, Errtizoe D, Sessa B, Papadopoulos A, Bolstridge Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 30(12):1165-1180. https://doi.org/10.
M, Singh KD, Feilding A, Friston KJ, Nutt DJ (2013) Broadband 1177/0269881116675512
cortical Desynchronization underlies the human psychedelic state. J Schulberg CH (1999) Out of the ashes: transforming despair into hope
Neurosci 33(38):15171-15183. https://doi.org/10.1523/ with music and imagery. Publishers, Barcelona, pp 7-12
JNEUROSCI.2063-13.2013 Smith JA (2011) Evaluating the contribution of interpretative phenomeNorth AC, Hargreaves DJ (1997) Liking, arousal potential, and the emo- nological analysis. Health. Psychol Rev 5:9-27
tions expressed by music. Scand J Psychol 38(1):45-53. https://doi. Smith, J., Osborn, M., and Flowers, P. (1997). Interpretative phenomeno-
org/10.1111/1467-9450.00008
logical analysis and health psychology (Routledge)
de Osorio FL, Sanches RF, Macedo LR, Santos RG, Maia-de-Oliveira JP,
Stace, W. (1960). Teachings of the mystics (New American Library)
Wichert-Ana L, Araujo DB, Riba J et al (2015) Antidepressant ef-
Studerus E, Gamma A, Vollenweider FX (2010) Psychometric evaluation
fects of a single dose of ayahuasca in patients with recurrent depres-
of the altered states of consciousness rating scale (OAV). PLoS One
sion: a preliminary report. Rev Bras Psiquiatr 37:13-20
5(8):e12412. https://doi.org/10.137 1/journal.pone.0012412
Pavlov A, Kameg K, Cline TW, Chiapetta L, Stark S, Mitchell AM
Summer L (1992) Music: the aesthetic elixir. J Association Music
(2017) Music therapy as a nonpharmacological intervention for anx-
Imagery:43-54
iety in patients with a thought disorder. Issues Ment Health Nurs
Summer L (2011) Client perspectives on the music in guided imagery and
38(3):285—288. https://doi.org/10.1080/01612840.2016.12645
16
music (GIM). Qualitative Inquiries inMusic Therapy 6:34-77
Pothoulaki M, MacDonald R, Flowers P (2012) An interpretative phe-
nomenological analysis of an improvisational music therapy pro- Swift TC, Belser AB, Agin-Liebes G, Devenot N, Terrana S, Friedman

gram for cancer patients. J Music Ther 49(1):45-67. https://doi. HL, Guss J, Bossis AP, Ross S (2017) Cancer at the dinner table:

org/10.1093/¡mt/49.1.45 experiences of psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy for the treatment

Preller KH, Herdener M, Pokorny T, Planzer A, Kraehenmann R, of cancer-related distress. J Humanist Psychol 57(5):488-519.

Stámpfli P, Liechti ME, Seifritz E, Vollenweider FX (2017) The https://doi.org/10.1177/0022167817715966

fabric of meaning and subjective effects in LSD-induced states de- Tagliazucchi E, Roseman L, Kaelen M, Orban C, Muthukumaraswamy

pend on serotonin 2A receptor activation. Curr Biol 27(3):451-457. SD, Murphy K, Laufs H, Leech R, McGonigle J, Crossley N,

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.12.030 Bullmore E, Williams T, Bolstridge M, Feilding A, Nutt DJ,
Quednow BB, Kometer M, Geyer MA, Vollenweider FX (2012) Carhart-Harris R (2016) Increased global functional connectivity

Psilocybin-induced deficits in automatic and controlled inhibition correlates with LSD-induced ego dissolution. Curr Biol 26(8):
are attenuated by ketanserin in healthy human volunteers. 1043-1050. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.02.010

Neuropsychopharmacology 37(3):630-640. https://doi.org/10. Vollenweider FX, Csomor PA, Knappe B, Geyer MA, Quednow BB
1038/npp.2011.228 (2007) The effects of the preferential 5-HT2A agonist psilocybin
Richards, W. (2015). Sacred knowledge: psychedelics and religious ex- on prepulse inhibition of startle in healthy human volunteers depend
periences (Columbia University Press), DOI: https://doi.org/10. on interstimulus interval. Neuropsychopharmacology 32(9):1876—
7312/columbia/9780231174060.001.0001 1887. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.npp.1301324
Roseman, L., Nutt, D., and Carhart-Harris, R. (2017). Quality of acute Watts R, Day C, Krzanowski J, Nutt D, Carhart-Harris R (2017) Patients’
psychedelic experience predicts therapeutic efficacy of psilocybin accounts of increased “connectedness” and “acceptance” after psi-
for treatment-resistant depression. Rev. locybin for treatment-resistant depression. J Humanist Psychol
Ross S, Bossis A, Guss J, Agin-Liebes G, Malone T, Cohen B, Mennenga 57(5):520-564. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022 167817709585
SE, Belser A, Kalliontzi K, Babb J, Su Z, Corby P, Schmidt BL Whelton WJ (2004) Emotional processes in psychotherapy: evidence
(2016) Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilocy- across therapeutic modalities. Clin Psychol Psychother 11(1):58-
bin treatment for anxiety and depression in patients with life- 71. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpp.392


a Springer
