[PAGE 001]

| Tuning in: Psychedelics and music
1828

BERGE


ser LE ee: JOSE ELIEZER MIKOSZ* ©
AKADEMIAI KIADO


UNESPAR Campus Curitiba I, Parana, Brazil


Gelberg, Steven J. (2025). Tuning In: Experiencing Music in Psychedelic States. Albany, NY:
rnal ofof Psyche
Journal Psychedeli
delic State University of New York Press.
Studies

9 (2025) 4, 311-312 Tuning In can be considered a pioneering study on the role of music in psychedelic states,
DOE exploring how these experiences can expand our aesthetic perception, deepen our listening,
10.1556/2054.2025.00457 and enrich musical appreciation. The work skillfully blends the author's personal narrative
© 2025 The Author(s) with academic research and interviews with musicians, psychologists, and mystics, creating a
beautifully articulated testimony on the intersection between sound and non-ordinary states
of consciousness.
Steven J. Gelberg is an American author and scholar whose personal and intellectual
journey has spanned spirituality, religious criticism, music, and psychedelia. Gelberg was
a member of ISKCON (International Society for Krishna Consciousness) from 1970 to
BOOK REVIEW 1987, during which time he adopted the spiritual name Subhananda Das. During those 17
years, he served in a variety of roles within the organization, including writer, editor, and
®) director of interfaith relations. Gelberg earned a Master of Theological Studies from
Harvard Divinity School in 1990. Gelberg is the author and editor of several works that

nen tot
updates
reflect his spiritual and intellectual journey, including Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna: Five
Distinguished Scholars on the Krishna Movement in the West (1983), a collection of in-
terviews with scholars on the Hare Krishna movement, India in a Mind’s Eye: Travels and
Ruminations of an Ambivalent Pilgrim an account of his travels to India and reflections
on his spiritual experience, and essays such as On Leaving ISKCON and Oh, The Things I
Learned! in which he shares his experiences and critiques of the Hare Krishna movement.
In Turning In Gelberg guides the reader through a journey that begins with his own
experience with music and psychedelics and expands into a broader and more philo-
sophical investigation. Music, as he affirms, acts as a profound conduit during psyche-
delic sessions—a mediator between the conscious and unconscious, the sensory and the
spiritual. Throughout the book, he suggests various musical selections, divided by specific
themes, with direct links to Spotify playlists. These carefully curated lists function as a
living sonic library, rich in variety and with enormous potential to catalyze mystical
experiences.
In recent decades, we have seen growing interest in using music as a therapeutic tool in
psychedelic contexts. Furthermore, as the author points out, music has been recognized as
a foundational element of deep psychedelic journeys since the 1950s. The book thus fills a
significant gap by offering practical guidance and specific musical suggestions that can be
used by therapists and practitioners alike.
The expanding field of psychedelic research in the West has reconfigured our under-
standing of spirituality, pointing toward experiences that transcend the boundaries of ra-
tionality. When paired with music, this expansion reaches new heights: this combination
opens doors to subtle discoveries that are difficult to express in ordinary language but
resonate with archetypal and emotional truth.
According to Gelberg, during psychedelic sessions, music can evoke love, transporting the
listener to other realms of experience, stirring deep emotions, offering comfort, and inspiring
profound transformation. Its therapeutic power lies especially in its paradoxical nature: while
it can provide emotional anchoring, it simultaneously propels consciousness toward
“Corresponding author. expansion. Participant-centered musical selection and openness to deep listening are directly
E-mail: antar.mikosz@unespar.edu.br, . . . . u:
antarm@gmail.com associated with both immediate and long-term positive outcomes.
Gelberg argues that music contributes to the psychedelic experience in several ways: it can
facilitate and energize the journey’s onset, provide structure and containment, touch the
emotional and spiritual core of the individual, serve as a mirror of the unconscious, create
+ Journals imaginal worlds of beauty and transcendence, and transmit profound meaning.


Unauthenticated | Downloaded 05/31/26 05:54 PM UTC

[PAGE 002]

312 Journal of Psychedelic Studies 9 (2025) 4, 311-312


In altered states, aesthetic sensitivity becomes heightened “Ethereal Dreams,” “Samadhi, Electric Dreams,” “A
» cc


—and this includes a transformed way of listening to music. Sacred Mind,” “Unconditional Love, ” “Spacetime CurvaFamiliar sounds are perceived in entirely new ways, and ture,” among others.
melodies once considered ordinary can become portals to e World music and the collective unconscious: “World
revelatory experiences. Listening becomes embodied, Music,” “Tribal, Trance, Drums, Shamanic, Ayahuasca,”
immersive, and at times even visual, thanks to synesthesia or “Earth Women Sing,” “Indian Classical Music,” “Hindu
intensified mental imagery. Prayers, Meditations, Devotions,” “Tamboura Drones,”
The author organizes a range of Spotify playlists, divided “Psychedelica Indica.”
into themes that reflect emotional or intentional states. e Sound alternatives to music: “The Music of Nature,”
Among them: “White Noise,” and other soundscapes that include nat-
ural sounds, often used in electronic music geared toward
e Classical and neoclassical music for psychedelic states:
psychedelic experiences.
“Classical Music for Psychedelic States,” “Neo-classical for
Psychonauts.” It's worth emphasizing that Tuning In is not intended as a
e Emotional and spiritual qualities: “Positive Mood,” technical guide or a general introduction to the therapeutic
“Peace, Serenity,” “Compassion, Love, Benevolence, use of psychedelics. Its focus is more sensitive and poetic: it is
Tenderness,” “Introspection, Reflection, Nostalgia,” an inquiry into the musical experience within expanded states
“Sweet Sorrow,” “Hoping, Longing, Yearning.” of consciousness. As the author himself explains, his main
e Exploration and transcendence: “Fantastic Journeys, motivation was the image of a single person—anywhere in the
Mystical Trips,” “Christian Mystical Music,” “Women world—immersed in a psychedelic journey, deeply attuned to
» cc


Composers.” one of the musical pieces from these recommended playlists,
e Ambient and evocative music: “Mycelium Dawn,” and surrendered to ecstasy, introspection, or wonder. That
“Kaleidoscopic Mind,” “Utopian Moon Garden,” person, he tells us, could very well be you.


Open Access statement. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium for non-commercial purposes, provided
the original author and source are credited, a link to the CC License is provided, and changes - if any - are indicated.


Unauthenticated | Downloaded 05/31/26 05:54 PM UTC
