[PAGE 001]

SECOND EDITION


Treating Survivors
of Childhood Abuse
and Interpersonal
Trauma |
STAIR Narrative Therapy


Marylene Cloitre,
Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo,
Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen

[PAGE 003]

TREATING SURVIVORS OF CHILDHOOD ABUSE
AND INTERPERSONAL TRAUMA

[PAGE 004]

Treating Survivors
of Childhood Abuse
and Interpersonal
Trauma
STAIR Narrative Therapy


Marylene Cloitre
Lisa R. Cohen
Kile M. Ortigo
Christie Jackson
Karestan C. Koenen


Sp
THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York London

[PAGE 005]

Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
370 Seventh Avenue, Suite 1200, New York, NY 10001
www.guilford.com


All rights reserved


Except as noted, no part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming,
recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.


Printed in the United States of America


This book is printed on acid-free paper.


Last digitis printnumber: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


LIMITED DUPLICATION LICENSE

These materials are intended for use only by mental health professionals.

The publisher grants to individual purchasers of this book nonassignable permission to reproduce all
materials for which permission is specifically granted in a footnote. This license is limited to you, the
individual purchaser, for personal use or use with clients. This license does not grant the right to reproduce
these materials for resale, redistribution, electronic display, or any other purposes (including but not limited
to books, pamphlets, articles, video- or audiotapes, blogs, file-sharing sites, Internet or intranet sites,
and handouts or slides for lectures, workshops, or webinars, whether or not a fee is charged). Permission
to reproduce these materials for these and any other purposes must be obtained in writing from the
Permissions Department of Guilford Publications.


The authors have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information that is
complete and generally in accord with the standards of practice that are accepted at the time of publication.
However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes in behavioral, mental health, or medical sciences,
neither the authors, nor the editors and publisher, nor any other party who has been involved in the preparation or
publication of this work warrants that the information contained herein is in every respect accurate or complete,
and they are not responsible for any errors or omissions or the results obtained from the use of such information.
Readers are encouraged to confirm the information contained in this book with other sources.


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data

Names: Cloitre, Marylene, author.
Title: Treating survivors of childhood abuse and interpersonal trauma : STAIR narrative therapy /
Marylene Cloitre [and four others].
Other titles: Treating survivors of childhood abuse.
Description: Second edition. | New York : The Guilford Press, 2020. | Revision of: Treating survivors
of childhood abuse / Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Karestan C. Koenen. c2006. |
Includes bibliographical references and index. |
Identifiers: LCCN 2020008162 | ISBN 9781462543281 (paperback) | ISBN 9781462543298 (hardcover)
Subjects: LCSH: Adult child sexual abuse victims—Treatment. | Psychotherapy.
Classification: LCC RC569.5.A28 C48 2020 | DDC 616.85/83690651—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020008162

[PAGE 006]

To our clients,
who have inspired us with their courage in coming to treatment,
confronting their traumas,
and daring to hope for the possibility of different lives
from the ones they have known

[PAGE 007]

A survivor ultimately has two psychological possibilities: to shut down or to open
up. Usually the survivor does both... . The protean self opts for opening out. . . .
This includes the basic satisfaction, even joy, in being alive, in not having died,
along with the sense ofhaving undergone an experience that is illuminating in its
pain. Survival also implies persevering, holding on, maintaining one’s existence . . .
a physical and mental strength. That sense of victory over destruction is evident
in gatherings of survivors . .. where one hears clearly the words, even if actually
unspoken: “We are here! Were alive! We have won!”

—ROBERT JAY LIFTON (1993, pp. 81, 82)

[PAGE 008]

About the Authors


Marylene Cloitre, PhD, is Associate Director of Research in the National Center for PTSD
Dissemination and Training Division, Palo Alto VA Health Care System; Clinical Professor (Affiliate), Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University; and
Research Professor, Department of Psychiatry, NYU Langone Medical Center. Dr. Cloitre's
primary clinical and research interests are the developmental consequences and treatment
of childhood abuse in adults and adolescents. She is the recipient of the Award for Outstanding Contributions to Practice in Trauma Psychology from Division 56 of the American
Psychological Association, is past president of the International Society for Traumatic Stress
Studies, and was a member of the World Health Organizations ICD-11 working group on
trauma spectrum disorders.


Lisa R. Cohen, PhD, has maintained a private practice in clinical psychology in New York
City since 2001. Dr. Cohen specializes in the treatment of trauma and stress-related disorders, as well as co-occurring anxiety, mood, eating, and substance use disorders. Previously,
she was a Research Scientist at the New York State Psychiatric Institute at Columbia University Medical Center, where she focused on developing, evaluating, and disseminating
evidence-based psychotherapies for PTSD and substance use disorders.


Kile M. Ortigo, PhD, is Program Director in the National Center for PTSD Dissemination and Training Division, Palo Alto VA Health Care System. He leads a national initiative
to evaluate and implement webSTAIR, an online program based on STAIR. Dr. Ortigo’s
research and writing have largely focused on personality, trauma, adult attachment, and
lifespan developmental models of self. He has a private practice at the Center for Existential Exploration, which he founded, in Palo Alto, California. He serves as the lead editor for
Psychedelic Support, an online resource and directory of clinicians.


vil

[PAGE 009]

viii About the Authors


Christie Jackson, PhD, is Director of Clinical Training for webSTAIR, an online program
based on STAIR. Since 2005, Dr. Jackson has maintained a private practice in clinical
psychology in New York City. She formerly served as Director of the PTSD Clinics at the
Manhattan and Honolulu VA Medical Centers. She has worked with Marylene Cloitre since
2007 on numerous projects to evaluate and disseminate STAIR within the VA and in the
community. She currently serves as Lead Trainer for the STAIR Institute.


Karestan C. Koenen, PhD, is Professor of Psychiatric Epidemiology at the Harvard T. H.
Chan School of Public Health. She uses a developmental approach to understanding the
epidemiology of trauma exposure and stress-related mental disorders such as PTSD and
depression. Dr. Koenen is a recipient of the Award for Outstanding Contributions to the
Science of Trauma Psychology from Division 56 of the American Psychological Association
and the Robert S. Laufer, PhD, Memorial Award for Outstanding Scientific Achievement
from the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies. Dr. Koenen also advocates for
survivors of violence and trauma.

[PAGE 010]

Preface
What Is the Interrupted Life?


Wren the first edition of this book was published in 2006, we focused on the “interrupted
life” of those who had experienced childhood sexual or physical abuse. We noted that abuse
interrupted the development of an individual's emotional, social, and intellectual capacities,
and accordingly, their growth as a capable and confident person. We created Skills Training in Affective and Interpersonal Regulation (STAIR) Narrative Therapy in large part as a
“resource rehabilitation” program, intended to connect survivors of abuse with an enriching
learning environment that they did not experience during their childhood.
Over the 20 years that we have delivered the treatment and trained other mental health
providers, we have realized that there are many other circumstances in which the development of key life resources can be interrupted. These circumstances include emotional abuse
or neglect in any of its varieties, such as inadequate nutrition, inconsistent parenting, or
inappropriate supervision. Even more remarkably, we have observed that individuals whose
predominant traumas occur in later life, such as domestic violence and exposure to genocide, terrorism, combat, or sustained civil war, also benefit from “resource rehabilitation” of
emotional and relational capacities. Long periods of exposure to trauma can and usually do
cause deterioration in these capacities. Furthermore, many populations who confront systematic discrimination and social prejudices (e.g., ethnic minorities, LGBTQ individuals)
experience a kind of chronic stress that, when combined with other forms of trauma, leads
to similar depletion of internal and external resources.
For all these reasons, we now recommend the treatment described in this book as
relevant to survivors of all kinds of severe and/or chronic interpersonal traumas, such as
childhood sexual abuse, domestic violence, and community violence. The conceptual frame
of the book remains focused on the impact of chronic interpersonal traumas, but does so

[PAGE 011]

X Preface


through a broad model of resource loss and then a more specific model of resource loss
when trauma occurs during the developmental years (Chapters 2-3). The rationale for the
treatment (Chapters 4-7), the assessment strategies and guidelines for implementation
(Chapters 8-9), and the actual application of the treatment (Chapters 10-26) are appropri-
ate for survivors of a wide range of traumas.
The program presented in this book, STAIR Narrative Therapy, comprises two modules.
The first module, STAIR, has been explicitly developed to generate and strengthen social
and emotional resources for effective living in the present (Chapters 10-19). A treatment for
trauma, however, would not be complete if it did not in some way address the equally pro-
found and widely recognized problem of traumatic memories. Because the emotions associ-
ated with traumatic memories—terror, humiliation, and betrayal—are extremely painful,
the memories are often avoided. As a result, the traumatic memories are not assessed or
integrated in any meaningful or coherent way into ones understanding of oneself or the
world. But the emotional power of the memories remains, driving their expression through
intrusive reexperiencing and reenactments of the trauma, all of which interfere with the
capacity to live meaningfully and fully in the present. The inability to experience oneself as
coherent and existing through time is another way in which life is “interrupted” for the survivor of trauma. The second module of the treatment, Narrative Therapy (Chapters 20-26),
thus focuses on reviewing a range of traumatic memories, for the purposes of making mean-
ing of these experiences and integrating them into the context of the individual's life story
to help provide a coherent sense of self.
Narrative Therapy provides a structure and strategy for approaching, managing, and
organizing traumatic experiences that have been unaddressed but are still quite alive with
emotional power. Narrative Therapy begins with the emotional processing of fear memories
via traditional imaginal exposure techniques (see Chapters 22 and 23). However, we have
extended this work in two ways. First, we have developed and systematically employed
“contextualization” strategies, grounded in recent models of autobiographical memory, to
organize and construct a “narrative of self.” Second, through these strategies, the client and
therapist can safely explore and effectively organize a sense of self around another two criti-
cal affective themes that often burden the survivors of chronic interpersonal trauma: shame
and betrayal (Chapter 24) and loss and grief (Chapter 25).
We have described two ways in which chronic trauma interrupts life. It disrupts the
development of (or causes substantial deterioration in) important emotional and relational
capacities that support effective living. It also disrupts a sense of coherence and continu-
ity in personal identity. Given these pernicious effects, we have chosen the phrase “STAIR
Narrative Therapy for the interrupted life” to describe our treatment approach, because
it conveys a message of hope. It recognizes the importance and possibility of repair to the
damaged self. We also propose the possibility that treatment may extend an individual
's
capacities beyond what should have been developed or maintained if not for trauma. In
regenerating important life skills and a coherent and revitalized sense of self, we hope that
clients can, in essence, resume the realization of hidden potential.

[PAGE 012]

Preface xl


WHO CAN BENEFIT FROM THIS BOOK?


This book provides an evidence-based treatment for mental health care providers who
work with survivors of interpersonal trauma. The treatment was originally developed for
survivors of childhood abuse (i.e., all people who have experienced sexual abuse, physical
abuse, or neglect as children). The treatment was also originally developed for women.
However, it has also been successfully used with men and gender-diverse clients, and with
clients of varied ages (including children and adolescents) who have experienced maltreatment in early life and/or many other forms of interpersonal violence (see Chapter 8). For
this reason, we have broadened the language of this book to be more gender-neutral (e.g.,
“they” and “them” when a specific gender identity is not specified or relevant) and to use
person-first language that emphasizes the person behind the trauma and the clinical presentation, rather than a disorder or negative characteristic (e.g., a “survivor of child abuse”
rather than “an abused child”). We hope these changes reflect our growing awareness (and
that of societies and the profession as a whole) of the benefits of inclusivity, diversity, and
empowerment.


THE TREATMENT PHILOSOPY


The orientation of the treatment is a blend of principles from the cognitive-behavioral and
the attachment-interpersonal-object relational traditions evolving from the work of Bowlby
(1988). The intervention techniques rely heavily on those from the cognitive-behavioral
therapy (CBT) tradition. These include, for example, interventions that help individuals
acknowledge and appraise the meaning of their traumatic experiences (exposure and cognitive reappraisal). They also include strategies for identifying the implicit interpersonal
schemas that guide beliefs, feelings, and behaviors, and revising them through reappraisal
processes and the use of role play to facilitate new learning and behavioral changes. They
also adhere to a philosophy implicit in CBT: that with practice, new ways of behaving, feeling, and thinking are possible. In this way, CBT is a remarkably practical and optimistic
psychotherapeutic tradition.
The theoretical framework of the treatment falls squarely within the interpersonal tradition, particularly as it has evolved from the work of Bowlby. The use of this framework
emphasizes the importance of early life attachments and the long-term consequences that
disturbances in caregiving relationships have in adult functioning. The cognitive-behavioral
strategies are the means by which the client identifies these problems and works toward
change. For example, problems in relationships related to early abuse are described through
the attachment concept of “internal working models of relating.” This concept is operationalized in the practical form of the Relationship Patterns Worksheets—tools that could easily
fit into many cognitive therapies and are used here to assess and change ideas about the self
and others.

[PAGE 013]

XII Preface


HOW TO USE THIS BOOK


This book is intended to provide therapists with the skills, competence, and confidence
to treat survivors of chronic interpersonal trauma. We have provided a session-by-session
guide to a treatment that is grounded in theory, has been tested in its benefits, and has been
refined over 20 years with feedback from our clients. The book provides practical, “nuts-
and-bolts” guidance for all the technical aspects of the treatment. Equally important, the
book is organized and written to highlight the rationale for the treatment and the primary
goals behind each intervention, so that a therapist can use STAIR Narrative Therapy guided
by the principles of the treatment as they fit a particular client, rather than feel compelled
to follow the modules, sessions, and interventions in a lockstep fashion.
The book is divided into three parts. Part I characterizes the effects of chronic trauma
in the context of a resource loss model and an attachment—developmental framework; Part
II describes the theoretical and empirical bases for the treatment rationale and outcome
data reporting the benefits of the therapy; and Part III provides session-by-session descrip-
tions of the treatment preceded by assessment and treatment guidelines. The book as a
whole is intended to convey a way of thinking about survivors of interpersonal trauma that
can facilitate effective therapy. Theory, research, and clinical service are unified under the
theme that recovery from such trauma requires recognition and redress of a life history in
which terrible things have happened—and, equally important, recognition and redress of
a life history in which many important normative events and experiences have been absent
or diminished.
In Part III, the STAIR module (Module I) targets the generation of social and emotional
resources (a focus on the present), while the Narrative Therapy module (Module II) aims
to resolve symptoms related to traumatic memories (a focus on the past). Many survivors of
trauma will have both types of problems and so will benefit from the use of both treatment
components. But a therapist can consider using only one or the other, as suits the needs of
a particular client at a particular time. Such judgments are aided by a review of treatment
guidelines (Chapter 8), strategies for evaluating when to make the transition from skills
training to narrative work (Chapter 20), and a review of the session summaries provided in
Part III (the summary is the first box in each chapter from 10 to 19 and from 21 to 26). These
“at-a-glance” summaries identify what matters most in the sessions (e.g., the development
of emotional awareness) and why it matters. This is intended to liberate the therapist from
the assumption that, in order to be successful, a session must be completed as described.
Rather, the theme of any given session should prompt the therapist to ask: “How significant
is this problem for my client? How skilled is my client in each of these activities? Which of
these strategies address my clients current problems?” Ideally, the therapist and client will
work together to answer these questions. The selection of the interventions and the choice
of specific goals to be targeted are the results of a collaborative effort.
It is well known that the therapeutic alliance influences the benefits of any treatment,
and this finding is particularly true for survivors of abuse (see Cloitre, Stovall-McClough,
Miranda, & Chemtob, 2004). For this reason, discussions of the nature and role of the

[PAGE 014]

Preface xiii


therapeutic alliance are integrated into several chapters of the book. Chapter 8 provides
an overview of the value of the therapeutic relationship and strategies for building a good
working relationship, particularly in the context of potential ruptures common in work with
survivors of trauma. Several sessions identify specific therapist attitudes and behaviors that
support and facilitate effective implementation of the session interventions—for example,
those related to emotional awareness (Chapter 11) and narratives of shame and loss (Chapters 24 and 25).
Finally, we have written with awareness of the need for therapists to manage their own
mental and physical health, and have highlighted the importance of therapist self-care (see
Chapter 8). We hope that the philosophy and guidelines for treatment we have set out provide compassion and understanding for their clients’ condition, and in doing so protect and
empower therapists in their work.

[PAGE 015]

Acknowledgments


W. wish to thank Ashley Bauer, Lori Davis, Chetali Gupta, Shaili Jain, Annabel Prinz,
and Brandon Weiss, who contributed as students, postdoctoral fellows, and colleagues to
the development, adaptations, and evaluation of this treatment. We would also like to thank
those individuals who have been especially important in our professional development and
personal growth, and who have provided inspiration, enthusiasm, and support for us during
the writing of this revised edition: Jerilyn Brownstein, Eugene Canotal, George and Susan
Cohen, David and Joyce DeArman, Caleb Ferguson, Maximilian Greer, Denise Hien, Marc
Horowitz, Alice Jackson, Nick Jollymore, Kathleen Koenen, Carol and Arvil Ortigo, Verna
and Ted Ortigo, Lorcan Purcell, David Schroeder, and Thea Stone.


XiV

[PAGE 016]

Contents


er
gg Theoretical Frameworks

A Resource Loss Model 3

Attachment: When Protector and Perpetrator Are One 13

Development in the Context of Deprivation 21


Foundations of Treatment

Treatment Rationale 33

Building Emotional and Social Resources: Overview of STAIR 49

Working with Traumatic Memories: Overview of Narrative Therapy 61

Extending the Narrative: Transforming Shame and Loss 68

Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 81

Assessment of Client and Match for Treatment 104


STAIR Narrative Therapy, Session by Session

: |. Skills Training in Affective and Interpersonal Regulation (STAIR):
Building Resources

0. The Resource of Hope: Introducing the Client to Treatment 127

11. The Resource of Feeling: Emotional Awareness 144


XV

[PAGE 017]

xvi Contents


Emotion Regulation: Focus on the Body 173

Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behavior 194

Emotionally Engaged Living: Distress Tolerance 220

The Resource of Connection: Understanding Relationship Patterns 241

Changing Relationship Patterns: Focus on Assertiveness 256

Changing Relationship Patterns: Managing Power 280

Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness 296

Self-Compassion and Summary of Skills Training 315


Narrative Therapy: Facing the Past and Imagining the Future

Moving from Skills Training to Narrative Therapy: 339
How Do You Know Your Client Is Ready?

Introduction to Narrative Therapy 345

Narrative of First Memory 364

Narratives of Fear 377

Narratives of Shame 390

Narratives of Loss 405

The Final Session 417


New Developments for STAIR Narrative Therapy 429


References 437

Index 448


Purchasers of this book can download and print additional copies of the handouts
and some boxes at www. guilford.com/cloitre-forms for personal use or use with clients
(see copyright page for details).

[PAGE 018]

Theoretical Frameworks

[PAGE 020]

A Resource Loss Model


Childhood abuse is not a diagnosis but a life experience.
—FRANK W. PUTNAM (2004)


The treatment described in this book is the result of more than two decades of listening
and responding to the needs and concerns of clients with histories of childhood abuse and
other interpersonal trauma experiences. When the first edition of this book was published,
Skills Training in Affective and Interpersonal Regulation (STAIR) Narrative Therapy was
the first demonstrably effective treatment developed specifically for survivors of childhood
abuse. It has undergone rigorous empirical evaluation and has been demonstrated as efficacious, feasible, and (most importantly) acceptable to survivors. The motivation for the first
edition of this book was derived from the observation that mental health services were not
providing programs for survivors of childhood abuse. Fortunately, this is no longer the case;
many health care systems are striving to provide trauma-informed services, including the
use of STAIR Narrative Therapy.
This new edition reflects the results of more than a decade of work with both survivors
of childhood abuse, as well as other survivors of complex interpersonal trauma, including
refugees and veterans of combat. We came to understand that the treatment was applicable
and valuable to these populations. We also learned that individuals presenting with adulthood interpersonal trauma, such as first responders to the September 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks, could develop a complex trauma symptom profile, depending on how horrendous
the exposure had been and the degree to which they had social and emotional resources
to support them in the recovery process. We realized that STAIR Narrative Therapy was
applicable, and indeed could be successfully delivered, to these populations with little
adaptation (Levitt, Malta, Martin, Davis, & Cloitre, 2007). The current chapter describes
the principles of STAIR Narrative Therapy within the framework of a resource loss model.
This model is applicable to individuals who have experienced trauma as children or adults.
Chapters 2 and 3 focus specifically on attachment-related resource losses that occur as
results of abuse and neglect during childhood.

[PAGE 021]

4 PART I. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


TRAUMA AND A NEW DIAGNOSIS: COMPLEX PTSD


Community studies indicate that trauma is common, with over 70% ofthe global population
reporting exposure to at least one traumatic event, and 30% reporting exposure to four or
more such events (Benjet et al., 2016). Traumatic experiences include those that are interpersonal and often involve violence perpetrated by one person on another, such as physical
assault, rape, and combat; they also include other types of experiences, such as serious accidents and natural or human-made disasters. The majority of interpersonal traumas, which
include sexual and physical violence, occur before the age of 18 (Kessler et al., 2017). Thus
the most devastating traumatic experiences occur to those least developmentally able to
cope with them. Childhood abuse and neglect or other maltreatment (all of which are types
of interpersonal trauma) are particularly common; more than one in four persons have experienced abuse by a caregiver by the age of 17 (Finkelhor, Turner, Shattuck, & Hamby, 2013).
Since the first edition of this book appeared in 2006, childhood abuse specifically and
trauma broadly have been recognized as major public health problems (Teicher & Samson,
2013). Evidence for the long-term adverse mental and physical health effects of childhood
trauma in particular has been recognized by the American Heart Association (Suglia et al.,
2018). Persons with histories of childhood abuse have an earlier age at onset of psychopathology, greater symptom severity, more comorbidity, a greater risk for suicide, and poorer
treatment response than those with no history of abuse who have the same diagnoses (Teicher & Samson, 2013).
The impairment and psychic suffering caused by childhood abuse are enormous. In
2018, the World Health Organization (WHO) identified the particularly complex nature
of the effects of childhood abuse and other chronic and sustained interpersonal traumas
through the introduction of a diagnosis, complex posttraumatic stress disorder (CPTSD),
into the 11th revision of the International Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems (ICD-11, WHO, 2018). ICD-11 is the official diagnostic system used worldwide,
including (finally) in the United States. The diagnosis includes not only the traditional
symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), but also the effects that trauma can
have on emotion regulation, self-concept, and relational capacities. When the first edition
of this book was published, the diagnosis of PTSD as presented by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition, text revision (DSM-IV-TR; American
Psychiatric Association, 2000), was the dominant formulation of the psychological effects
of trauma. At that time, we discussed problems we observed among survivors of childhood
abuse that extended beyond DSM-defined PTSD, particularly regarding emotion regulation, interpersonal functioning, and negative self-concept, but that were not officially recognized. Such symptoms are now addressed in DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association,
2013), which has added a symptom cluster of “negative alterations in cognitions and mood”
that references negative beliefs about self and others, as well as feelings of detachment from
others. It has also added a “with dissociative symptoms” subtype of PTSD that identifies
one type of emotion regulation difficulty (hypoactivation). However, the inclusion of the
CPTSD diagnosis in ICD-11, which provides a coherent and empirically supported profile of symptoms typically associated with complex trauma, makes the problems typically

[PAGE 022]

1. A Resource Loss Model 5


seen among survivors of childhood abuse easier to recognize, assess, and treat. We discuss
the specific symptom profile associated with ICD-11 CPTSD, as well as its assessment, in
Chapters 8 and 9.
The purpose of this book is to provide a treatment guide for individuals who have
experienced childhood abuse and other interpersonal traumas that result in a wide range
of symptoms, including those found in ICD-11 CPTSD. We believe that this book is now
needed more than ever, as a result of the addition of CPTSD to the diagnostic nomenclature. However, we recognize that not all of the problems that survivors of childhood
abuse and other severe interpersonal traumas experience are captured by this diagnosis.
Accordingly, it is our intention to provide a conceptual framework and a treatment program that address the experience of chronic interpersonal trauma, rather than a diagnosis.
The formulation of the effects of trauma as a resource loss provides an explanatory frame
for PTSD and CPTSD, as well as for other disorders and psychological problems that can
result from various types of interpersonal trauma. The treatment program presented in
this book, STAIR Narrative Therapy, addresses all problems represented in the diagnosis
of CPTSD. It can also address other problems, once these are understood in the context of
resource loss and resource rehabilitation. The remainder of this chapter describes trauma
as a resource loss phenomenon. This includes specifically the types of losses resulting from
trauma that occurs during childhood, particularly at the hands of caregivers; the ways in
which these losses are represented in the CPTSD diagnosis; and the rationale for STAIR
Narrative Therapy as a resource rehabilitation program.


ALL TRAUMAS AS RESOURCE LOSS EVENTS


Resource loss is a critical and universal feature of all traumas: Life after a trauma is diminished. Depending on the trauma, the resource loss may be psychological (such as a person's
sense of security, optimism, and social support), material (such as a home, family, schooling
or employment, and a community within which to prosper), or both. In addition, certain
types of traumatic events and their harshest consequences befall those who are already in
circumstances with limited resources. Trauma often comes to people with fewer financial
resources. For instance, persons who cannot afford to live in areas outside of hurricane
paths and floodplains experience more hurricanes and floods, and more devastating consequences from those natural disasters. Similarly, those who have fewer physical and psychological resources to protect themselves, such as children, elderly individuals, and injured
persons, are likely to experience interpersonal violence. Forcible rape among females, for
example, is not randomly distributed across the lifespan, but occurs predominantly in the
vulnerable years of childhood and adolescence; as noted above, over half of sexual and
physical assault occurs by the age of 18 (Kessler et al., 2017).
In addition, those who are most vulnerable to trauma because of limited resources will
have more difficulty recovering. The irony of trauma is that recovery requires the presence
of resources greater than those the victim often had in the first place. Rebuilding a house
destroyed by a hurricane requires more than bricks, mortar, and the owners own toil; it

[PAGE 023]

6 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


also requires a team of roofers, bricklayers, plumbers, and painters. Just as the homeowner's
own resources are not enough, the resources of a survivor of trauma are often insufficient
without additional investment from the outside. This is particularly true of persons who
have been traumatized as children. Childhood is a time when an individual is vulnerable
to victimization, and once victimization occurs, the child has even fewer psychological and
social resources than before with which to negotiate a recovery process.
Lastly, the traumatized state is not static. If resource regeneration does not occur, the
result is not stasis, but rather continued resource loss and degeneration (see Hobfoll, Mancini, Hall, Canetti, & Bonanno, 2011). The unrepaired or partially repaired house will be
buffeted by wind, risk further decay, or be entirely destroyed in the onslaught of another
hurricane. Similarly, without resource recovery, the psychological and social trajectory for a
survivor of trauma will be vulnerable to the vicissitudes of both ordinary life stressors and
additional traumas. The risk of a downward trajectory is particularly relevant and evident
among those traumatized in childhood. The mandate of childhood is growth—physical,
psychological, and social. Trauma reduces the resources necessary not only for recovery,
but also for the developmental tasks integral to childhood. As a result, the achievement of
such tasks is often compromised, with impairments evident in poor life functioning and
accumulating into adulthood.
The resource loss model thus informs our understanding of trauma recovery. Trauma
recovery requires resource recovery (Hollifield et al., 2016). Accordingly, the principle of
intervention to which this program adheres is one of recovery of resource losses—in particular, the rehabilitation of the psychological, emotional, and social capacities whose development has been interrupted by trauma.


PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAUMA AS A RESOURCE LOSS


“Trauma” has been defined in medicine as a circumstance in which some part of the body
has been suddenly damaged by a force so powerful that the body's natural protections are
unable to prevent injury and the body's natural healing abilities are inadequate to resolve
the injury without medical assistance (Stedman's Medical Dictionary, 2000). The word
“trauma” is, in fact, derived from the Greek for “wound.” As noted by Chris Brewin (2003),
Freud (1920/1955) was the first to define the term “psychic injury” by analogy to physical
injury. Freud described psychic trauma as an event that “penetrates a kind of mental skin
designed to protect a person from excessive external forces; trauma [is] essentially a “breach
in an otherwise efficacious barrier ” (Brewin, 2003, p. 4). The breach is the result not only of
the strength and impact of the external force, but of the inability of the organism or affected
area to deflect, absorb, neutralize, or compensate for the injury.
Following this analogy, we describe psychological trauma as a circumstance in which
an event overwhelms or exceeds a persons capacity to protect their psychic well-being and
integrity. It is a collision between an event and a person's resources, where the power of the
event is greater than the resources available for effective response and recovery. Deterioration in functioning occurs, and intervention or resources beyond those the individual has

[PAGE 024]

1. A Resource Loss Model 7


available are required for recovery. Psychological trauma, like physical trauma, represents
a complex relationship between an event and a response. The objective characteristics of
a potentially traumatic event—its force, strength, or “dose”—can be quantified, but the
impact of the event cannot be determined without taking into account the resources and
vulnerabilities of the particular individual who sustains the injury.


CHILDHOOD MALTREATMENT TRAUMA AS A RESOURCE LOSS


This analysis has significant implications for our understanding of childhood abuse or neglect
as a major trauma. To continue the medical analogy, it is well known that certain toxic chemicals and environmental pollutants have a significantly greater impact on children than on
adults, even when the amount of exposure or “dose” is the same. Children’s immature development makes them particularly vulnerable to the effects of such toxins. The impact on their
bodily systems is more potent than that experienced by adults, and the effect of a toxin on
one system has negative effects on other related and vulnerable developing systems.
Now let us consider, for example, sexual abuse as a powerful physical and psychological
toxin to the child because of their immature development. “Sexual abuse,” by definition, is
physical contact with a child for sexual purposes without the child’s meaningful consent.
This act is one in which the perpetrator takes ownership of the child’s body, which, by
definition, is the essential and basic territory of the self. Furthermore, sexual abuse often,
if not typically, co-occurs with physical abuse (e.g., Kim, Mennen, & Trickett, 2017). Thus a
typical picture of childhood abuse is one in which there are repeated exposures to multiple
forms of violence to the body. An effective response to this circumstance requires internal
and external resources of a kind and quantity not typically within a child’s grasp.
The internal or personal resources with which children can protect themselves are
limited by the simple fact of their life stage. Their levels of cognitive, affective, and physical
development place significant limits on their capacity to recognize, avoid, or escape perpetrators. Explicit or implied suggestions that sexual activity with a caregiver or other adult
is good, or that physical abuse or neglect is deserved, are difficult for children to oppose or
resist. They tend to be naive or confused by the threat hiding behind the blandishments and
compliments of perpetrators of sexual abuse. Their small size also makes them easy targets
for physically abusive adults.
In addition, children’s external resources are far more limited than those of adults.
When adults experience a trauma such as a rape or motor vehicle accident, or when they
witness violence, they are more likely to have a place of safety to recover and/or a social support network on which to rely on for care as needed. In contrast, children have little choice
about where they live or on whom they depend. Their home, the traditional source of safety,
is also often the source of what most threatens them. The caregivers on whom the children
depend are frequently those who are committing the transgressions against them. The necessary alternative in this situation—telling someone about a caregiver's abuse or neglect—
can be frightening in its implication of loss of home and caregiver, or attendant sense of
betrayal, regardless of the danger posed by the abuse. Even getting access to agencies and

[PAGE 025]

3 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


institutions that aim to protect children is difficult or impossible for a child to do alone, as it
legally requires the accompaniment or aid of other adults.
The resource limitations of children confronted with maltreatment lead us to define
such maltreatment as a trauma in all of its essential characteristics. In particular, children
who are abused are individuals who are helpless in the face of repeated, unavoidable, and
inescapable transgressions against their bodies. A child's resources are no match for the
immediate and consistent threat of physical or sexual assaults by an adult, particularly when
that adult is a parent or other caregiver.


SPECIFIC RESOURCE LOSSES ASSOCIATED
WITH CHILDHOOD MALTREATMENT


The resource limitations a child experiences in confronting the trauma of maltreatment
are defined by their life stage and yield a circumstance in which the child rarely succeeds
in warding off or neutralizing sexual or physical threats or neglect. In addition, once the
trauma occurs, its presence creates a cascade of resource losses that continue during its
typically chronic course and have significant consequences long after the abuse ends.
The most immediate consequences of childhood abuse or neglect are the losses of physical safety and physical integrity. Less evident, but equally profound and perhaps unique
to childhood maltreatment, are the losses of many psychological and social-developmental
opportunities and advances, which are diminished or negated as either direct or indirect
results of the maltreatment. Childhood abuse or neglect is a trauma perpetrated by an adult,
usually an important caregiver upon whom a child depends significantly for psychological
and material resources. It occurs during a time of life when many developmental tasks,
involving the growth of emotional and social competencies, are being completed; these tasks
require sustained contributions by caregivers, family members, and the community. Under
conditions of maltreatment, these necessary resources are often deficient or disturbed, compromising the child’s ability to complete these tasks successfully. Lastly, it is critical to note
that recovery from the effects of maltreatment, like recovery from all traumas, requires the
investment of additional “repairing” resources. But for a child or adolescent, this investment
often requires the initiative of the caregiver—and if the caregiver is the perpetrator of the
trauma, they are motivated to ignore, hide, or deny the maltreatment. This aspect of abuse
or neglect, the silence and stigma associated with it, adds to further resource loss (i.e., the
support and intervention of the community). All of these losses and the absence of intervention in a time of development conspire to create substantial functional impairment among
adult survivors of childhood maltreatment.
Acknowledging all these circumstances, we have catalogued the potential resource
losses that childhood maltreatment engenders in both the short and long term. They include
(1) loss of healthy attachment and healthy sense of self, (2) loss of effective guidance in the
development of emotional and social competencies, and (3) loss of support and connection
to the larger social community.

[PAGE 026]

1. A Resource Loss Model y


Loss of Healthy Attachment and Healthy Sense of Self

One of the most devastating aspects of childhood abuse or neglect is that the perpetrator of
the trauma is almost always a parent or other important caregiver. The implications of this
circumstance as a resource loss are staggering. The attachment of a child to a parent or other
primary caregiver creates the base for learning about the essentials of living. This attachment is a resource from which springs the evolution of effective agency, self-definition, and
autonomy. It is intended to provide sufficient safety and security for the child to explore
and learn about the world, and to grow in confidence and autonomy. Ideally, a caregiver
provides a secure base or home for “refueling” of resources to explore the world. This secure
base involves the caregiver's availability to act as a facilitator to the child’s growing capacities in self-management and effective interaction with the social and physical environment.
The power of the parent as a source of safety was documented during World War II. Child
psychiatrists in London noted that that children were better off staying with parents during
bombings than being separated from the parents for the “safety of the countryside’; indeed,
children did rather well if their parents did well by them and were psychologically healthy
themselves (Carey-Trefzer, 1949). Children look within their immediate environment, and
particularly to their caregivers, to gauge safety and interpret the level of threat in a particular situation.
Children use their parents as anchors or reference points to understand the meaning of
traumatic events, understand cause and effect, experience safety and support, obtain comfort, and receive guidance in effective coping. Maltreatment is essentially a betrayal of the
assumption of care by a parent for a child (DePrince et al., 2012), and in every aspect of the
betrayal of parenting responsibilities, there is a definable loss.
There is a profound loss of a sense of security and personal safety; associated with this
is a restricted capacity for curiosity and exploration about the world. There is also the loss
of a healthy trajectory of affective organization. The developing capacity for self-soothing is
challenged by physical and sexual violations in particular, and guidance from the abusing
caregiver is often absent, irregular, or deviant. Moreover, there is significant disturbance in
the development of a sense of autonomy and agency. Rather than recognize and protect the
necessary but vulnerable authority of the child as an agent of their own experience, the maltreating caregiver acts in such a way that the child becomes an extension of the caregiver's
own sexual and aggressive impulses. The betrayal of the attachment bond often leads to loss
of trust in intimate relationships, with long-term consequences in the management of future
interpersonal relationships.
Lastly, childhood maltreatment leads to loss of the capacity for self-love and positive
self-regard. Healthy attachment includes expressions by the caregiver of positive regard for
the child, which the child internalizes. Under circumstances of abuse and neglect, the child
still absorbs the messages communicated by the caregiver, but they are negative: “You are
bad,” “Look what you made me do, “I should give you away,” “I will give you away if you
tell anyone.” These messages establish a working model of a self-identity as “bad” that is
often not consciously formulated and can be difficult to identify and change in later years.

[PAGE 027]

10 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


Moreover, neglect or sexual and physical abuse often elicit feelings of shame and guilt that
are integrated into the child’s self-identity, leading to feelings of shame and guilt about who
they are versus what was done to them.


Loss of Opportunities for Social and Emotional Development

Childhood maltreatment derails the development of important life skills, particularly emotional and social competencies that lead to effective self-management and interpersonal
relationships. Children who are maltreated often come from families in which parents or
caregivers often were maltreated themselves as children, are limited in emotional expression and interpersonal functioning, and often suffer from PTSD and other mental health
problems themselves (Anderson, Edwards, Silver, & Johnson, 2018; Widom, Czaja, &
DuMont, 2015); thus they are less than ideal role models for learning such skills.
In addition, maltreatment within the home setting creates paradoxical and conflicting
information about acceptable and effective rules for living. For example, standard rules of
sexual and physical behavior are applicable in general, but not in the home. These inconsistencies, often unexplained, can create inappropriate social behaviors that lead to peer
rejection and loss of confidence in the survivors own perceptions and judgments about
social realities. The diminished emotional and social competencies associated with maltreatment are further exacerbated or result in continued social and emotional injury and
loss in the larger social environment during both childhood and adolescence. For example,
compared to their peers, children who have been abused have greater difficulty socializing
with peers and managing conflict, are more uncomfortable with high levels of emotion,
expect little social support from adults in resolving social difficulties, are less confident,
and report lower self-esteem (Naughton et al., 2013; Perepletchikova & Kaufman, 2010).
In adolescent years, those with abuse histories are more likely than their peers to develop
mental health problems (McLaughlin et al., 2012), drop out of school, engage in substance
abuse and delinquent behaviors, and experience interpersonal violence both as victims and
as perpetrators (Amstadter et al., 2011; Carliner, Gary, McLaughlin, & Keyes, 2017).
In adulthood, individuals with a history of childhood abuse often report a profound
sense of lost opportunities in realizing desired goals in both their work and personal lives.
Widom, in her work following a cohort of children who experienced abuse and are now
grown up, reports individuals with histories of childhood abuse are more likely than their
peers without such histories to fall short in achieving expectable life milestones, including
achieving fewer years of education, having more criminal arrests (Horan & Widom, 2015),
living in less desirable neighborhoods, and engaging in illicit drug use (Chauhan, Schuck,
& Widom, 2017; Chauhan & Widom, 2012). Childhood abuse also has long-term effects on
emotion processing that persist into adulthood (Young & Widom, 2014), and such persons
suffer from increased rates of depression and anxiety throughout their lives (Jaffee, 2017; Li,
D'Arcy, & Meng, 2016). Perhaps, as the ultimate behavioral expression of all that ails them,
person with abuse histories are more likely to attempt suicide than are their peers without
such histories (Liu et al., 2017).

[PAGE 028]

1. A Resource Loss Model 11


Loss of Perceived Support of the Community

It has become clear that welcoming children into the larger community enhances their
development, including self-esteem, social skills, and physical well-being. The support of
the community is expressed in the explicit valuing of children as community members. This
is demonstrated by acknowledgment of their presence in the community, concern about
their experiences, expression of positive regard, and active efforts to provide them with
appropriate roles. Children who have been maltreated often do not experience full and
positive engagement in the community. This can occur in many ways and for many reasons.
Children who have been maltreated may be hampered in integrating themselves if their
emotional resources are primarily absorbed by the demands of the home environment (i.e.,
managing maltreating parents and experiences). Their lesser social and emotion regulation skills, as described above, may make them less attractive to peers, teachers, coaches,
religious leaders, or other important figures of influence. Furthermore, silence about the
maltreatment may create feelings of alienation and a loss of any authentic sense of relating
to peers, teachers, or other members of the community.
Lastly, the stigma of maltreatment and general discomfort about recognizing its presence may keep community members at a distance from a maltreated child or youth. The
tendency to “blame the victim” emerges from the distress that is elicited by recognizing
and responding to victimization. It forces recognition of malfeasance toward a vulnerable
person, and in the case of childhood maltreatment, adult malfeasance toward an innocent
person. Children who have been maltreated can make adults uncomfortable, because they
challenge the belief system that the world is benevolent and that we are all competent to
take care of ourselves. The desire to maintain this illusion leads us to expect an unrealistic level of competence in children to defend themselves (Langton, Berzofsky, Krebs, &
Smiley-McDonald, 2012).
The alternative to “blaming the victim,” which is to recognize the existence of maltreatment, leads to other kinds of difficulties. There may well be confusion and uncertainty about
how to intervene, and reluctance to do so. Indeed, data indicate that while the majority of
Americans view childhood maltreatment as a serious problem, it is rarely reported (“How
America Defines Child Abuse,” 1999). The impulse to intervene in the activities of a family
where a child is being victimized by a parent or other caregiver conflicts with traditional
beliefs about the integrity and autonomy of the family unit. Strategies for intervention have
been developed through family courts and the development of agencies that monitor the
safety of children, but there is a sustained tension between these interventions and beliefs
about the privacy and authority of the family unit and its potential superiority as a context
for caring for children.
Finally, as exemplified by the development of safety-monitoring agencies, children who
have been maltreated, like all persons who have experienced trauma, require the extension
of social and community resources. Such resources include money, time, and effort. If such
resources become scarce, sympathy for these children may yield to feelings of resentment
or indifference. Those with more resources may lose patience with those who have fewer of

[PAGE 029]

12 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


them. Thus the consequences of childhood maltreatment as a resource loss ripple out to the
community in which a maltreated child lives and needs to be supported. Reactions to the
diminution of resources often lead to conflict and reduced integrity of the community and
its members. The integration of a maltreated child into the community is strained. Stigma
remains, and the child still feels alienated and out of the mainstream. The alienation generated by the silence is transformed into alienation generated by resentment.


SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT


This chapter has described the myriad ways trauma during childhood results in developmental losses regarding the effective growth of emotional, cognitive, behavioral, and social
capacities. The treatment philosophy described in this book affirms that recovery from
childhood trauma requires the rehabilitation of resources and life skills that were derailed
or denied in the skirmish to survive in a chronically abusive environment. Our treatment is
at heart a resource recovery program, with an emphasis on reclaiming and building emotional and social competencies. We adhere to the notion that resources above and beyond
those necessary for basic survival must be recruited and accumulated in order to recover
from the damages inflicted by a trauma. In addition, like many other researchers, therapists, and survivors, we have found that emotional processing of the trauma is a powerful if
not a critical component in trauma recovery.
Accordingly, we have developed a two-module treatment program in which the development of resources and emotional processing of the trauma are equal and balanced partners. The first treatment module, STAIR, is dedicated to building emotional and social
competencies as resources. The second treatment module, Narrative Therapy, involves the
emotional processing of the traumatic events in the context of a safe and supportive environment. The ordering of the components is purposeful. Resource development precedes
the trauma-processing work because skills in emotion regulation and social connection not
only help improve functioning in day-to-day life, but can support the effective use of Narrative Therapy. Although we encourage flexibility in the ordering of treatment modules so
that they are sequenced to meet the needs and preferences of individual clients, empirical
support for the benefits of this particular sequence is provided in Chapter 4.
We have proposed that in the course of a life that includes childhood maltreatment
or exposure to other chronic traumatic events, the development of CPTSD is the result of
insufficient resources with which to heal from the trauma. In the same way, we propose that
in the course of therapy, confronting the pain of multiple traumatic memories requires the
presence of emotional and interpersonal resources to be successful and healing. The treatment is in essence a recapitulation of the appropriate order of development in the ideal case:
The fortunate person is provided with the advantage of the accrual of multiple and diverse
resources as they face their life challenges.

[PAGE 030]

Attachment
When Protector and Perpetrator Are One


Attachment theory starts from the power of adults to protect and provide
security for their children. In abuse, this fundamental biosocial contract
between adults and children is ruptured: adults use their power for their
own ends rather than those of the child.
—JEREMY HOLMES (2001, p. 95)


THE POWER OF THE ATTACHMENT BOND


A child's parents (or other primary caregivers) are the child's most important resources by
far. Parents provide safety. They provide instruction on how the world works and how to
function in it. They stand between the child and the vicissitudes of life until the child is
ready to face these independently. Parents extend the child's awareness of external resources
to those in the larger world, and oversee the child's ability to use these resources on their
own behalf: in maintaining safety, in solving problems, in finding friends and a supportive
environment, and in experiencing pleasure and joy. Parents also build the child's internal
resources. A parent helps a child develop a sense of competence through regular instruction
and feedback. More importantly, the parent mirrors back not only success in a learned skill,
but something more ineffable and more valuable: pride in the child's accomplishment. The
infrastructure of the child's self is built on the parents internalized view of the child: that of
being well regarded and valued. These perceptions are the foundations of self-esteem, self
confidence, and self-love, which allow the developing child to do well. This positive view
of self provides the child with the capacity to confront new situations with the expectation
of doing well, and to meet new people with the expectation of being well regarded. It also
allows the child to approach difficulties with the belief that solutions can be found and that
personal limitations can be managed.
Perhaps it is inevitable that the proximity of a child to a caregiver, intended to secure
the child's continued growth, is also an Achilles heel: The primary sources of injury and
harm to children are their caregivers. For example, reviews of nearly 3 million cases of
documented child abuse in a single year in the United States indicated that 80% of the


13

[PAGE 031]

14 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


sexual abuse perpetrators were parents (Golden, 2000). Such circumstances pervert the
resource relationship between parent and child. The child’s need for physical proximity to
the caregiver, and dependence on the caregiver for safety, result in experiences of physical
transgressions. The bond with the caregiver becomes an affective and cognitive contradiction: The source of safety is also a source of danger. The explanations for effective functioning in the world at large are suspended, irrelevant, or contradicted at home. The person
responsible for building the child’s self-regard also breaks it down with physical intrusions
or assaults. The parent who creates bridges between the child and the social world also
severs those connections with secret sexual transgressions. As a result, the child's feelings
of safety and control, positive regard, competence, and connection to the larger world are
compromised.
The attachment literature has demonstrated that the connection between caregiver
and offspring is a critical dynamic that supports the survival and growth of the child. In this
design of care, it is expected that threats to safety are generated beyond the shadow of the
caregiver, and that when threatened, the child returns to the safety of home base. Evolution of the fight-or-flight reaction is viewed as consistent with a system of safety in which
protection is anchored to a home base. The fight-or-flight response is effective for refueling
in the short term and for longer-term resource building in the affiliative/protective network
of home base. But this arrangement is not a “fail-safe” system, as demonstrated by circumstances in which parents/caregivers themselves become threats via physical abuse, sexual
abuse, and/or neglect of their offspring. The consequence of such circumstances is that for
at least some period of time, a child inevitably experiences a relationship in which perpetrator and care provider are one.
The power of the attachment bond remains apparent, even in the context of maltreatment by caregivers. This has been demonstrated in several research literatures. For example,
among nonhuman species, offspring will remain in physical proximity to their parents or
designated caregivers, even when contact with the caregivers is associated with significant
physical pain and aversive experiences (see Perry, Blair, & Sullivan, 2017; Santiago, Aoki, &
Sullivan, 2017). The evolution of this circumstance is presumably related to the biosocial net
cost of such relationships: Any caregiver is better than none, particularly when the offspring
have little capacity to function independently. Among humans, the rate of maturation is
relatively slow and the dependence of children on adult caregivers is sustained, with several
years of guardianship required to monitor and support the children’s constant cognitive,
social, and emotional growth.
One of the more perplexing consequences of maltreatment in early life is that attachment to an abusive/neglectful caregiver can be more powerful than that which occurs
within nonabusive bonds. Although this is a devastating consequence, it is not difficult to
understand once the dynamics of childhood maltreatment are understood. As Freyd (1996,
p. 71) notes, “The child is charged by life” to sustain the attachment to parents, and so to
sustain the self. A vicious cycle that begins with the child’s inherent dependence on the parent is established. In healthy circumstances, development progresses with increasing autonomy and the prerequisite resources to succeed in this independence, all of which are supported by the caregivers. However, autonomy is stymied in circumstances of maltreatment,

[PAGE 032]

2. Attachment 15


because injury and diminished capacity actually increase rather than decrease dependence.
Research with nonhuman species has shown that maltreatment actually increases attachment, because the more an individual is injured or terrorized, the stronger the person's
need becomes for protection and comforting. Allen (1995, p. 157) describes the bond in
terms of a three-part cycle: The worse the injury, the greater need for care and security, and
so the tighter the bond.
This dynamic operates with children under circumstances of intrafamilial trauma. The
children grow more helpless and less competent. Typically living in relative social isolation
and naive to alternatives, the children continue to turn to their parents for help. In addition,
children assume that their parents have their best interests in mind, despite the maltreatment. Frightened and confused, they are seeking safety and security; the provision of any
shred of care, affection, or attention will draw them closer to their parents.


ABUSE-GENERATED RELATIONSHIP MODELS


One of the most alarming legacies of childhood abuse is repeated victimization (Coid et al.,
2001; Desai, Arias, Thompson, & Basile, 2002). This includes relatively high rates of bullying and scapegoating experiences in childhood (e.g., Shipman, Zeman, Penza, & Champion, 2000), of sexual assaults and date rape among adolescent girls and young women (e.g.,
Gidycz, Hanson, & Layman, 1995; Krahe, Sheinberger-Olwig, Waizenhofer, & Koplin,
1999), of domestic violence among women (Messman & Long, 1996; Polusny & Follette,
1995), and of particularly high rates of repeated sexual assaults among women with significant psychiatric illness (Cloitre, Tardiff, Marzuk, Leon, & Portera, 1996).
Recent research has identified that multiple factors mediate the relationship between
childhood abuse and adult revictimization, including dissociation (Zamir, Szepsenwol,
Englund, & Simpson, 2018), substance misuse (Messman-Moore, Ward, & Zerubavel, 2013),
depression, and expectations about sexual behaviors (Miron & Orcutt, 2014). We propose
that these factors function as coping strategies for emotion dysregulation (distress management) and habitual modes of interpersonal relating that are actually based on a healthy
impulse to engage in and maintain relationships. We propose that the affective and interpersonal strategies by which attachments develop are based on the experiences of abuse,
which create substantial risk for revictimization. Engaging with other people and staying
in relationships are learned behaviors. When significant learning experiences come from
an abusive context or abusive people, the resulting interpersonal expectations and social
behaviors are likely to have features that maintain abusive interpersonal dynamics. One
goal of the present treatment is to help survivors maintain the desire for connection, but to
change their behavioral patterns of relating and the people with whom they relate.
The treatment uses the notion of a “relationship model,” derived from the work of John
Bowlby and other attachment theorists, as an explanatory construct for understanding how
healthy impulses go wrong. The identification of relationship models within an attachment
model is theoretically very important, because it provides a value-neutral explanation of
revictimization within the context of general principles of interpersonal behavior.

[PAGE 033]

16 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


SOME ASPECTS OF ATTACHMENT THEORY


Bowlby (1969) and others have suggested that several biologically based mechanisms support the propensity to maintain closeness to the available caregiver and function to maximize
survival. Their nature and complexity are in accord with the point at which they emerge
during the course of behavioral, cognitive, and affective development. One mechanism is
the development of “relationship models.” These models, sometimes also called “interpersonal schemas, have been described as information-organizing cognitive—affective structures that, based on experience, specify and anticipate the contingencies for maintaining
relatedness to the caregivers (Safran, 1990a, 1990b; Safran & Segal, 1990). Multiple models
develop through time, based on differing interpersonal events of consequence with different
important people. Relationship models are also amenable to revision as a result of changing
circumstances. There is some evidence, however, that the first and oldest of relationship
models, formed within the context of attachment relationships, play a central role in shaping
future thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in the interpersonal domain (see Cicchetti & Toth,
2015; Doyle & Cicchetti, 2017).
Among the earliest and prototypical models are those pertaining to specific behaviors
that will elicit the approach or proximity ofa caregiver. Under advantageous circumstances,
this proximity yields a response of care and concern. In turn, the caregiver experiences the
expression of care elicited by the child as intrinsically satisfying. However, the relationship model that emerges in an abusive caregiving setting will deviate from this proposed
dynamic of mutual satisfaction. For example, in a physically assaultive home, proximity—a
condition for care—may also elicit physical assault. Thus care and physical assault become
paired. In sexually abusive homes, proximity can elicit sexual activity. Such contingency
experiences, whatever their particulars, may lead to the following models of interpersonal
relatedness: “To be interpersonally engaged means to be abused” and “Abuse is a way to be
connected.”


THE SELF-FULFILLING NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP MODELS


Because relationship models are assumed to be the underlying templates that guide future
expectations and behaviors, it is easy to see how negative patterns set down in childhood
can guide one toward repeating activities that are maladaptive in adulthood. The model
suggests that reliance on past experiences to anticipate the future is a typically adaptive
strategy for living, and that the resultant tendency to repeat one’s history is normative.
Indeed, for those who have had positive attachment experiences, the self-fulfilling aspect
of models works to their advantage: Expectations of positive regard tend to elicit positive
responses. For survivors of abuse, however, reliance on past experiences means reliance on
deviant patterns of relating. This tends to lead the survivors to function in social environments in ways that elicit similar deviant patterns, or to find that abuse-adapted patterns for
relating are no longer effective in healthier social contexts.
The first time we observed this principle in action with disastrous results concerned a
case of a female soldier in the Army who had been sexually assaulted by a fellow soldier. The

[PAGE 034]

2. Attachment 17


two had been romantically involved. When the woman decided to break off the relationship, her boyfriend responded with rage and physically assaulted her. He also threatened
to make her life miserable for the duration of their time on the base. Fearful of continued
physical reprisal from him, she bought groceries and sundries from the post exchange and
brought them to him at his barracks. His response was one of outrage: He sexually assaulted
her and enlisted the help of a bunkmate in this act, which was repeated several times. During this womans first visit at our clinic, the interviewer asked, in a gentle, supportive, but
curious way, why she had gone to the boyfriend’s barracks. She answered with surprise,
“Why, this is what I knew to do when I got beat.” It had always worked to save her from
trouble before. The child of severely abusive parents, this woman had learned that the most
effective way to appease her brawling parents was to take over household tasks—to go for
groceries, do the cooking, and clean the house.
The woman was acting in a way that was intended to protect herself. However, the
actions that had previously worked well now, in a changed environment, failed her; in fact,
they contributed to the repetition of an old scenario she was trying to escape. The rules
guiding effective living in an abusive environment needed to be changed, now that she had
left it.


DIMENSIONS OF ABUSE-RELATED RELATIONSHIP MODELS


Our empirical inquiry (see Cloitre, Cohen, & Scarvalone, 2002a) into the general characteristics of abuse-related relationship models has been derived from a well-established system
of categorizing types of self—other interactions (Kiesler, 1983; Leary, 1957). It is a model
intended to capture the full range of potential interpersonal interactions as based on two
independent dimensions that are assumed to be present in all human interactions: an affective/affiliative dimension (warm to cold) and a control dimension (high to low). We compared the interpersonal expectations of women with histories of childhood abuse, women
with childhood abuse and adult revictimization experiences, and women who had never
experienced abuse or other forms of interpersonal victimization. When asked to recall the
responses of their caregivers to them in a variety of emotional and social circumstances,
the survivors described their caregivers as predominantly cold—and, among those survivors with repeated victimizations in adult life, cold and highly controlling. In contrast, the
never-abused group reported their caregivers’ reactions to them as warm and responsive to
their situation and as respectful of their autonomy.
When asked to think about an important person in their lives now (e.g., their current
best friend), the most common type of interpersonal attitude and behavior expected was,
for each of the study groups, a match to the type described for the caregiver. The group
who had never experienced trauma had the largest number (60%) of women who expected
those in their current lives to behave in ways similar to their caregivers—that is, as warm,
responsive, and open to them, and as willing to follow their lead. In contrast, the majority
of those with abuse histories described their current relationships as cold, and their significant others as emotionally unresponsive, controlling, and domineering. The self-fulfilling
prophecy thus appeared to operate among both the traumatized and the nontraumatized

[PAGE 035]

18 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


respondents, with the only difference between the groups being the particulars of their life
experiences and expectations.
These results are consistent with relational models of behavior, which describe generalization from predominant relationship models as a basic human cognitive—affective
tendency. It also supports our analysis of revictimization as a consequence of a general
principle of functioning, rather than as a pathological behavior associated with survivors of
abuse. Still, the implications for the two groups differ. Among those who are not traumatized, routine model-driven actions may be an effective strategy for living, as the expectation for positive interactions creates a bias toward positive outcomes. In contrast, survivors
of trauma are burdened with the necessity of recognizing and changing their patterns of
relating if they are to improve their functioning and escape their traumatic past.


WHEN THE PROTECTOR FAILS TO PROTECT


Most epidemiological studies of childhood abuse (see Finkelhor, 1994; Russell, 1983; Wyatt,
Loeb, Solis, & Carmona, 1999) indicate that sexual abuse is most often perpetrated by males
in caregiving roles or positions of authority. Still, we know from the theory and research of
Bowlby and other attachment specialists that the capacity for relatedness is modifiable, and
that the presence of “even just one” positive care figure can produce a “protective shield”
around a child and mediate negative outcomes (Lieberman & Amaya-Jackson, 2005). This
leads to the question of the role of the mother or other critical caregivers in a child's system
of care as a factor mediating or contributing to the child’s immediate or long-term outcome.
The topic is remarkably complex (Tener & Murphy, 2015). For example, research on disclosure of abuse suggests that telling a mother or someone else with power to intervene about
the abuse is not related to symptom status in either the short or long term (e.g., Blieberg,
2000; Wyatt, Guthrie, & Notgrass, 1992). Disclosure may be positive only when the telling leads to a protective and supportive response. Responses of agitation, denial, and even
upheaval in the family system may negate any benefit that might accrue (see Alaggia, 2002;
Heriot, 1996). Similarly, disclosure to friends or social community leads to negative as well
as positive impact on the survivor (Andalibi, Haimson, De Choudhury, & Forte, 2016).
Among survivors of abuse who seek treatment, we have found either that they have
typically experienced abuse from multiple caregivers, or that nonabusing caregivers are
neglectful, are absent, or simply deny or avoid recognition of the abuse. In our study (Cloitre
et al., 2002a), sexual abuse was perpetrated most often by a male family member (88%), and
abuse of some kind (physical, verbal, or sexual) by the mother was reported in half of the
sample. The characterizations of the paternal and maternal caregivers did not differ: Both
father and mother figures were reported as either cold and distant or cold and controlling,
and there were no significant discrepancies between the abuse characteristics and relationship models for the two types of figures.
Research on the topic of the parent who is a witness to abuse rather than an active
agent of it suggests that passivity in the face of abuse is itself harmful as a form of betrayal
of trust, or what is now called “betrayal trauma” (Platt & Freyd, 2015). Indeed, our clinical

[PAGE 036]

2. Attachment 19


experience suggests that the failure of a parent to care for and safeguard a child appears
to have its own specific impact on the interpersonal beliefs and attitudes of survivors (e.g.,
“When I am in trouble, I know I need to take care of things myself”). This is most salient
in clients’ narratives about a passive or neglectful parent figure who turns a blind eye to the
presence of physical or sexual abuse in the home. Anger and a sense of betrayal are directed
toward the parent who did not intervene: the father who silently watched the mother batter
their children, or the mother who denied the sexual intrusions of the father, stepfather, or
boyfriend.
Steven Gold (2000) makes the important point that the significant impact of a parent
who is a passive bystander is often overlooked:


It is not unusual to hear therapists voice the conviction that resentment directed toward
non-offending parents of others who did not prevent or stop the abuse is undeserved, or
represents displaced hostility that, in actuality, is related to the perpetrator. This follows
logically from a trauma model framework which assumes that the abuse itself is cardinal
in its impact. However, this viewpoint negates a child’s fundamental need to be valued
and cherished enough to be protected, supported, and affirmed, particularly by parental
figures and other caretakers . . . the anger toward non-offending parties may also reflect
the fact that failing to stop the abuse was just one of the myriad of ways in which parents
and other caregivers abrogated their responsibilities to nurture, validate, and safeguard
the client in childhood. (p. 31)


Consistent with this perspective, we view the parent who neglects a child as representing a variation of a disturbed attachment relationship. The primary function of the attachment relationship is to ensure the safety of the child. The absence of this simple but essential dimension from the child’s relationship with the parent/caregiver is an instance of a
separate and independent psychological trauma. An attachment compromised by neglect,
inconsistency, or hostility/distance also has a significant impact on a child’s capacity to manage abuse, even when the abuse is not perpetrated by the primary caregiver; indeed, it may
create vulnerability to sexual abuse by other adults in the child’s larger system of care (see
Chapter 3).


SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT


The overriding theme of this chapter has been the impact of abuse on the capacity for interpersonal relatedness when abuse is perpetrated by a primary caregiver. We have articulated
the outcome of this experience through the shorthand of the relationship model “To be
connected means to be abused.” This shorthand refers to the tendency of survivors’ relationships to consist of victim—perpetrator bonds and dynamics. These dynamics are expressed
directly in repeated abusive relationships (e.g., date rape, domestic violence) and high rates
of revictimization. They are also reflected in chronic and pervasive problems with intimacy:
Suspicion, anger, and mistrust erode relationships, leading to patterns of relationships that
are short-lived or end badly.

[PAGE 037]

20 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


We have also suggested that a sense of self develops in the context of relationships
to others. When abuse occurs, both the sense of self and the capacity for relating are disturbed. So feelings of self-love and compassion are in part the results of having been loved
and protected, and the capacity to love someone is related to one’s own capacity to feel lovable and loving. Feelings of security are instilled by trust-inspiring caregivers, and these in
turn allow risk taking in relationships.
All these ideas are realized in the treatment in a practical way through the notion of the
“relationship model.” The relationship model is a conceptual tool with a specific structure
and is included in many of the interventions in our treatment program. During STAIR,
therapists and clients work to identify problematic relationship models. These are often
variations of “To be attached means to be abused,’ and, once organized, they reveal and
clarify deep-seated beliefs involving feelings and themes of fear, despair, shame, and grief.
The models articulate negative beliefs about self and expectations of others, which limit
the range of perceptions the clients can have of themselves and of experiences with others.
Alternative models and associated experiential exercises are proposed. These alternative
models become the basis for exploring, testing, and practicing alternative ways of relating
to others and experiencing new personal possibilities.
Relationship model analysis is part of both STAIR and Narrative Therapy and creates
a conceptual bridge between the two modules. During the narrative work, therapists and
clients identify the core relationship models embedded in the clients’ narratives. The abuserelated models embedded in these narratives are contrasted with the newly emerging models that have been proposed in STAIR. This contrast reminds the clients that the old narratives represent contingencies for living that belong to the past and need not be continued in
the present. The new models represent the opportunity for living in the present and ideas
for shaping a possible future. This contrast helps move clients from a view of themselves as
victims with limited options, to a sense of themselves as adults with new resources, new
choices, and new ways to think through and plan for the future.

[PAGE 038]

Development in the Context
of Deprivation

Growing up in an abusive household is like
learning to run under water.
—AUGUSTEN BURROUGHS (2003)


The context in which a child who is chronically maltreated lives is directly contrary to the
kind of environment required for healthy development. The child strives to develop in a setting that lacks the essential resources needed to support growth. The treatment presented
in this book is based on the understanding that the reduction, loss, or absence of normative
social experiences is a critical feature of chronic childhood trauma, equivalent to and potentially more powerful than the acute traumatic events themselves. The first component of
our treatment program provides the opportunity for survivors of childhood abuse and other
interpersonal trauma to explore and systematically address specific social and emotional
difficulties that have a negative impact on their functioning, future opportunities, and quality of life. The goal of this treatment component is to help survivors, whose progress was
interrupted when resources for appropriate learning were deficient or unavailable, develop
emotional and social competencies.
Most people who have experienced trauma, or know someone who has, understand
the potent psychological effects such events can have. The successful management of both
daily tasks and major life challenges results from having specific emotional and social skills.
These abilities include how to know what one feels, communicate those feelings effectively
to others, solve problems effectively, recognize the value of practical and emotional social
support, and know how to recruit such support when needed. All of these skills grow and
are elaborated and reinforced during the childhood years of physical, cognitive, emotional,
and behavioral development. Adults who experience trauma but have learned these skills
earlier in life can capitalize on them for their posttraumatic healing. The intrusion of trauma
and the context of an abusive home in childhood, though, can compromise the development
of these skills. We describe below the specific developmental disturbances that have been


21

[PAGE 039]

22 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


documented among people who have experienced childhood abuse. Tracing these problems
to their origin has helped us understand the particular competencies often compromised by
abuse, which in turn has allowed us to formulate a program with interventions and activities
to address them.
The compromised competencies can have pernicious effects on abused persons’ confidence, particularly in trusting their perceptions and judgments about themselves and about
others. They second-guess their own emotional reactions, fearing (sometimes accurately)
that they have damaged or disturbed “emotion sensors. Because their learning experiences
have deviated from ideal ones, survivors of abuse also often second-guess their appraisals
of situations and the motives of others. Fundamentally, at a very deep level, they do trust
neither themselves nor others.
One overarching theme in the treatment we have developed for adult survivors is facilitating the rebirth and growth of their confidence in themselves. This confidence generates
the freedom to engage effectively and fluidly in day-to-day life, and the belief that they can
respond effectively to future hardships.


CHILDHOOD TRAUMA INTERRUPTS DEVELOPMENT


Intrafamilial trauma during childhood creates a burden that both distracts from and distorts the achievement of typical developmental goals in the childhood and adolescent years.
A highly traumatized childhood often involves putting energies into strategies for maximizing physical and psychological survival. In the case of childhood sexual and physical abuse,
such strategies are often physical activities that reduce the risk of exposure to the assaults,
or psychological strategies such as numbing, denial, dissociation, or distorting the meaning
of the events when physical escape is not possible. A significant literature exists on the psychological mechanisms children use for coping with chronic intrafamilial abuse (e.g., Shapiro, Kaplow, Amaya-Jackson, & Dodge, 2012). These mechanisms, while possibly adaptive
at the time, often divert energies away from fulfilling normative developmental milestones.
In contrast, in adulthood, the long-standing consequences of this deprivation and diverted
energies continue and can even become more apparent.


Emotional and Sensory Development

Sexual or physical abuse disturbs the development of a coherent and integrated experience
of the body. This disturbance occurs, in part, because the immature body of the child is
overwhelmed by the unmodulated, uncontrolled, and undifferentiated sensations of arousal
that occur during sexual and/or physical abuse. Perhaps more important is that children
are almost always abused by parents or other caregivers, and abusive caregivers fail in the
fundamental tasks of guiding children in modulating arousal. An effective caregiver modulates a child’s emotional arousal by providing appropriate doses of soothing and stimulating
activities (Stern, 1985). Doing so does not just maximize comfort and security; it facilitates
the child’s learning of how to self-soothe and to orient selectively to either the internal or

[PAGE 040]

3. Development in the Context of Deprivation 23


external environment. This learning, in turn, contributes to the accumulation of additional
experiences of discrimination and categorization—between self and other, as well as across
different kinds of emotions and emotional exchanges (see Gergely & Watson, 1996; Nichols,
Gergely, & Fonagy, 2001).
Through a caregivers nonverbal behavior (e.g., tone of voice) and later through language, the learning of self-soothing and affective discrimination expands. For example, parents ideally contribute to healthy emotional development in their children by accurately
labeling feelings the children express. A mother might say to a distressed child, “Youre
upset because you missed seeing your friend today.” This statement gives a label to a feeling, describes the experience, and ideally explains the source of the feeling. A typical report
from an adult survivor of childhood abuse describes a scene in which a parent slaps a child
and follows the slapping by stating, “That did not hurt.” The child experiences a discrepancy between the internal experience and the label. From such events, abused children
often experience confusion, distrust of their sensory perceptions, and a limited capacity to
describe and accurately differentiate their feeling states.
Furthermore, abusive caregivers are poor guides to emotional modulation because
they have limited emotion regulation skills themselves. Parents of abused children are significantly more likely to have histories of drug and alcohol problems, substantial mood disturbance, legal trouble and jail time, psychiatric hospitalizations, and fewer mental health
services despite need (Hien & Honeyman, 2000; Sheridan, 1995; Baumann & Kolko, 2002;
Haskett, Smith Scott, & Ward, 2004; Kaplan, Sunday, Labruna, Pelcovitz, & Salzinger,
2009; Stith et al., 2009). Such parents are poor role models for “learning by observation.”
The things their children learn are unlikely to be behaviors and attitudes that lead to effective emotion regulation. Instead, what abused children observe are the relative absence
of emotion regulation and the negative consequences of this absence—such as a deteriorating family environment, acrimony in the family, legal difficulties, hospitalizations, and
substance-related problems.
Poor affect regulation development in abused children is behaviorally evident as early
as the toddler and preschool years (e.g., Cicchetti & White, 1990; Shields & Cicchetti, 1998).
For instance, early maltreatment, including both sexual and physical abuse, corresponds
to high levels of negativity and anger in toddlers and lack of self-control in preschoolers
(Erickson, Egeland, & Pianta, 1989). In the preteen and adolescent years, those with abuse
histories are much more likely to engage in impulsive behaviors, including sexual and drugrelated activities and reactive aggression (Lipschitz et al., 1999a, 1999b; Lipschitz, Rasmusson, Anyan, Comwell, & Southwick, 2000; Kilpatrick et al., 2003).
In adulthood, difficulty with emotion regulation is one of the primary reasons for seeking mental health treatment (Levitt & Cloitre, 2005). Several researchers have identified
these individuals central clinical concern as problems with modulating feeling states. Some
researchers describe this clinical population as “emotion-phobic” (van der Kolk, 1996) or
even “alexithymic” (Frewen, Dozois, Neufeld, & Lanius, 2008); others note significantly
higher levels of hostility and anxiety compared to other clinical samples (Zlotnick et al.,
1996), as well as chronic problems with mental health, suicidality, and medical conditions
(Maniglio, 2009; Norman et al., 2012).

[PAGE 041]

24 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


In sum, survivors of childhood abuse learn the negative consequences of unregulated
feelings. What they do not learn is that emotional states can be experienced and managed
in healthy ways, can support relationships, and can even be a source of pleasure. Our treatment helps address this deficit by introducing the feeling and management of emotions as
positive, life-affirming, and essential to the human experience.


Cognitive Development: Experience of Agency

As early as 12 months of age, infants demonstrate an understanding of cause and effect,
and integral to this development is the experience of the self as an agent or cause of events
(see Gergely, 2004; Gergely & Watson, 1996). Caregivers play a critical role in this process.
They draw out connections of cause and effect through movement and tone of voice, as well
as by directing children’s attention to changes in the environment that are causally related.
In particular, a caregiver draws attention to a child's actions as having consequences in the
environment, including effects on that most important and powerful figure of the social
world—the caregiver. The child’s sense of agency develops and is reinforced by the caregivers directed responses to the child’s expressed needs. The child then experiences the self
as an initiator of action or the cause of an effect (i.e., “IfI do something, I get a response”).
Conversely, caregivers diminish children’s sense of agency by remaining unaware of,
neglecting, or ignoring the children’s signals. In fact, caregivers who sexually or physically
abuse children nullify their experience of agency, since these events occur without regard to
their needs or despite their protests. An abused child is given the message “You dont exist,”
or “You dont count.”
One experiences a sense of agency in part through expressions of feelings. A child cries,
and the caregiver responds; the child stops crying, and the caregiver changes behavior once
again. This type of experience contributes to the child's sense of ownership of and authority
over feelings. It also encourages feelings to become valid reference points from which the
child initiates action with some expectation of success. Abuse by caregivers includes the
experience of having feelings ignored, dismissed, or distorted. Survivors of chronic abuse
often not only lack awareness of their own feelings, but also do not expect their feelings to
matter or to be respected. They do not use their feelings as points of initiative or justification for action (e.g., “I feel this way, so I better do something about it”).
One also creates a sense of agency and vitality through interpersonal experiences—
particularly experiences of recognition by a caregiver who follows and supports the child's
actions and responds to them in a complementary fashion (Ammaniti & Ferrari, 2013).
These responses happen in play or in “mirroring-back” behaviors, where the caregiver
reflects back, amplifies, or elaborates the child's actions. For example, a child may slap a
hand down on a table, creating a smacking sound and look to the caregiver, who responds by
clapping with delight, simultaneously reinforcing and praising this instance of cause (“My
hand clapping . . .”) and effect (“. . . makes noise”). Abuse undercuts the self-enhancing
power of experiences in which the child takes initiative and experiences reinforcement by
the caregiver. Abuse expresses the perpetrators power to initiate and sustain action, regardless of the child’s will or intention. The overwhelming power of the abusive caregiver denies

[PAGE 042]

3. Development in the Context of Deprivation 25


the child’s recognition of the self as an autonomous being and may convey to the child that
they are merely an extension of the abuser's will. As adults, survivors often report feelings of
incipient “annihilation” during experiences of conflict. These experiences may result from
lapses in recognizing the survivors agency and transgressions of their autonomy during
their abusive childhoods. It is thus not surprising that survivors often struggle with power
dynamics in interpersonal relationships—sometimes feeling overly dependent and passive,
and other times exerting great effort to be “in control” of a relationship.
Our programs interventions help clients become better at identifying feeling states and
more effective in interpersonal relationships. In many of the Part III chapters describing
Module I of the treatment (STAIR; see Chapters 10-19), the therapist instructions include
not only how to teach clients a particular skill, but also what attitude to bring to the task and
how to give feedback, so that the therapist acknowledges clients’ experiences in a supportive, affirming, and accepting manner. We hope that in this emotionally corrective process,
clients will not stop at learning just the names of their feelings. Ideally, they will also experience themselves as the authors of their own feelings and agents of their meaning and use,
and in the task of adopting new interpersonal positions and responses with the therapist,
they will experience “being seen” by the therapist as persons in their own right.


interpersonal Development

As implied above, interpersonal development incorporates the management of feelings in
relation to others. Interpersonal development across childhood and adolescence involves
at least three key tasks: learning and implementing interpersonal models for establishing
relationships; learning how to resolve conflicts; and developing flexibility in interpersonal
expectations and behaviors. As adults, individuals can revisit these tasks and update their
understanding based on new experiences.
Relationships with parents, other caregivers, and siblings establish the first models
for relating to others, which act as templates to guide expectations and prime behaviors in
developing relationships that follow. These first relationships are essentially characterized
by the reliance of the young on elders, particularly primary caregivers, as sources of safety
and nurturance. This domain of development is that of Bowlbys (1969) attachment system.
Over many years of clinical practice and research, we have found that people abused in
childhood adopt interpersonal frameworks (“internal working models,” as Bowlby called
them) assuming that relationships are essentially adversarial or unreliable, that vulnerability leads to exploitation, and that intimacy leads to pain and betrayal. These assumptions
become most evident in important relationships and at times of conflict, when differences
between individuals can threaten a survivor's sense of safety, control, autonomy, and recognition of needs.
Social-observational studies of maltreated preschool and school-age children have
found an association between abuse and maladaptive internal working models of attachment, particularly for those associated with disorganized attachment (Carlson, Cicchetti,
Barnett, & Braunwald, 1989; Main, Kaplan, & Cassidy, 1985; Solomon, George, & DeJong,
1995). In addition, such internal working models are associated with aggressive and fearful

[PAGE 043]

26 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


relationships with peers and externalizing symptoms in school-age children (e.g., LyonsRuth, Alpern, & Repacholi, 1993). Although empirical investigations of the role of specific
internal working models and behavioral problems among children and youth with histories
of abuse continue, the presence ofinterpersonal and social impairment among such children
and youth is well established. Childhood victimization is associated with social behaviors
such as peer rejection and bullying in the school years (Shields & Cicchetti, 1998; Schwartz
& Proctor, 2000). Among adolescents, it is associated with increases in both aggression and
social avoidance, as well as significant increases in criminal and delinquent behaviors and
early sexual activity (Giaconia et al., 1995; Horowitz, Weine, & Jekel, 1995; Malmquist,
1986; Pynoos et al., 1987).
Experiences of early trauma, unfortunately, can continue to affect adult relationships,
often at least partially through their impact on attachment and internal working models of
self and others (McCarthy & Maughan, 2010; O'Dougherty Wright, Crawford, & Del Castillo, 2009; Ortigo, Westen, DeFife, & Bradley, 2013; Riggs, Cusimano, & Benson, 2011).
Consistent with these observations, adult survivors of child abuse report significant interpersonal problems. In a large study of the effects of childhood physical and sexual abuse on
adult women, 91% of the respondents described significant problems in relationships (van
der Kolk, Roth, Pelcovitz, & Mandel, 1993). The most frequent difficulties were sensitivity
to criticism, inability to hear other viewpoints, difficulty in standing up for themselves, and
a tendency to quit jobs and relationships without negotiation. Our own research corroborates these findings: Among treatment-seeking women, the majority reported significant
problems with intimacy, being too controlling, acting too submissive, being inappropriately
assertive, and being insufficiently sociable (Cloitre, Scarvalone, & Difede, 1997; see also
Chapter 4).
Taken together, these studies suggest that central difficulties arise in emotion-laden
situations involving the management of conflict or balance of power in relationships. These
behaviors are quite understandable when viewed from the perspective of the lessons
learned about relationships in abusive homes. The hypersensitivity to conflict reported by
adult survivors is a legacy of these experiences. The interpersonal schemas that survivors
of abuse most frequently rely on reflect expectations that others will respond to them in a
cold, controlling, hostile, or distant manner (Cloitre et al., 2002a). Their current behaviors
may, in part, be preemptive maneuvers to avoid the negative outcomes they expect—or,
alternatively, reenactments of familiar interpersonal roles or dynamics.
The interpersonal schema study discussed in Chapter 2 (Cloitre et al., 2002a) also found
that the schemas of survivors of abuse tended to be limited in number and fairly rigidly
applied across different people and different situations. For example, when these survivors
reviewed hypothetical situations in which the behavior of another person was most likely to
be warm and inviting, the survivors still responded with expectations of the other to be cold,
hostile, and controlling. In addition, the particular relationship with the significant other
did not seem to make a difference to the expectations of the survivors: They responded
to situations involving a mother, father, significant other, and best friend in the same way,
regardless of the expectations appropriateness for each person in these situations.

[PAGE 044]

3. Development in the Context of Deprivation 27


Part of the normative trajectory of social development involves refining and adding
interpersonal rules for relating, depending on the contexts and the individuals involved.
For example, children learn when aggressive behaviors are appropriate (e.g., on the basketball court) and when they are not (e.g., with a toddler sibling); when obedience to an
adult is appropriate (e.g., with a teacher in the classroom) and when it is not (e.g., with a
stranger in an elevator); and so on. Parents help guide this knowledge with specific teaching about diversity in interpersonal expectations within and beyond the family, and they
provide children with opportunities to explore their emotional reactions as they experience
these different interpersonal scenarios. Our data suggest that this sensitivity and flexibility
does not fully develop among treatment-seeking survivors of abuse. Moreover, rigidly applying a negative schema—behavior dynamic to new situations only serves to reinforce further
the “truth” ascribed to the negative expectations. The self-reinforcing nature of these selffulfilling prophecies impedes natural healing that may occur with safe others (Wachtel,
1997).
The treatment program we have developed and refined over the years includes a strong
emphasis on expanding the number and kind of interpersonal schemas a client has available
for consideration. We propose models of interaction (schemas) in which the client’s overtures of warmth can be met with warmth, and overtures of appropriate assertiveness can
be met with recognition and respect. Furthermore, we ground the development of these
new models in an understanding of their context-sensitive nature—that is, the concept that
different types of relationships (work vs. romantic vs. parenting relationships) require different expectations and/or different actions and reactions. Key goals of the treatment involve
helping the client develop alternative ways of relating to people from those that emerge
from abuse, and develop sensitivity to the diversity in the nature, character, and context of
relationships.


INFLUENCE OF POOR CAREGIVING ON ABUSE
FROM OUTSIDE THE HOME


Individuals who as children experience sexual and physical abuse from outside the family
often still have primary caregivers who have impaired parenting skills and do not or cannot
effectively respond to their attachment mandates. This situation is clearly the case when
caregivers perpetrate the abuse. However, clinical experience and substantial research suggest that individuals who come to treatment with a history of abuse outside the home often
report parenting or environmental difficulties that predate or are separate from the abuse
experiences. Many researchers (e.g., Conte, Wolfe, & Smith, 1989; Gold, 2000; Finkelhor,
1980; Gapen et al., 2011) have suggested or found that beyond the fact of abuse itself, the
presence of problematic attachment, disturbed parenting behaviors, and certain types of
living environments and neighborhoods create vulnerability to abuse and other types of
interpersonal trauma outside the home. On top of that, their presence in general makes
recovery more difficult.

[PAGE 045]

28 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


A substantial literature indicates that problematic attachment can occur with a nonabusing parent because the parent is too preoccupied, distant, or distressed to be reliably
responsive and nurturing (van IJzendoorn & Kroonenberg, 1988). Other factors might
include the presence of psychiatric problems, including ones stemming from the caregiver's
own trauma history, such as PTSD or depression. The intergenerational transmission of
trauma is, sadly, a well-known phenomenon (Bowers & Yehuda, 2016), and it corresponds
with Bowlby’s (1984) original ideas of how familial violence affects both the attachment
and caregiving systems. Environmental pressures, such as limited income and poor health
or injury among family members, may also contribute to the caregiver's difficulties. In
such circumstances, the caregiver may not have the ability to provide a sufficient, reliable
“secure base’ for the child, effective guidance in developing socioemotional competencies,
protection from significant threats, or the nurturing capacity to help the child recover from
traumas.

In addition, the families of survivors of abuse have certain similar characteristics,
regardless of whether the abuse occurs inside or outside the home. Studies have found
shared characteristics of high levels of rigid behavioral control, and low degrees of adaptive
emotional expressiveness (Nash, Hulsey, Sexton, Harralson, & Lambert, 1993; Ray, Jackson, & Townsley, 1991). Translated into terms of daily living, relationships among family
members tend to be circumscribed within specific roles (often of an authoritarian nature),
with little flexibility or range in expression of emotions. Moreover, the experience of limited
and rigid relationship roles tends to limit children’s ability to learn the subtle but critical
life lesson that different people and different contexts require diverse ways of relating and
different sets of interpersonal expectations.
In his book on treating survivors of child abuse, Gold (2000) suggested that the typical
characteristics of these families are likely to produce or mold expectations and behaviors
in children that leave them vulnerable to exploitation and abuse by predatory adults. For
example, a caregiving environment that is cold, unaffectionate, and unresponsive to a child's
emotional needs may result in a child who hungers for warmth, recognition, support, and
validation. Such a child may be particularly vulnerable to the attentions, blandishments,
and flattery of a child molester. In DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), disinhibited social engagement disorder is a sad and extreme but prime example of this outcome of indiscriminate trust after severe neglect or abuse. Family systems that are high in
authoritarian and controlling behaviors toward children may elicit and shape interpersonal
styles marked by either unassertiveness, deference, and appeasement, or “trigger-finger”
rebelliousness and disengagement. The first adaptation creates an interpersonal dynamic
that allows a child to be easily intimated and coerced by demanding adults. The second
creates dynamics of power struggles, isolation, and even bullying of others. A family that is
low in organization, cohesion, and expressiveness can reduce clarity about appropriate adult
behaviors and reduced confidence in perceptions of threatening behavior, further reducing
the likelihood of a child’s avoiding or escaping from adult intrusions (see Gold, 2000). These
patterns, sadly, often continue into adulthood.
In our own clinic population, parents are the primary perpetrators of abuse in 80% of
cases (e.g., Cloitre, Miranda, Stovall-McClough, & Han, 2005). The remainder of clients

[PAGE 046]

3. Development in the Context of Deprivation 29


(those whose abuse has been perpetrated by someone outside the family) report some form
of maltreatment in the home—typically verbal abuse and neglect, or some combination.
These statistics and our own clinical experiences have led us to surmise that negative family contexts, and cold and distant relationships with caregivers in particular, are associated
with victimization outside the home. Children seek out and sometimes feel comfort by the
presence of alternative caregivers—in the form of babysitters, coaches, teachers, religious
or community leaders, or more generally individuals who make themselves available to give
attention to neglected children. Some of these adults are good models and lead the survivor
to a path of resilience. Not all of these adults, however, are trustworthy, which can lead to
continuing instances of trauma inflicted by other adults who were not the original perpetrators.

In fact, larger trends on attachment are not encouraging about the likelihood of moving toward security without direct clinical intervention. In a cross-cultural meta-analysis of
infant attachment styles (van IJzendoorn & Kroonenberg, 1988), studies reported an average of 65% of infants as securely attached, 21% as insecure-avoidant, and 14% as insecureresistant. For adults in the general population, a large review by Bakermans-Kranenburg
and van IJzendoorn (2009) found that 58% had an adult attachment style described as
secure, 23% as dismissing, 19% as preoccupied, and 18% as unresolved due to loss or trauma
(roughly akin to disorganized attachment in infants). Another meta-analytic review of adults
in the general population confirmed this trend toward less attachment security over time
(Konrath, Chopik, Hsing, & O’Brien, 2014). To address these trends at both individual and
larger societal levels, we must consider the role of trauma at all stages of life.
In short, a survivor of childhood abuse has almost always grown up in a family that
provides little in the way of skills necessary for adaptive or even adequate socioemotional
functioning. The difficulties in emotion management and interpersonal relating described
above are known to emanate most often from intrafamilial abuse, but they can also serve as
risk factors creating vulnerability to further abuse and additional types of trauma outside
the home even into adult years


SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT


In this chapter, we have noted that difficulties in emotion regulation and interpersonal relationships are present at each developmental stage among those abused in childhood, including toddlerhood, the middle years, and adolescence. These data suggest that the similar
problems seen in adults who come to treatment may have their origins in the developmental
years. They also suggest the entrenched and enduring nature of such difficulties.
One critical goal of the STAIR component of our treatment program is that in providing clients with a clear analysis of their problems, we also respond to gaps in their socioemotional competence by building and reinforcing emotion management and social skills.
In this way, we conceptualize the treatment as the provision or rehabilitation of basic and
life-enhancing social and emotional competencies with which survivors of abuse often have
not had sufficient experience.

[PAGE 047]

30 PART |. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


One cannot overstate the role of poor emotion management in interpersonal difficulties. The reasons for interpersonal conflict are often readily identified as emerging from
distressing and unmanageable feelings. Anger leads to words that are later regretted, to
strained or ruptured friendships, and sometimes to physical violence. Feelings of anger,
hurt, sadness, and humiliation are often out of proportion to the events that elicited them.
Even when justified, such feelings may be expressed in ways that do not lead to a satisfactory conclusion or a sustained human connection. Alternatively, emerging positive feelings
such as happiness, pride, or pleasure can also feel overwhelming or destabilizing to survivors ability to function in a situation; the survivors may have learned to distrust positive
emotions or feel that these are followed by punishment or despair. The consequence may be
that all emotionally intense feelings and situations are avoided, leading to social withdrawal
and isolation.
We have developed STAIR with the view that individuals communicate powerfully if
not primarily through the expression of feelings—verbal or nonverbal, intended or not. As
a result, the interpersonal interventions exercise clients awareness of and behaviors related
to the expression and modulation of emotion. Simply put, feelings are often about others or
about the self in relation to others. STAIR aims to help clients develop an expanded repertoire of emotional expressiveness so that they can more effectively and adaptively communicate with others. As adults, they can awaken to their own inner power and agency, and can
heal from the wounds that have kept them impaired for so long.

[PAGE 048]

Foundations of Treatment

[PAGE 050]

Treatment Rationale

Psychotherapy is not really about symptom relief;
its essential purpose is to help a person function
in the world, and ideally, to function well.
—ANONYMOUS


There are now several effective treatments for PTSD, with those identified as most effective focusing predominantly on confronting and working through the traumatic memories
(International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies [ISTSS], 2019a). However, we propose
that although such treatments are effective in treating PTSD related to past traumatic exposure, they do not optimally address clients’ range of problems in the present, which interfere
with effective functioning. The clients who come to mental health services seek help for
long-standing and pervasive problems in emotion management, in relationships, and with
work and career goals. Often clients acknowledge the presence of PTSD symptoms when
asked, but do not identify them as their primary reason for entering therapy. Others report
that they have hit “rock bottom” and can no longer deny the level of functional impairment
in their lives. These clients are often unemployed or working at jobs far lower than their
education or abilities warrant, have lost one or more jobs per year for several years, and/or
have intimate partners who are threatening to leave or who have already left.
These problems are not random assortments of life difficulties. Rather, they reflect
specific and enduring disturbances in emotion regulation and interpersonal capacities. The
common sources of these problems in daily functioning appear to be limited emotional and
social competencies. Such clients do not know how to manage emotional distress effectively
or deal with fluctuations in negative emotional states. Similarly, the many failed relationships they report are often the results of limited expectations that relationships can involve
mutual trust, respect, and support; of limited skills in creating such relationships (including
the selection of appropriate partners and friends); and of limited skills to maintain healthy
relationships and end unhealthy ones. All these limited competencies are consistent with
the characteristics of “derailed development” as predicted by attachment theory.
Our goal in developing STAIR Narrative Therapy has been to create a treatment program that supports recovery from the full range of difficulties resulting from exposure to


33

[PAGE 051]

34 PART Il. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


interpersonal trauma in the developmental years. The formulation and testing of STAIR
Narrative Therapy have been based on evidence emerging from the clinical, trauma, and
developmental literatures. This chapter describes the systematic empirical investigation
that yielded the rationale for this treatment, as well as the empirical outcomes of the treatment. Our goal in providing this historical review is to allow readers to critically evaluate
what makes sense to them, and to effectively adapt the strategies described in Part III of the
book in an informed way that is governed by the particular needs of individual survivors.


WHAT DO CLIENTS REALLY WANT?


The first empirical effort in our initiative was to determine what survivors were most concerned about and what they wanted from treatment. In order to answer these central questions, members of our clinical staff conducted a phone survey of 98 survivors of childhood
abuse (Levitt & Cloitre, 2005). As Table 4.1 shows, they found that the most common reasons for seeking services were interpersonal problems (67%), emotion management problems (31%), and symptoms of PTSD (59%).
It clearly did not seem sufficient to provide treatment for the one set of problems for
which we had effective therapy—the PTSD symptoms. Nor did we wish to assume that targeting this one problem set would automatically resolve the other two. Indeed, this seemed
unlikely. Certainly, PTSD symptoms do disrupt functioning; for example, sexual intimacy
can be quickly disturbed when certain touches or sensations are traumatic reminders of
sexual abuse and trigger flashbacks, acute physical discomfort, and fear. But many of the
observed emotion management and relationship problems seemed to derive from other
aspects of the experience of childhood trauma—particularly disturbances in emotional and
social learning experiences. We wished to provide treatment that would directly respond to
the most evident needs expressed by survivors of childhood abuse beyond those of PTSD.


WHAT MAKES CLIENTS’ DAILY FUNCTIONING SO DIFFICULT?


We were committed to the ideal that good treatment requires attending to our clients’
complaints and taking seriously the factors having the greatest apparent impact on their


TABLE 4.1. Reasons for Seeking Treatment
Reason for seeking treatment Percent

Interpersonal problems 67%

PTSD symptoms (any) 59%

Mood problems 31%

Other kinds of problems
Suicide attempt (lifetime) 45%

Substance abuse 33%

Note. n = 98. Data from Levitt and Cloitre (2005).

[PAGE 052]

4. Treatment Rationale 35


day-to-day functioning. Indeed, one traditional way to identify the presence of significant
mental health problems is to assess the impact of the problem on a client's functional status.
DSM-5, for example, the current compendium of formally accepted psychiatric disorders in
the United States, stipulates that functional impairment must be associated with symptoms
as a requirement for a psychiatric diagnosis (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
In an effort to organize a trauma treatment around functional capacity, our team analyzed the data from the face-to-face assessment interviews of the first consecutive 167
treatment-seeking women with a history of childhood abuse. We conducteda series of statistical analyses to determine to what extent each of the three symptom sets—PTSD symptoms, emotion management problems, and interpersonal problems—made a significant
contribution to functional impairment. The importance of this task was reinforced by the
treatment literature on the mood and anxiety disorders, which indicated that while various
treatments were successful in resolving disorder-specific symptoms, significant functional
impairment persisted (e.g., Agosti & Stewart, 1998; Coryell et al., 1993; Rapaport, Endicott, & Clary, 2002; Serretti et al., 1999). These data were taken to suggest that functional
impairment not only is a direct result of diagnostically defined symptoms, but also has other
sources.

The results of our own investigation indicated that functional impairment was related
not only to PTSD symptoms, but also to emotion regulation difficulties and interpersonal
problems (see Cloitre, Miranda, Stovall-McClough, & Han, 2005). Analyses were conducted
conservatively, maximizing the opportunity for PTSD symptoms to be associated with functional status. To the extent that PTSD and the other symptom sets shared the predictive
weighting of functional status, the predictive weighting was credited only to PTSD. After
age and other sociodemographic factors were accounted for, PTSD symptoms accounted for
20% of functional impairment. Emotion regulation difficulties alone accounted for an additional 4%, and interpersonal problems for yet another 18% of functional impairment (see
Figure 4.1). In sum, emotion regulation and interpersonal difficulties combined accounted
for essentially the same proportion of functional impairment as PTSD symptoms did. This
finding indicated an important organizing framework for developing the treatment. In
order to improve functional outcomes among survivors of trauma, we needed a treatment
that focused on ameliorating emotion regulation and interpersonal difficulties as well as
PTSD symptoms.
The extent to which these three factors together accounted for functional impairment—
a total of 42% of impairment—gave us confidence in advocating for resources of time,
money, and effort to be spent on developing an intervention that would directly address
each of these domains. To put the relative explanatory power of this model into perspective, we considered the translation of statistical results into funding resources for physical
health problems salient to women. For example, researchers investigations into the causes
of breast cancer have found that family history accounts for 10% of breast cancer cases (e.g.,
Yang et al., 1998) and is a significant predictor of the disease. Several million dollars have
been spent disseminating this information and providing prevention and early detection
interventions. By comparison, our research described above has captured a much greater
proportion of the sources of the problem of interest. In this context, the results of the study
become more compelling.

[PAGE 053]

36 PART Il. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


PTSD
symptoms

(20%) oo
Emotion
Functional
regulation problems ———————>
impairment
(4%)
onal
Interpers
problems
(18%)


FIGURE 4.1. Contributions of PTSD symptoms, emotion regulation difficulties, and interpersonal
problems to functional impairment. Data from Cloitre, Miranda, Stovall-McClough, and Han (2005).


THE CENTRAL ROLE OF EMOTION REGULATION IN HEALTHY LIVING


Having both good emotion regulation and interpersonal skills contribute to good overall
functioning. However, it is becoming clear that emotion regulation capacities constitute a
powerful driving force that influences the quality of relationships and has an independent
influence on several aspects of life, including general mental health and physical health.
Developmental studies have found that children’s emotion regulation capacity, measured
by their ability to manage intense feelings, predicted 2 years later how well liked they were
by schoolmates, how many friends they had, and how well adjusted they were rated by their
teachers (Parke, McDowell, Cladis, & Leidy, 2006). Several studies among young adults
have shown a similar sequential relationship between emotion regulation capacities and
multiple positive outcomes.
For example, Westphal, Seivert, and Bonnano (2010) evaluated the emotion regulation skills of college students in their first year of college, and found a significant relationship between strength of emotion regulation during that first year and good outcomes 3
years later regarding general mental health, physical health, ability to accomplish goals,
ability to cope, and quality of social interactions. Moreover, the benefits of good (vs. less
good) emotion regulation skills in the first year was most pronounced among those who had
experienced high levels of stressors during the intervening years, suggesting that emotion
regulation contributes to resilience in difficult times. “Good” emotion regulation comprises
several characteristics, among which include being able to express authentic feelings rather
than hide or suppress them (Bonnano et al., 2007), being able to express emotions in a way
that is appropriate to the social circumstances, and being able to express positive emotions
and share positive feelings (Papa & Bonanno, 2008).
All of the data cited above support our decision to organize the STAIR module in
such a way that emotion regulation skills precede and lay the foundations for interpersonal
skills development. Emotion regulation skills support effective relationship functioning in
several ways. The first sessions of STAIR focus on cultivating awareness of feelings, which
can lead to more authentic and appropriate self-expression to others, while emotion regulation skills allow an individual to choose when and how to share their feelings. Interwoven

[PAGE 054]

4. Treatment Rationale 37


through most of these sessions is attention to experiencing positive emotions and engaging
in pleasurable or playful experiences. These types of experiences help create a sense of life
as worth living, balancing out the pain that many have experienced; can help individuals
experience living in the here and now; and, importantly, can act as “glue” strengthening
bonds in relationships.


DIFFERENCES BETWEEN CHILDHOOD AND ADULTHOOD TRAUMA


In the previous chapters, we have described scenarios suggesting that limitations in emotion management and interpersonal functioning may have their source in disturbed attachment and social learning. The salience of these early life experiences, their influence on
adolescent and later-life emotional and social development, and their cumulative impact
over decades suggest that such problems may be more severe among survivors of childhood
abuse than among those who have experienced their first significant trauma in adulthood.
The most compelling support for this view are studies that have directly compared individuals with childhood-onset trauma to those with adult-onset trauma (e.g., survivors of
rape or natural disasters) and found that survivors of childhood abuse are consistently more
troubled, particularly in the domains of affect modulation, anger management, and interpersonal relationships (Cloitre et al., 1997; van der Kolk et al., 1993; Zlotnick et al., 1996).
Results from a study by Cloitre et al. (1997) found that while rates of PTSD were similar
among women who sought treatment for rape in adulthood versus childhood sexual abuse
(70% vs. 75%, respectively), those with childhood sexual abuse as their primary concern
reported significantly more affect regulation difficulties and had more significant interpersonal problem profiles. Both groups were compared on these measures to a comparison
group of women of similar age and background who reported that they had never been
traumatized and had no psychiatric diagnoses (see Figures 4.2 and 4.3). Women who had
experienced childhood abuse showed much more pronounced impairments in affect regulation than either of the other groups, while the survivors of rape looked rather similar to
the nontraumatized comparison group. Affect regulation was measured by alexithymia (difficulty identifying and labeling feelings) and dissociation. We also included lifetime suicide
attempts, following Marsha Linehans (1993) notion that suicide attempts often represent a
way of controlling and ending chronic and acute states of extreme distress—a commonly
endorsed reason for suicide attempts among survivors of childhood abuse (see Brodsky,
Cloitre, & Dulit, 1995).
A similar pattern was obtained in the assessment of interpersonal problems: Survivors
of childhood abuse consistently reported more problems than did either the survivors of
rape or the nontraumatized comparison group. Of particular interest was that the survivors
of childhood abuse reported significant problems in all aspects of interpersonal functioning
examined in the study, including problems with being assertive and with being submissive,
as well as problems with being too controlling. Although these may look like contradictory
endorsements, our work with this population suggests that the reporting is accurate and
reflects these survivors overall problems in managing power dynamics in relationships:

[PAGE 055]

38 PART Il. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


Emotion Dysregulation Measures


80-


607 y

507 4
Positive
40-

0
Percent
207 >
Y
107


Alexithymia (TAS) High Dissociators (DES) Suicide Attempts
=or>74 =or>20

| CSA MASA ONC|


FIGURE 4.2. Differential impact of trauma on emotion regulation depending on life stage: Emotion regulation. TAS, Toronto Alexithymia Scale; DES, Dissociative Experience Scale; CSA, group
with childhood sexual abuse; ASA, group with adulthood sexual abuse (rape); NC, never-abused
comparison group. Data from Cloitre, Scarvalone, and Difede (1997).


being insufficiently assertive in situations that call for a self-protective response, but being
too controlling in situations that do not warrant it. Sustained problems in managing power
and control in relationships are also consistent with our research on relationship models
among survivors of childhood abuse, which indicated a rigidity in perceptions of power
dynamics, reflected in a predominant model of human relationships that is based on control
(Cloitre et al., 2002a; see also Chapter 2).
Evidence highlighting the differences between individuals who have experienced a
single-event trauma and those who have been exposed to sustained, chronic, or multiple
types of trauma, particularly during the developmental years, has been accumulating over


Inventory of Interpersonal Problems


of Subjects


Percent


Assertive Sociable Submissive Responsible Intimate Control


|S.CSA MASA ONC|


FIGURE 4.3. Differential impact of trauma on interpersonal problems depending on life stage:
Interpersonal functioning. CSA, ASA, and NC as in Figure 4.2. Data from Cloitre et al. (1997).

[PAGE 056]

4. Treatment Rationale 39


the past decade. A greater number of traumatic exposures is typically associated with more
severe and a greater number and types of problems, regardless of whether traumatic exposures began in childhood or adulthood. However, when exposure to repeated or chronic
trauma occurs in childhood, the risk for an increasing diversity of problems is greater than
when trauma occurs in adulthood (Cloitre et al., 2009), and this is particularly true of problems in the area of emotion regulation, interpersonal functioning, and self-concept (Briere
& Rickards, 2007). The evidence that has accumulated is sufficiently substantial that there
is now a formal diagnosis of CPTSD in ICD-11 (WHO, 2018), as mentioned in Chapter 1.
This new diagnosis explicitly acknowledges the presence of disturbances in emotion regulation, negative self-concept, and interpersonal difficulties as defined symptom domains, in
addition to those traditionally viewed as belonging to PTSD (e.g., nightmares and reexperiencing symptoms). We expect that STAIR Narrative Therapy will be effective for survivors
of trauma in general, but may be particularly beneficial to those with CPTSD. More details
about this diagnosis and its assessment are provided in Chapter 9.


MATCHING INVERVENTIONS TO TARGETED PROBLEMS


The CPTSD diagnosis and the presence of reliable and valid measures will help identify
individuals who might be a good match for this treatment. Box 4.1 lists a broad range of
symptoms that can result from childhood abuse and neglect. Not all of them are explicitly
included in the CPTSD diagnosis, but they are known consequences of childhood interpersonal trauma and can act as “flags” for consideration of whether a treatment such as STAIR
Narrative Therapy might be of value.
Given that survivors of childhood interpersonal trauma frequently have both PTSD
symptoms and other types of problems, we determined to develop two distinct modules of
treatment. The first module of treatment focuses on the development of effective adaptive
emotional expression, an enhanced repertoire of interpersonal behaviors, and an improved
sense of self. The immediate goals of this module, STAIR, are to vigorously and directly
address problems in affect and interpersonal domains, and to help clients improve their
self-esteem and capacity for functioning in daily life.
The second module focuses on the emotional processing of the trauma and is intended
to resolve the PTSD symptoms. The therapy with the most evidence for the resolution of
PTSD symptoms is prolonged exposure (ISTSS, 2019a). We modified prolonged exposure
and adapted it to the needs of survivors of abuse (Cloitre, Koenen, Cohen, & Han, 2002b),
and we developed a series of interventions wrapped around it called Narrative Therapy.
The sequencing of STAIR before Narrative Therapy is intended to enhance the effective
use of narrative work through the development of a good relationship with the therapist and
through improvement in emotion management skills.
A summary of the interventions for STAIR Narrative Therapy is provided in Box 4.2.
Detailed descriptions of the reasoning behind the selection and development of the specific
interventions for STAIR and for Narrative Therapy are provided in the next two chapters
(Chapters 5 and 6, respectively).

[PAGE 057]

PART Il. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


General Symptom Profile of Survivors
of Childhood Abuse and Neglect

PTSD SYMPTOMS


Reexperiencing symptoms: Nightmares, flashbacks, intrusive thoughts/images related to the
trauma

Avoidance and emotional numbing: Avoidance of thoughts, people, places, or activities that
produce reminders of the trauma; loss of interest in things that used to give pleasure; feeling
numb
Hyperarousal: Difficulties with sleeping and concentration; exaggerated startle response;
irritability


EMOTION REGULATION PROBLEMS


Emotional reactivity (fear, rage, avoidance) to minor stimuli
Difficulty in “getting back to baseline” or restoring sense of equilibrium
Tendency to dissociate under stressful circumstances
Engaging in self-injurious behaviors (self-cutting, burning)
Coping through excessive use of alcohol or other substances


NEGATIVE SELF-CONCEPT


Feeling worthless
Feeling like a failure
Feeling “invisible” to others
Feeling to blame when things go wrong
Chronic sense of shame or guilt


INTERPERSONAL PROBLEMS


Difficulty with intimacy and trust
Sensitivity to criticism
Inability to hear other viewpoints
Difficulty in standing up for oneself
Tendency to quit jobs and relationships without negotiation
History of repeated victimization (e.g., domestic violence, date rape)

[PAGE 058]

4. Treatment Rationale 41


Overview of STAIR Narrative Therapy with Symptom Targets

MODULE I: SKILLS TRAINING
FOR AFFECTIVE AND INTERPERSONAL REGULATION (STAIR)

Symptom Targets: Emotion Regulation Difficulties, Interpersonal Problems

Emotional awareness: Identification and labeling of feelings, self-monitoring of emotions;
skill of Focused Breathing
Emotion regulation: Psychoeducation on emotional responding in physiological, cognitive,
and behavioral channels; skills of Focused Breathing, Thought Shifting, Positive Imagery,
Positive Self-Statements; working with fear and anger, pleasurable activities, and positive
emotions

Emotionally engaged living: Goal identification; distress tolerance; skill of Pros and Cons;
using positive feelings as guide to decision making and action; acceptance of negative emo-
tions


Symptom Targets: Changing Relationship Patterns

Understanding the self-fulfilling nature of trauma-based relationship models
Taking an opportunity to change; revising interpersonal expectations
Agency in relationships; focus on appropriate assertiveness, changing relationship models;
practice in role play
Flexibility in relationships; focus on maintaining respect for self and others, regardless of
power balance
Increase ability to be close to others and stay close despite conflict
Review of improvements in skills; importance of self-compassion and of practicing it even in
difficult times; skill of SelfCompassion Meditation


MODULE II: NARRATIVE THERAPY

Symptom Targets: PTSD Symptoms, Emotion Regulation Difficulties,
Interpersonal Problems

Narratives of traumatic memories with focus on fear, shame, loss
Using postnarrative grounding strategies to orient client to present
Identifying relationship models in narratives; contrasting trauma-generated models with
alternative and more positive and flexible models based in STAIR work
Practicing new behaviors, exercising emotional awareness, contrasting the present with the
past, redirecting attention and energy to the present

[PAGE 059]

42 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


WHY A SEQUENTIAL TREATMENT?


One might consider that skills training could be provided simultaneously with more traditional trauma-focused work, or, alternatively, after the trauma-processing work has been
done. But we decided against this for several reasons.


Giving Clients Time to Learn

First, the empirical literature has indicated that when coping interventions and trauma processing were conducted simultaneously within a session, the benefits of the treatment were
no greater than the benefits of treatments that just provided one or the other component of
treatment. Some treatment researchers (e.g., Foa, Dancu, Hembree, Jaycox, & Meadows,
1999) have suggested that the limits on effectiveness may be the result of “information overload,” in which clients cannot absorb the substantial amount of information provided in the
limited time typically available for treatment.


Preparing Clients for Narrative Work

Second, we wanted our clients to have a maximal skill set with which to engage in the narrative work. Although many survivors of trauma are able to discuss their traumatic memories in a sustained and emotionally connected way, there is a substantial clinical literature
reporting concern that survivors of childhood abuse may come to the work with fewer
resources than are optimal for the emotional effort involved. For example, Steven Gold
(2000) comments:


Adults with adequate adaptive skills that have been disrupted by the impact of a single
traumatic event enter treatment with an array of personal capacities (e.g., coping skills,
judgment, a sense of efficacy) and environmental resources (e.g., social support, financial
reserves) that are nowhere near as likely to be accessible to survivors of extended child
abuse. The former group, therefore, even if they are highly symptomatic individually, has
firmly rooted strength to draw upon that greatly bolster their capacity to face and produc-
tively process trauma. The latter group, however, lacks these advantages. Consequently,
even the routine stressors of daily adult living tax their capacities and can be destabilizing.
It is unreasonable to expect that they are in a substantially better position to productively
assimilate traumatic experiences than when those events originally occurred. (p. 58)


Indeed, several clinical reports indicate that clients who have compromised capacities in tolerating distress and difficulty securing good relationships with their therapists
may experience symptom exacerbation during the processing involved in exposure-based
trauma treatment or drop out of the therapy (Larsen, Stirman, Smith, & Resick, 2016;
McDonagh et al., 2005; Scott & Stradling, 1997; Tarrier et al., 1999), or may not obtain as
good an outcome as clients without such problems (Foa, Riggs, Massie, & Yarczower, 1995b;
Ford, Fisher, & Larson, 1997; Ford € Kidd, 1998; Funari, Piekarski, & Sherwood, 1991).

[PAGE 060]

4. Treatment Rationale 43


The implementation of STAIR prior to trauma processing was intended to address these
concerns. Data from a study by Cloitre and colleagues (2010), described in the next section,
identify the benefits of sequencing treatment in reducing symptom exacerbation and dropout rates from treatment.


Respecting the Power of the Therapeutic Alliance

Lastly, we were sensitive to the importance of the therapeutic relationship. The working
relationship between the therapist and client is the single most important factor predicting
good treatment outcome (Horvath & Symonds, 1991; Martin, Garske, & Davis, 2000). This
is aremarkably durable phenomenon. It has been observed in interpersonal (e.g., Krupnick
et al., 1996), cognitive (e.g., Muran, Segal, Samstag, & Crawford, 1994), and dynamic (e.g.,
Stiles, Agnew-Davis, Hardy, Barkman, & Shapiro, 1998; Yeomans et al., 1994) therapies, as
well as in a range of therapy targets (e.g., alleviating depression or anxiety, treating alcohol
or other substance use).
It is clearly important for the therapist and client to develop a rapport and good understanding of each other before engaging in the emotional processing of the trauma. Many
trauma therapists have alluded to the difficulties any survivor of interpersonal trauma has in
tolerating the interpersonal nature of therapy—that is, “the [need] to . . . trust another person with his or her pain” (Turner, McFarlane, & van der Kolk, 1996, p. 538; see also Pearl.
man & Saakvitne, 1995; Lindy, 1996). This difficulty would seem further exacerbated in
exposure-based treatments, which require a significant and sustained amount of emotional
disclosure. We wished to maximize the client’s sense of being understood and supported by
the therapist—and, just as important, the therapist's and client’s mutual recognition that the
therapist is familiar with the client’s strengths and vulnerabilities and will attend to them
accordingly during the narrative work.


BENEFITS OF A SEQUENTIAL TREATMENT


Our research with STAIR Narrative Therapy has supported the notion that a sequential
treatment with skills preceding narrative work contributes to good outcome in trauma processing. The first randomized controlled trial (RCT) compared STAIR Narrative Therapy to
a minimal-attention wait-list condition (Cloitre et al., 2002b). We found that two characteristics of STAIR significantly influenced the success of the narrative work: a strong and positive therapeutic alliance, and the development of emotion regulation skills. While STAIR
produced many positive and important improvements for the clients, such as decreases in
anxiety and depression, only improvement in negative mood regulation and the strength of
the therapeutic relationship were significantly related to PTSD reduction in the narrative
phase (see Table 4.2). These results suggested the relative specificity of the resources that
support effective processing work, as well as the value of organizing the treatment components in a chronological fashion.

[PAGE 061]

44 PART Il. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


TABLE 4.2. STAIR Predictors of Success in Narrative Therapy
as Measured by PTSD Symptom Reduction
Phase I variables R p Effect size”

Therapeutic alliance (WAT) -64 03 Large

Improved negative mood regulation —.47 .03 Medium-large
(NMR)

Note. WAI, Working Alliance Inventory; NMR, Generalized Expectancy for
Negative Mood Regulation Scale. Data from Cloitre, Koenen, Cohen, and Han
(2002b).
“An effect size of 0.10 is small; one of 0.30 is medium; one of 0.50 is large.


Treatment Outcome

The RCT described above was an initial study to assess whether STAIR Narrative Therapy
was an efficacious treatment as compared to a wait list. As expected, the treatment resulted
in significant reductions in PTSD symptoms. In addition, there were significant improvements in experiencing and modulating emotions (as measured by increased ability to identify and name feelings, improved mood regulation, and decreased dissociation). There was
also significant and sustained reduction in three central mood disturbances: anxiety, anger,
and depression. Lastly, interpersonal problems were significantly reduced, and role functioning in home, work, and social domains was improved. All of these gains were maintained at 3- and 9-month follow-ups.
A second RCT was completed, which compared STAIR Narrative Therapy to each of
its component parts (Cloitre et al., 2010). In one comparison condition, STAIR was replaced
with supportive counseling (SC) plus Narrative Therapy to determine whether the active
ingredients in STAIR (skills training) were contributing to overall good outcome and might
have a positive impact on reducing dropout, as well as preventing the symptom worsening
(increase in PTSD and dissociative symptoms) that sometimes occurs in trauma-focused
treatment. In the second comparator, Narrative Therapy was replaced with SC to determine whether PTSD symptoms could be improved in the absence of trauma-focused work.
The results indicated that STAIR Narrative Therapy was superior to the SC plus Narrative Therapy condition in the reduction of PTSD diagnosis, while STAIR plus SC fell in
the middle. A similar result was observed with self-reported PTSD symptoms: STAIR Narrative Therapy produced greater improvements than the SC plus Narrative Therapy condition and was superior to both treatment conditions in improving interpersonal problems.
All treatments showed improvements in each of three main outcomes, and at the immediate
posttreatment assessment, it looked as if the results of the three therapies did not differ
substantially. However, at the 3-month outcome and then certainly by the 6-month followup, STAIR Narrative Therapy was superior on all three outcomes. (See Figures 4.4 through
4.6.)
We hypothesize that the combination of the narrative work and skills work was responsible for these findings. That is, the narrative work helped clients put their traumas in the

[PAGE 062]

4. Treatment Rationale 45


PTSD Symptoms
70.0


60.0


50.0


40.0 —E-STAIR/NT

STAIR/SC


30.0 SCINT


20.0


10.0
Pre-Tx Mid-Tx Post-Tx 3MFU 6MFU


FIGURE 4.4. Reduction in PTSD symptoms (as assessed with the PTSD Symptom Scale SelfReport Version, or PSS-SR). STAIR/NT, STAIR Narrative Therapy; STAIR/SC, STAIR plus supportive counseling (SC); SC/NT, SC plus Narrative Therapy. Data from Cloitre et al. (2010).


120.0 Emotion Regulation


110.0


100.0
-8-STAIRINT


STAIR/SC

SCINT
90.0 “


80.0
Pre-Tx Mid-Tx Post-Tx 3MFU 6MFU


FIGURE 4.5. Improvement in emotion regulation (as assessed with the Generalized Expectancy
for Negative Mood Regulation Scale). Abbreviations as in Figure 4.4. Data from Cloitre et al. (2010).

[PAGE 063]

46 PART Il. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


2.0
Interpersonal Problems


1.5


--STAIR/NT


STAIR/SC
1.0
SCINT


0.5
Pre-Tx Mid-Tx Post-Tx 3MFU 6MFU


FIGURE 4.6. Reduction in interpersonal problems (as assessed with the Inventory of Interpersonal Problems). Abbreviations as in Figure 4.4. Data from Cloitre et al. (2010).


past where they belonged, while the skills allowed them to do better in daily living through
improvements in relationships and functioning, which in turn reinforced the message from
the narrative work that the trauma was indeed behind them.


Improving Completion Rates and Reducing Challenges
of Trauma Processing

An important goal of the component study was to determine whether introducing skills
training before narrative work would have a positive impact on some of the challenges of
narrative work that can lead to dropout and increased symptoms. Indeed, the STAIR Narrative Therapy dropout rate was significantly lower than the SC plus Narrative Therapy
dropout rate (15.2% vs. 39.4%). There were also significantly lower session-to-session PTSD
symptoms during Narrative Therapy when it was preceded by STAIR than it was when not.
A similar pattern, though not significant, occurred with the dissociative symptoms. (See
Figures 4.7 and 4.8.)
Inspection of the graphs shows that the PTSD symptoms at the beginning of the narrative work (see Session 10) were almost as low when preceded by STAIR (line with squares at
assessment points) as when there was no Narrative Therapy happening (line with triangles).
This is in contrast with the condition where Narrative Therapy was not preceded by STAIR
(line with round circles), in which there was a substantial increase in PTSD symptoms and
dissociation. Overall, these results suggest that STAIR Narrative Therapy reduced distress
during the very important process of telling about the trauma.

[PAGE 064]

4. Treatment Rationale 47


50.0
PTSD Symptoms START

STAIR/SC

40.0 SC/NT


30.0

Se

20.0


10.0
Pre-Tx 2 4 6 Mid 10 12 14 Post


FIGURE 4.7. Session-by-session self-reported PTSD symptoms (as assessed with the PSS-SR).
Abbreviations as in Figure 4.4. Data from Cloitre et al. (2010).


2.0 . a:
Dissociation
-#STAIRINT

STAIR/SC

1.5 SC/NT
E=


1.0


0.5 7


0.0
Pre-Tx 2 4 6 Mid 10 12 14 Post


FIGURE 4.8. Session-by-session dissociation symptoms (as assessed with the Trauma Symptom
Inventory’s Dissociation scale). Abbreviations as in Figure 4.4. Data from Cloitre et al. (2010).


EXPERIENTIAL ASPECTS OF STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY


As we spent time working with our clients, we came to appreciate an experiential aspect
of sequencing skills training before the narrative work, for which we have no data but our
own clinical observations. We noted that the skills work, in combination with a positive
relationship with the therapist, provided the clients with increased confidence and perceptions of themselves as persons who were competent, well regarded, and esteemed. These
new self-perceptions seemed to provide the clients with a way of thinking about themselves
that made the confrontation of the past less difficult and overwhelming. The confidence in
engaging in the narrative work seemed to come not only from the clients’ awareness of their

[PAGE 065]

48 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


own capacity to manage the feelings the trauma memories engendered, but also from their
knowledge that they were no longer exactly the persons they described in their narratives.
The narrative work requires going back to the past and telling about traumatic events
with emotional depth and intensity. This process returns clients to their early life histories
and often leads to a deeply felt awareness of the far-reaching influence these experiences
have had on the trajectory of their lives. This seems more easily acknowledged when the
clients have achieved some sense of distance from their past and from the more vulnerable
persons they were then. From the position of present strength, the clients are able to feel
compassion for the young persons they once were, and for the fear, pain, and disappointment they experienced then. They can also feel more respect for their current achievements
both in and out of the therapy.
The completion of the narrative component in turn seems to strengthen the clients’
appreciation for the present and their motivation to live well in it. During the narrative
work, the clients grapple with the pain generated by the traumatic experiences; with this
effort, their emotional lives are often deepened and enriched. The experience can lead to
an increased capacity for openness in emotional experiencing and greater authentic connection with others. When clients complete the narrative work, they often return to STAIR
skills practice with a deeper appreciation of the emotional and social benefits of this work.
The STAIR module provides the clients with tools for behaving, thinking, and feeling in
more positive and competent ways, and expanding their reach for positive relationships and
self-awareness. The clearest indicator that narrative work has been successfully completed,
as well as its greatest benefit, is that the clients “let go” of the past in favor of the present.
Recovered survivors find the present a more interesting place to be—and, with the needed
skills, a place where they can feel at home.


SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT


This chapter has provided a systematic review of the empirical data that generated the
formulation of the treatment described in this book—a treatment that includes interventions focused on affective and interpersonal problems particularly for survivors of interpersonal trauma, and that sequences treatment modules so that skills training precedes
trauma-focused work. The chapter also identifies data from RCTs describing the benefits
of a sequential treatment. These data are intended to give therapists a clear understanding
of why they are providing the interventions in this program and the potential benefits of
sequencing interventions. Being aware of these data can help therapists feel confident about
the work they are doing and why. This information can also be shared with clients, to clarify
the rationale for the treatment and to help the clients determine whether the treatment is a
good match to their needs.

[PAGE 066]

Building Emotional
and Social Resources
Overview of STAIR


Humans have the capacity for change and growth
through the entire life span.
—JEROME KAGAN (1980)


This chapter provides the rationale for the STAIR session topics and for their order. By
conscious design, the session topics follow the human developmental trajectory in the maturation of emotional and social competencies, particularly as these competencies contribute
to the growth of agency and connection with others. Agency, a sense of oneself as a source
of action, originates in the ability to know what one feels and to use feelings as a guide to
action. The expression of these feelings aids communication with others and, if effectively
done, contributes to connection with them. Sustained connection requires the ability to
express one’s feelings in a way that can be understood by others and to endure certain
amounts of distress in resolving conflict. It also requires the ability to balance self-interests
with recognition of the interests of others. Flexibility in expectations of others, depending
on their needs and the social context, allows one to have different kinds of relationships.
Relationships can range from those with easy-going and fleeting acquaintances to those
with long-term or lifelong partners and friends. Diverse kinds of relationships provide one
with enriching experiences and resources for living. The STAIR treatment includes skills
training in identifying feelings, managing and expressing emotions, enhancing assertiveness, managing power dynamics, optimizing levels of intimacy, and increasing flexibility in
relationships, which all build on each other to create emotional and social resources. Lastly,
STAIR highlights the importance of cultivating self-compassion through the learning process. Compassion itself may be one of the most important resources for living that exists, and
it animates all of the skills and recovery processes described in this book.
The progression of emotional and social skills development described above is reflected
in the order of the STAIR sessions. The first sessions address emotional awareness, emotion


49

[PAGE 067]

50 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


regulation, and effective emotion-informed planning and action. Session 2 begins with the
task of identifying and labeling feeling states. Once feelings are named and their reality is
affirmed, the sessions progress to the tasks of discriminating among feelings and communicating about them. The middle sessions (Sessions 3—5) introduce the critical skills of modulation of feelings, including the appropriate and effective expression of these feelings to
others, as well as how to use information from feelings to make decisions about whether tolerating distress is worthwhile for larger personal goals and values. The next series of STAIR
sessions (Sessions 6—9) makes the transition to matters of interpersonal functioning—in particular, the role of emotional experiencing and expression as central means of creating and
maintaining healthy attachments. These include developing assertiveness skills and effectively managing power balances in relationships. These sessions highlight the importance
of responding flexibly to a growing range of social circumstances, individuals, and experiences, but always with a sense of respect for oneself and others. Session 9 introduces what
may be the most challenging task of those who have experienced interpersonal violence—
namely, working toward, achieving, and maintaining healthy levels of intimacy and closeness with others. The final STAIR session (Session 10) explicitly discusses the concept of
self-compassion, while reflecting on gains made thus far in their skill development.
The treatment proceeds from the very beginning with the therapist expressing and
modeling an attitude of compassion and respect toward the client as they work toward their
goals. In the final session, the importance of self-compassion is explicitly discussed as the
client prepares either to make the transition to Narrative Therapy or to continue practicing
skills on their own. Every person will fail to meet some goals and will experience relapses to
problematic behavior at some point. Acceptance of these failures or limitations can paradoxically lead to greater ease in creating change and experiencing growth. Reactions to failures
such as self-criticism and anger consume time and emotional energy that could otherwise
be channeled into reassessment and change. For those going on to Narrative Therapy, an
attitude of compassion for self and others will be helpful as the clients review painful and
disappointing experiences.
Although the growth and maintenance of self-regulation capacities and self-compassion
constitute a lifelong endeavor, the goal of STAIR is to help each client develop core emotional and social competencies that will provide a foundation for future efforts. Below, we
describe the concepts and skills that are introduced in the STAIR sessions, and we provide
descriptions and rationales for the specific interventions used to develop those skills. An
at-a-glance, session-by-session summary is provided in Box 5.1.


EMOTIONAL COMPETENCIES


“Emotional competencies’ are the abilities to identify, monitor, manage, and express emotions for specific functional or adaptive purposes. Chapters 2, 3, and 4 have described
the developmental literature on children who have experienced maltreatment, as well as
empirical assessments of adult survivors of childhood abuse. The research thus far indicates that many emotional competencies, particularly those influenced by experiences with

[PAGE 068]

5. Building Emotional and Social Resources 51


Building Emotional and Social Resources:
Outline of STAIR Sessions (Module I)

Session Content

Session 1 The Resource of Hope: Introducing the Client to Treatment.
Treatment overview and goals; introduction to Focused Breathing.


Session 2 The Resource of Feelings: Emotional Awareness.
Psychoeducation on the function of emotions and importance of emotional
awareness. Introduction of Feelings Monitoring Form.


Session 3 Emotion Regulation: Focus on the Body.
Review of healthy and unhealthy efforts to cope along the body channel.
Introduction to skills of Basic Self-Care, Soothing the Senses, and Progressive
Muscle Relaxation.


Session 4 Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behavior.
Review of common healthy and unhealthy efforts to cope in the thought and
behavior channels. Selection and practice of skills tailored to each client, which
can include the Evidence Technique, Positive Imagery, Take a Break/Time
Out, Opposite Action, Seek Support, and Plan Pleasurable Activities.


Session 5 Emotionally Engaged Living.
Introduction of distress tolerance as an essential set of skills to encourage
engaged and/or value-centered living. Introduction of Pros and Cons skill.
Organization and practice of skills from all three channels to reach an
identified valued goal.


Session 6 Understanding Relationship Patterns.
Introduction of concept of relationships models as drivers of interpersonal
habits. Examples of trauma-generated models are provided. Clients generate
examples of their own relationship models.


Session 7 Changing Relationship Patterns: Focus on Assertiveness.
Psychoeducation on effective assertiveness and basic personal rights;
discussion of alternative relationship models; role plays requiring assertiveness;
generation of alternative relationship models.


Session 8 Changing Relationship Patterns: Managing Power and Maintaining Respect.
Psychoeducation on impact of trauma on experience of respect for
self and others. Practice in being flexible regarding expectations and
behaviors, depending on power balance in relationship. Practice of skills in
acknowledging the needs, feelings, and beliefs of others.
(continued)

[PAGE 069]

52 PART Il. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


Session Content

Session9 Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness.
Review of different kind of relationship boundaries. Introduction of skills to
increase closeness to others, such as skills for repairing a relationship after an
argument and beginning a new relationship.


Session 10 Self-Compassion and Summary of Skills Training.
Review of treatment progress. Reflection on role of self-compassion in
recovery; introduction and practice of Self-Compassion Meditation. Discussion
of next steps—either self-directed continued skills practice or transition to
Narrative Therapy.


caregivers, are disturbed by maltreatment. These disturbances include difficulties in identification and labeling of feeling states, differentiation among different emotions, appropriate
danger detection, effective strategies for managing and modifying feelings, and expression
of feelings in social and interpersonal contexts. We have organized emotional competencies
into three core skills: (1) emotional awareness; (2) emotion regulation; and (3) emotionally
engaged living, with a focus on the pursuit of valued goals.


Emotional Awareness

Emotional awareness is a prerequisite to effective emotion modulation and effective living.
Whether we are aware of our feelings or not, they guide our decision making and actions.
They inform others, and indeed even ourselves, about who we are. Emotions have a powerful and pervasive influence in all aspects of living. Accordingly, awareness of our feelings
is a first step toward self-knowledge, self-regulation, and self-direction. Awareness of our
emotions allows us to modulate them in a more purposeful, direct, and mindful way than is
possible when we attempt to avoid or suppress them, or when we simply experience them as
a cascade of undifferentiated sensations. In addition, awareness of feelings gives us greater
degrees of freedom in living. Realizing and naming what we are feeling opens up options—
the option to modulate a feeling, as well as the options to change it, act on it, accept it, or
let it go.


Identifying and labeling feeling states

The task of identifying and labeling feeling states has particular significance for survivors of
childhood maltreatment. The social environment of a child who has experienced maltreatment is one in which the labeling of feeling is limited and, in regard to the maltreatment,
either highly distorted or altogether absent. Because physical and sexual abuse incidents
in particular are hidden from public view and knowledge, and are not typically topics of
conversation in the social network, opportunities for correction or reanalysis of “victim
blaming” or other distorted labeling is not easily available. In addition, the silence about

[PAGE 070]

5. Building Emotional and Social Resources 53


the reality of the maltreatment in the home is inadvertently reinforced by the silence of
the larger social environment. For the survivor, the absence of a descriptive language for a
key life experience often leads to feelings of inauthenticity—and, worse, to an internalized
vocabulary that is self-blaming (“You deserve what you are getting’), incongruent with the
actual experience (“This was good for you in the end”), or full of denial (“Maybe it really
didnt happen or was as bad as I remember”). As a result, survivors of childhood trauma are
often at a great disadvantage in coming to terms with the impact of their trauma. Feelings
arising from the maltreatment remain inaccurately named or even unnamed; moreover, the
fear, anger, depression, and aggression related to the abuse are often not connected to the
trauma, by the survivors or by anyone around them.
The first intervention in STAIR involves the systematic exploration of feelings—their
names, their intensity, and the context in which they occur. This effort is intended to yield
clarity about specific feelings, recognition of different kinds of feelings by reference to
different events and experiences, and sustained awareness of the presence of feelings in
daily life. The opportunity for survivors of interpersonal trauma to name their feelings and
describe their emotional experiences is vital to the process of self-discovery and ongoing
self-assessment. The naming of things is the first step in each client's discovery of an authentic personal voice. The ongoing expression and organization of feelings throughout the treatment are essential to the creation of a coherent narrative of the client's personal history.


Emotion Regulation

“Emotion regulation” refers to the capacity to modulate emotional reactions and expression.
Persons who have problems in emotion regulation experience rapid and intense emotional
reactions, with difficulty returning to baseline (Linehan, 1993; van der Kolk, 1996). Marsha
Linehan was the first to label such disturbance in ability to manage emotions and to discuss
it thoroughly as a problem that many clients bring into treatment. Linehan, a well-known
psychologist, has worked many years with clients who present with chronic suicidality. She
has observed that suicide attempts are often efforts to terminate either the pain of intense
negative emotions as they are occurring in the moment, or the dread of the emotions’ relentless and uncontrolled appearance in these clients” lives. Linehan has developed a program
called Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT), which is shaped by the principle that treatment
should provide clients with options for how they might choose to respond to an emotion or
experience, rather than being simply carried away by it (Linehan, 1993). This principle is
applied to both internal and interpersonal experiences. With this ground-breaking work,
Linehan has oriented therapists and researchers to the importance of the study and treatment of emotion management difficulties.


Basic skills in emotion regulation

Difficulties in emotion regulation reflect disturbances in underlying sensory, cognitive,
and behavioral systems, rather than problems with one specific type of emotional experience. The research literature has consistently identified the development of these three

[PAGE 071]

54 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


core coping systems across all ages—from the toddler years through adolescence into adulthood and old age—as contributing to effective emotion management. This literature thus
suggests the relevance of these systems in the treatment of clients with emotion regulation
difficulties, which are often seen in clients with a history of early and repeated trauma. It
also has provided us with a heuristic for organizing the emotion skills training. The three
systems, or what we call “channels,” of emotional experiencing are described in this treatment as follows: (1) the “body channel,” which includes interventions related to physical/
physiological management (e.g., deep breathing, exercise); (2) the “thought channel” which
includes cognitive strategies (e.g., self-statements, reframing of upsetting events, attentional
control); and (3) the “behavior channel,” which includes behavioral efforts at management
and/or social support (e.g., taking a time out, calling friends for help, talking with others
about feelings).
A client's coping strategies are assessed within each channel, with the goals of strengthening and elaborating existing strategies and training the client in new ones. The overall goal is to create a well-integrated set of coping strategies, so that physical sensations,
thoughts, and behaviors influence one another and work together toward well-modulated
emotional experiences.


Modulating negative feelings

Fear and anger are often the emotions to which management skills are first applied. The
reason for this order of priority is that fear and anger tend to be highly prevalent among
survivors of interpersonal trauma and also create immediate and obvious problems in their
day-to-day functioning, particularly in monitoring personal safety (inaccurate threat perceptions) and avoiding interpersonal ruptures (anger). The application of emotion regulation skills to feelings like shame and grief tends to occur later in the treatment, as these
feelings often first emerge when the trauma history is explored in the development of the
life narrative. The emotion regulation skills described above effectively result in reduced
difficulties in managing day-to-day experiences; better management of difficult feelings
such as anxiety, anger, and depression; and reduction in dissociation. They also contribute,
through their application during the trauma processing, to a reduction of PTSD symptoms
(e.g., hyperarousal, reexperiencing).


Accepting and modulating positive feelings

Although it seems counterintuitive, the experience of positive emotions can be painful to
survivors of interpersonal trauma. Positive feelings are unfamiliar, and their unfamiliarity
creates unease. Positive emotions are also threatening because they create the risk of new
ways of being “out of control” or may lead to disappointment if the survivors cannot sustain the emotion. Accordingly, clients are introduced to the notion that emotion regulation
includes the ability to modulate not only negative feelings, but positive ones. The clients
are encouraged to engage in simple pleasures and to practice modulation skills to keep
their feelings within bounds that are comfortable to them. The immediate consequence

[PAGE 072]

5. Building Emotional and Social Resources 55


of introducing small pleasures is the satisfaction that the ability to confront and modulate
negative feelings carries with it the reward of experiencing positive feelings as well.
However, more importantly, this exercise conveys the true meaning of emotion regulation. It refers not only to the abilities to self-soothe and to reduce negative feeling states,
but also to the abilities to raise and sustain positive feelings. It is the capacity to create an
“emotional comfort zone” that is neither too intensely high nor too low, and as such allows a
person to function, learn, and stay connected with the environment.


Emotionally Engaged Living: Toward the Pursuit of Valued Goals

For many survivors, the only alternatives to living painful and out-of-control lives are emotional avoidance, social withdrawal, limited pleasure in daily activities, and severely limited actualization of their potential. Such clients are encouraged to identify positive goals
for themselves—to articulate their desires and wishes, and to consider ways in which they
may realize these. Leaving the familiarity of an avoidant lifestyle requires support from
the therapist and the development of several skills—making sound judgments about which
goals to attempt, pacing goals, and weighing the costs and benefits of any new experience.
The concept of “distress tolerance” and the skills associated with it (see Linehan, 1993,
2015) are introduced and practiced repeatedly in the treatment. This process is intended to
provide survivors with the skills necessary to control the pace of their gradual reconnection
to the emotional and social world.


Distress tolerance

Once survivors are able to identify and manage emotional reactions, they can allow themselves the experience of (well-managed) distressing feelings that serve an important purpose
or goal, or are simply an inevitable aspects of certain life experiences. For example, if a client wants to get a job, a job interview is likely, and so is some anxiety. Ifa client wants to get
married or have a long-term relationship, the anxious feelings associated with first meeting
someone, coming to know this person, and risking rejection are all inevitable. Interventions
for distress tolerance are introduced, so that the client can successfully achieve certain valued goals. This skill also involves weighing a goal against the likely distress it will generate,
evaluating one's capacity to manage the distress, and deciding to adjust or delay the goal.


Accepting positive feelings as guides to planning and action

Clients are also introduced to the utility of positive feelings in identifying valued goals.
Positive feelings about certain activities, people, or projects are identified as legitimate and
valuable guides in decision making. This work builds on the previous interventions in which
the clients are introduced to small pleasures and practice in modulating and enjoying positive feelings. In this next step, the clients are introduced to ways to enhance quality of life
by engaging in “approach behaviors’ to life experiences that are positive or goals that provide intrinsic pleasure.

[PAGE 073]

56 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


SOCIAL COMPETENCIES


The majority of survivors of interpersonal trauma are motivated to come to treatment
because of self-identified problems in relationships. Inevitably, problems in relationships
include problems with emotions: feeling too much, feeling too little, or having a feeling
poorly matched with the demands of the situation. Thus the skills developed in the first sessions are directly relevant to improving relationships. In addition, problems in relationships
for survivors of child maltreatment emerge from maltreatment-generated interpersonal
expectations and patterns of behaviors that are not adaptive in the clients’ adult worlds.
Problems with starting and maintaining relationships, sustained conflict in intimate relationships, consistent feedback from friends about approach—avoidance patterns of relating,
failures in appropriate assertiveness in the workplace or among family members, anger fits
in front of their children, and fears of handing down the legacy of their maltreatment to
their children all often have their source in trauma-related beliefs and behaviors and are all
reasons for entering into treatment.


identifying Trauma-Related Relationship Models

Chapter 2 on attachment has proposed that working models of relationships, or what we
more simply call “relationship models,” emerge from experiences with early caregivers or
other significant people and are important because they influence the selection, character, and dynamics of relationships that follow. In STAIR, we have adapted the concept of
relationship models to define and explore the negative patterns of relating that dominate
clients’ lives and over which they feel little control. Our research has indicated that the relationship models of survivors of interpersonal trauma represent “self and other” in victim—
perpetrator patterns, where the expected contingencies for relationships, abstracted from
their particulars, reflect formulations such as “To be attached means to be abused” and
“Abuse is one way of attaching.”
One of the central tasks in the STAIR treatment is to identify trauma-related relationship models and describe them as the result of a healthy impulse, attachment, which has
gone astray because of the malicious environmental context in which the rules for attachment were derived. Both therapists empathy for their clients and the clients’ eventual
empathy for themselves are based on the understanding that schemas constitute a built-in
“ambush” for survivors in the form of the self-fulfilling prophecies.
Relationship models have a positive function, in that they allow the anticipation of future
events on the principle that “The future will be much like the past” or “The past predicts the
future.” People’s behaviors are guided by behaviors that prepare them for expected rather
than all possible outcomes. Such preparations often help create the expected outcomes
and close out other possibilities. This process is adaptive among people who have positive
expectations or who live in unchanging, stable environments. However, it leads to significant
negative consequences for survivors of childhood maltreatment, who have left the maltreating environment but still (and rather inevitably) maintain expectations generated in that
environment. For example, a young woman from an abusive family who has developed the
understanding that interpersonal relatedness is contingent on sexual behavior is more likely

[PAGE 074]

5. Building Emotional and Social Resources 57


to engage in or initiate sexual activity as a way of emotionally connecting to others, whether
or not she is interested in sex and whether or not her partner is actually expecting sex.
We view the identification of relationship models as a critical aspect of treatment. It
represents the distillation of central beliefs about self and others that provide clarity about
the clients’ motivations for action. The clients behaviors become understandable to themselves and to their therapists. In addition, the sources of the models as they derive from
past experience can be explored, and the accuracy of their application to the present can
be empathetically challenged. Alternative ways of thinking about self and other can be
constructed.


Changing Relationship Models

As just introduced, the second and more difficult aspect of the treatment is to begin proposing and adopting alternative relationship models—ones suggesting that the “glue” of relationships can be found in other behaviors and emotions, such as mutual respect, positive
regard, and affection. This work requires moving a client from the realm of expected outcomes to that of imagined outcomes. It requires the therapist to provide guidance, suggestions, and proposals that will prompt the client to think in ways that personal history has not
supported and that essentially require an act of imagination and even faith. The therapist is
in some ways “reparenting the client in the possibilities of interpersonal relationships and
creating alternative working models—through their own relationship, as well as by explicitly
proposing alternative formulations of relationships and putting them to an experiential test.
This effort is supported by each client's inner desire for a more fulfilling life, one not
riddled with all of the ongoing negative effects of trauma. The maladaptive nature of traumagenerated relationship models is evident when clients’ goals for themselves are disrupted by
the activation of these models. For instance, a client may become aware that anger at a past
abusive authority figure is getting in the way of forming current relationships with other
authority figures. Or expectations ofsexual exploitation based on sexual abuse may be creating disturbance and upheaval in current romantic relationships. The discrepancies between
feelings/beliefs from the past and current goals sometimes become evident through painful
real-world experiences. The treatment attempts to avoid this type of “hard-knocks” learning by using the therapy sessions as a setting in which to practice, via role plays, what
clients can feel, say, and do in situations related to goal implementation. Through therapist
feedback and the clients own monitoring of feelings and statements, the clients can revise
behaviors and feelings in ways that are more in accord with their identified goals, and can
practice these new behaviors in sessions. A session is, in essence, a place to explore—to “try
on” and assimilate different attitudes, behaviors, and words that match desired goals for
self-expression and effective communication with others.
In STAIR, relationship models are structured as simple contingency statements (i.e.,
“If... ,then..., or “When..., then...”). Clients find that these formulations are easy to
use and effectively elicit their implicit interpersonal contingency beliefs. Typical examples
include “IfI do as I am told, I will be loved,” or “When I ask for my needs to be met, then I
am rejected. This approach allows therapists to distill clients’ “core beliefs” about self and
others, to provoke clients” thoughts and reactions, and to help clients develop alternative

[PAGE 075]

58 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


“trial relationship models” for consideration (e.g., “If I dont ask for my needs to be met, then
my friends will never know what I want’). This exercise is repeated from the sixth session of
treatment to the later trauma-processing sessions and through to the very end of treatment.


Linking Current Relationship Models to Past Trauma
during the Narrative Work

Relationship models are the tools, and model analysis is the strategy for creating change in
interpersonal attitudes and behaviors. Several STAIR sessions focus on identifying, proposing, and implementing alternative and more adaptive relationship models. However, even
when the narrative work begins, model analysis continues. Relationship models embedded in the narratives of childhood trauma are identified and compared to those that are
imagined and tested daily in the present. This activity helps gauge positive changes. It
also creates anchors in the implicit development of a life story. This process is valuable for
survivors of childhood maltreatment, who often fear that by letting go of their past beliefs,
they are betraying or invalidating the reality of their trauma. It suggests that the past will
be respected and recognized as part of the clients’ evolving life stories and not forgotten or
taken for granted, even while new schemas are elaborated in the treatment. Lastly, relationship models function across both the STAIR and Narrative Therapy components of treatment to provide clients with a shorthand method for recollecting the pains of the past,
without necessarily feeling those pains in depth during the recovery and change process.


Problems with Power Dynamics: Issues of Assertiveness

We have observed that as survivors struggle to adopt alternative relationship roles, they can
often move out of victim roles and into victimizer roles. This shift may occur in evolving
relationships where a survivor of maltreatment, in an attempt to be assertive and appropriately “in control” of events in the relationship, becomes utterly rigid and extreme. This rigid
response is often related to the relative lack of variety in types of relationship templates with
which a survivor is familiar. The victim—victimizer dyad is the template for relating. If the
survivor has had few relationships other than the victimizing ones, the client has very little
room for maneuvering into new ways of relating.
We use the notion of relationship models to sketch out alternative dyadic relationships
that manage power in different, more egalitarian, and mutually respectful ways (e.g., “Having my needs recognized/recognizing those of others is a way to connect’). Because a relationship model often effectively articulates the generalized rules with which survivors have
lived, they are quickly embraced as tools for the revision of interpersonal expectations. The
new models are often more ideas than realities. Clients are usually stymied in their early
efforts to engage in the feelings, behaviors, and language associated with dyads other than
the victim—victimizer pairing. For this reason, role plays in therapy sessions are critical, as
are carefully selected, well-graduated exercises with others outside the treatment. These
exercises provide the real-world “stuff” and experiential evidence of the reality of alternative ways of relating, compared to the introduction of the concept of relationship templates,
which is more theoretical and abstract.

[PAGE 076]

5. Building Emotional and Social Resources 59


Flexibility in Managing Power Dynamics, and the Role of Respect
for Self and Others

The generation of alternative relationship models highlights the importance of moving away
from the “all-or-nothing” view of power that characterizes victim—victimizer dynamics, and
toward a view that relationships can vary in the types of power dynamics that define them
(e.g., parent-child, supervisor—supervisee). The application of an egalitarian model across all
relationships would lead to poor outcomes, because even that model fails to account for different relationship types and structures. An insistence on maintaining a healthy diet is a reasonable and expected demand by a parent of a child —but it is not generally appropriate with
a spouse (with whom decisions concerning what to eat in the household are usually shared),
and certainly not with a boss who is discussing their favorite desserts and fondness for sweets.
Nevertheless, a constant in managing the power dynamics of any relationship is that a
person experience and maintain a sense of respect for the self and for those with whom they
interact. A parent will create a better relationship with a child if they keep in mind that the
child deserves understanding and respect for the developmental phase in which the child
is growing and experiencing life. The supervisee will do better in managing an exchange
with their boss if they remember to respect the burdens, responsibilities, and perspective
of being a supervisor. Power dynamics can be difficult for an individual who has experienced interpersonal trauma. Power over another person (be it physical, financial, material,
psychological, emotional, or maturational) is exploited to perpetrate maltreatment against
another person. Power often is used not only to harm but to demean and diminish the other
person. A physically abusive parent may say to a child, “This is what you deserve,” or a rapist may tell a victim, “You wanted this,” in an effort to humiliate and demean the victim. It
is not surprising that survivors of early maltreatment equate power with maltreatment and
are fearful of it. This underlying fear leads the survivors to have problematic interactions
with those who have power, as well as difficulties when they have power themselves. They
may fear falling into a perpetrator role, or may simply not know how to manage power in an
effective and appropriate way.
The next step in STAIR moves clients toward recognizing and being comfortable with
different relationship power balances. Indeed, research on interpersonal relationships has
found that one of the strongest correlates of overall psychological health and life satisfaction
is flexibility in interpersonal expectations and behaviors (Hill & Safran, 1994). Relationship
models with different power balances are formulated, but each includes awareness of the
worth and value of the client as well as the person with whom they are interacting. Developing skills that express an attitude of mutual respect, regardless of the balance of power in
the interaction, will facilitate the client’s ability to move fluidly and effectively in a larger
social landscape.


Problems with Intimacy and Closeness

Difficulty with developing and maintaining close relationships is so pervasive among survivors of trauma that this characteristic is included in definitions of PTSD (DSM-5; American
Psychiatric Association, 2013) and CPTSD (ICD-11; WHO, 2018). Survivors fear that their

[PAGE 077]

60 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


experiences are “out of the norm,’ and that others will not understand what they have been
through—or, worse, will blame or shame them for what they have endured. So they keep
a distance from others. Moreover, as suggested above, some believe on the basis of their
past experiences that relationships lead to exploitation or pain and are best avoided. Other
survivors maintain a defensive, dismissive attitude: They view relationships as unnecessary
or worthless, given past disappointment and pain. Ultimately, some survivors have lived so
long avoiding relationships that their skills in forging intimacy and closeness have “rusted.”
Others have really never quite gotten the chance to develop appropriate skills in the first
place. During the final sessions of STAIR, beliefs that are barriers to intimacy and closeness
are explored, and alternatives are proposed. Skills are introduced to help clients try out the
first steps of approaching others and learn how to manage and resolve conflict.


Transition to Narrative Therapy

Relationship models are effective tools for working with multiple relationship difficulties
that concern survivors of interpersonal trauma, including repeated negative relationship
patterns, pervasive difficulties in managing power dynamics, and problems in establishing
alternative ways of approaching and relating to others. In addition, because relationship
models characterize both the actions and feelings in an anticipated exchange, they allow
the exploration of feelings, particularly the power of feelings in derailing behaviors. In the
treatment, a therapist and client develop new schemas to articulate desired interpersonal
goals and ways of being. The implementation of the new relationship models is often difficult, because feelings from the past conflict or compete with interpersonal goals of the
present. The conflict between feelings from old relationship models and the goals shaped
by new models can be clearly brought forward to the client for examination and change.
The contrast between old models (based in a traumatic past) and new emerging models are
further highlighted during Narrative Therapy, the second module of treatment.


SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT


Emotional and social skills are not abilities we humans are born with. They are learned.
The limited scope of the abilities that survivors have developed does not represent personal
failure or pathology but limited opportunities. These limitations put the survivors at risk for
developing problems such as anger outbursts, substance misuse, and risk avoidance, among
many other possible negative emotional and behavioral patterns. They also prevent clients
from achieving what they want (having secure relationships, doing well at their jobs or
careers, being good parents, etc.). For survivors, doing well in life can be a mystery. STAIR
provides skills that fill the gaps left by the tumult of trauma. A client completing this module of treatment noted with relief, “It's learning things that everyone else knows.” The goal
of STAIR is to have the world become a little less mysterious and much more negotiable for
such clients. The skills are intended to provide support for the clients to achieve important
life goals and have a greater number of life choices.

[PAGE 078]

Working with Traumatic Memories
Overview of Narrative Therapy


Speaking about the [trauma] . . . provides the possibility of turning
passivity into activity. In retelling an experience, we voluntarily
evoke it. Narration is thus like play in that one can assume control
over the repetition of an event which, in its occurrence, ran counter
to one’s wishes . . . [Here, one moves] from being the helpless victim,
one becomes an effective storyteller.
—MARTHA WOLFENSTEIN (quoted by Janoff-Bulman, 1992,
pp. 108-109)


The goals of the Narrative Therapy component of treatment are to resolve PTSD symptoms through the process of “revisiting” the traumatic memories, and to put the trauma in
perspective as one experience or set of experiences within a larger life story. The first goal
involves the process of retelling the traumatic events, with the purpose of confronting the
feared elements of the experience and dissolving the power of the memory to elicit fear.
The second process involves appraising the meaning of the traumatic experiences in the
context of an evolving life story. Narratives, in both name and process, convey the message
that a life story is composed of a past, present, and future. Telling about trauma creates and
reinforces its “pastness.” Moreover, narration assumes a chronological structure that not
only allows the trauma to be located in the past, but provokes consideration of the present
and imagination of a future. The life story that begins to emerge flows from the models or
formulations of self and other that are anchored in time and distinguished by differences
between present and past realities. Both the repeated narrations and the meaning analyses
are intended to free clients from the grip of a traumatic past, so that they can begin living
in the present and can have a sense of a future.
In this chapter, we review the rationale and history of imaginal exposure and the
updating of memories as interventions to resolve PTSD symptoms. An at-a-glance, sessionby-session overview of Narrative Therapy is provided in Box 6.1.


61

[PAGE 079]

62 PART Il. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


Working with Traumatic Memories:
Outline of Narrative Therapy Sessions (Module Il)

Session Content

Session 11 Introduction to Narrative Therapy.
Description and rationale for narrative activities; establishing commitment
for narrative work; developing a memory hierarchy.


Session 12 Narrative of First Memory.
Practice with neutral memory. Then conducting first narrative of trauma
memory; listening to recording together; exploring beliefs about self and
other.


Sessions 13-17 Narratives of Fear.
Selection of memory for narration, and conducting narrative. Then
identifying relationship models embedded in narrative and providing
alternative relationship models; identifying current life difficulties and
implementing skills.


Sessions 13-17 Narratives of Shame.
Procedure same as for fear narratives. Also, providing clear response of
positive regard following narratives of shame; emphasizing social and
personal resources that support positive appraisal.


Sessions 13-17 Narratives of Loss.
Procedure same as for fear narratives. Also, exploring ways of transforming
loss for living in the present.


Session 18 The Final Session.
Review of gains; planning for next steps; addressing relapse risks; providing
resources and referrals.


WHY VISIT THE TRAUMATIC PAST?


It is commonly accepted that a crucial task in resolving PTSD symptoms is the emotional
processing of traumatic memories. The process we use is one of retelling or “revisiting” the
past trauma. It is based on the principles of exposure therapy, particularly as developed by
Edna Foa and her colleagues (see Rothbaum & Foa, 1999). Some therapists immediately
recoil when they hear the words “exposure therapy” used in treatments for survivors of
trauma. Therapists fear inflicting pain on their clients, or even feel themselves to be sadistic
in encouraging the practice. In actuality, clients can experience palpable relief at having an
opportunity to discuss and describe their trauma in a safe environment and in a structured

[PAGE 080]

6. Working with Traumatic Memories 63


and contained way. The reality is also that clients with PTSD relive their memories every
day in some form or other—reenactments, flashbacks, nightmares, intrusive thoughts, and
images that are far more painful than the trauma-focused session work any of us has implemented. In addition, the clients’ past traumatic experiences often profoundly dictate much
of their present behavior. In reaction to the intrusion of the past into the present, clients
avoid reminders of the past. They may keep relentlessly busy, misuse substances, and spurn
romantic attachments. The failure of one set of avoidance strategies often begets additional
avoidance strategies. The clients’ experiential worlds get smaller and smaller.
Consequently, the clients memories of the past control their lives. The intrusive, uncontrollable, and unpredictable symptoms reinforce the helplessness generated by the original
trauma. At one time, the clients were subject to an ongoing reality of threat that they had no
power to end or avoid. Now they are subject to the capricious and random intrusion of the
memories of these events. But the reality is that the trauma is in the past, and the fear that
persists is of the memories. The only exception to this situation occurs when a person is currently in a traumatic environment; in this case, the interventions should be supporting the
client in protecting themselves, removing themselves from a dangerous situation, and building skills to help them do so. In cases of past trauma in a currently safe environment, the
situation is different. Here, they can contextualize the traumatic memories. For example,
although clients with childhood trauma could not control the original traumatic events, they
can have full authority over the impact of their memories in the present. In the process of
examining and exploring their memories, clients confront them, own them, and ultimately
determine their value and meaning. The process of confronting the traumatic memories
reverses the relationship between the clients and their trauma. In confronting and telling
about their past, the clients gain mastery over it. They move from being passive recipients
of a burdensome history to becoming active agents in determining its place in their lives.


A BRIEF HISTORY OF EXPOSURE THERAPY FOR PTSD

The Evolution of Exposure Therapy for Memories

The first documented efforts in resolving PTSD through the direct emotional exposure and
processing of traumatic memories were made by behavioral psychologists working with
combat veterans in the late 1970s and 1980s. The PTSD symptoms of fear and avoidance of
situations reminiscent of the trauma were often behaviorally quite evident. The sound of a
car backfiring, evoking a memory of gunfire, could elicit a startle response from a veteran.
For veterans of the Vietnam War, the sound of rain and feel of humidity, reminiscent of the
combat zone, could induce increased heart rate, sweating, and muscle tension. Later work
with survivors of rape revealed similar physiological and behavioral responses. A woman
raped in an elevator, garage, or park might suffer intense hyperarousal in these settings or
avoid them altogether, leading to significant restrictions in movement and travel. Effective
interventions for these problems were derived from understanding this pattern of behavior as an example of a conditioned response: The sights, sounds, smells, and sensations
that occurred during a traumatic event, while not necessarily intrinsically frightening, are

[PAGE 081]

64 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


associated so strongly with the event that their recurrence months or even years after the
trauma can elicit a fear response in the absence of any real threat.
This phenomenon has been reliably observed in a series of studies where veterans with
combat-related PTSD were exposed to sounds, pictures, or film clips of combat experiences.
These veterans responded with strong fear reactions, as measured by affective response,
blood pressure, and increased flow of epinephrine in their bloodstreams, particularly as
compared to similarly exposed veterans who had not developed PTSD (e.g., McFall, Marburg, Ko, & Veith, 1990). Accordingly, treatment to resolve these maladaptive reactions
involved the “decoupling” of the fear response from the stimuli in a traditional behavioral
manner. Via repeated exposure to the stimuli in the absence of any real threat, the clients
would experience decline in the fear reaction. The stimuli, once paired rather capriciously
with a real and powerful threat, now lost their potency. They became ordinary objects in
the world, neutral features of the environment.
A remarkable evolution in this research occurred when it was noted that fear reactions
of equivalent strength could be elicited simply through the evocation of these stimuli in
memory. The physical presence of trauma-related stimuli was not necessary to elicit a fear
response; the memory of these stimuli was sufficient. Increased heart rate, blood pressure,
and muscle tension, all measurable aspects of a fear reaction, were induced simply by the
thought of the trauma (e.g., Pitman, Orr, Forgue, de Jong, & Claiborn, 1987). PTSD became
reformulated as more of a disorder of memory: The feared “object,” so to speak, was a
memory. The process of habituation previously applied to external stimuli was adapted to
mental stimuli. The rationale for the treatment was that if a therapist could induce a client to bring up the image of the trauma in sufficient detail and for a sufficiently long time
in the context of a safe environment, the clients fearful reactions to the memory would
diminish, and PTSD symptoms would resolve (see Shalev, 1997). A series of randomized,
well-controlled treatment studies with veterans in the late 1980s and early 1990s, however,
indicated that the intervention was only partially successful: PTSD symptoms improved
but did not entirely resolve (Cooper & Clum, 1989), or veterans reported little change in
subjective distress despite reduction in physiological arousal (Keane, Fairbank, Caddell, &
Zimmering, 1989). In one study PTSD symptoms were not reduced, even though veterans
were rated as better adjusted (Boudewyns & Hyer, 1990).


The Strength of Fear Memories

Independent of these efforts to characterize and treat PTSD, a line of research exploring the
neurobiological basis of fear responses was being conducted in animal laboratories. Joseph
LeDoux and his team were among the leading scientists who determined that a relatively
primitive brain structure, the amygdala, was the center of learning and unlearning of fear
reactions. They were particularly interested in determining the parameters of this process.
Early research tracked electroencephalographic (EEG) patterns in the amygdala during
extinction of a conditioned fear response, with the expectation that the firing of the neurons
related to the fear response would diminish with repeated exposure to the stimulus. In a
critical study of this design, the investigators found that while there was an overall reduction in neuronal activity, the activity in cells that had been identified as specifically related

[PAGE 082]

6. Working with Traumatic Memories 65


to the learned fear did not diminish. The fear reaction as represented in the neuronal activity of the amygdala did not go away (see LeDoux, 1998).
LeDoux (1998) originally described this phenomenon as the “indelibility” of emotional
memories. It was proposed that certain aspects of fear memories were indelibly etched into
memory. The implications of these findings, translated into human functioning, suggested
that traumatic memories could never be entirely freed of the overwhelming fear with which
they had been encoded. This notion was supported in a substantial number of empirical
studies among both animals and humans (e.g., Bouton & Swartzentruber, 1991; Jacobs &
Nadel, 1985).
The idea that there are indelible aspects to traumatic memories provided an explanation
for diverse observations about traumatic memories among those who suffered from PTSD. If
the emotional quality of traumatic memories could never be entirely extinguished, then the
memories could be activated or reactivated with sufficient cueing or under circumstances
of sufficient emotional power. This proposition is consistent with the observed relapse of
PTSD symptoms on anniversaries of the trauma (“anniversary reactions”), delayed onset
of PTSD when a survivor is presented with emotional or physical environments similar to
the circumstances of the trauma; “recovered” memories that have lain dormant for years or
decades; and the emergence of PTSD among elderly persons confronting chronic illness or
mortality, such as World War II veterans and Holocaust survivors (see Shalev, 1997).


Updating of Fear Memories

Shortly after the identification of the work that fear memories were so strong that they
appeared to be indelible, a second line of research by the same investigators found that
while fear memories were powerful, they were not necessarily “indelible.” LeDoux and
colleagues found that when a memory is first called up, it enters into an activated or labile
state, where it can be revised and the fear associated may be eliminated or reduced (e.g.,
Nader, Schafe, & LeDoux, 2000). As a practical matter applicable to psychotherapy, the
revision of the memory occurs through the introduction of new information. For example, a
person who is recalling a rape event and feeling to blame for it can introduce the idea that
the attacker, with whom the person was on a date, actually exploited the client's trust and
committed a crime, and the perpetrator is to blame. Alternatively, the person recalling the
rape can introduce the fact that the event is in the past and they are safe now.
During this period of activation, the new information is integrated, resulting in a revision of the memory—a process called “memory reconsolidation.” It is not that aspects of the
memory are “erased” (as it is sometimes described in the popular media), but rather that
new information is introduced, so that old information becomes less important and the emotional valence of the memory changes. Scientists have described memory reconsolidation as
a process that allows the updating of memories in order to maintain their relevance as circumstances change (Lee, Nader, & Schiller, 2017). This research provides one way to frame
the process that occurs during narrative work, and it offers a potential explanation for the
resolution of symptoms. During the narrative work, the client calls up an old memory, adds
new information, and reevaluates its meaning. The new information results in a revised or
updated memory of the event that takes into account new insights and new feelings. In the

[PAGE 083]

66 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


narrative work, the client also integrates the traumatic memory within the context of previous and subsequent experiences. The old memory is “updated” in two ways: as a specific
event, and in the context of a life that is being lived.
The disruption of old memories and their updating via introduction of new and alternative information is a core principle of many cognitive therapies (e.g., Ehlers & Clark, 2000;
see Ehlers & Wild, 2015). This principle is applied in STAIR Narrative Therapy as well.


THE TRAUMA NARRATIVE


The review and elaboration of trauma memories in STAIR Narrative Therapy involves both
an appraisal of the event and well as the elaboration of the event in the context of the persons life. The therapeutic power and necessity of both of these aspects of the process was
demonstrated to us in the case of a man suffering from PTSD symptoms and burdensome
grief that literally left him gasping for breath. The man, in his 70s, came into treatment
after losing his son in the September 11, 2001, terrorist attack on the World Trade Center.
He could not stop imagining his son's final moments and the particulars of his death. So
frequent and extreme were these intrusive thoughts and images that when he was asked to
describe his relationship with his son, he could recall nothing. It was as if the horrendous
images of his son's death obscured access to any other memory about him. The situation was
devastating to behold. The man had lost his son twice over: once in the World Trade Center,
and now again, in his imaginal world. It was clear that a review of the traumatic event, in
and of itself, was insufficient to resolve the PTSD.
The therapist shifted the work to include a discussion of the sons death in the larger
context of the life he had lived. The therapist began by asking the man to tell about his son
as a young child, and then about his son’s middle school years, his performance as a high
school athlete, and his marriage to a neighborhood girl. Over time, several stories were told,
and the death of his son became one of several belonging to the narrative that was his son's
life. The last story was a terrible story, to be sure. But the formation of the narrative had
placed the death in the context of a life lived; it was no longer simply the story of a death.
When the man thought of his son, he had a narrative of how his son had lived joyfully, or
another narrative about the relationship with his son and its various ups and downs. In
either case, the narrative did not end with the son’s death, but was continued by the creation
of positive memories of the son to be handed down to his grandson.


THE TASKS OF NARRATIVE THERAPY

Telling the Story

As the description provided above indicates, the primary function of narrative work for the
survivor of trauma is to create the story of an unfolding life, in which the trauma is only
one of many events have occurred and that are possible for the survivor moving forward. A
particular traumatic event is described several times. It is expected that through repeated

[PAGE 084]

6. Working with Traumatic Memories 67


tellings, the associated fear reactions will diminish and the memory will become organized
and internally coherent, so that questions about the facts of the matter (what happened and
when) can be answered as clearly as possible.


identifying Themes

After the trauma narrative is shared, however, the client and therapist continue the work
by listening to the narrative and identifying interpersonal relationship models within it.
These models identify the client's core beliefs about the self in the world, and are typically
driven by feelings of fear, shame, and loss. Examples of such beliefs include (1) “The world
is a dangerous place, and I am not able to live in it without being hurt again and again” (a
theme of fear); (2) “I did something to provoke this and did not stop it, so I am to blame” (a
theme of shame); and (3) “I never had what so many take as ‘given’ in a normal childhood,
and I cannot ever have it” (a theme of loss and grief). The treatment sessions described in
Chapters 23-25 of this book provide specific guidance about how to work effectively with
the commonly occurring themes of fear, shame, and loss, respectively.


SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT


This chapter has highlighted the importance of and rationale for addressing the traumatic
past, as well as the strategies we use to make this process engaging, relevant, and therapeutic. The overall goal of the Narrative Therapy work is to create an integrated sense of
self—one that incorporates the traumatic past in a respectful way, and that allows the person to live in the present and have hope for the future. This is accomplished via the identification of old trauma-generated relationship models embedded in the trauma narrative.
These models are validated as adaptive or inevitable, given the conditions of trauma from
which they emerged. In addition, the old trauma-generated models and the new emerging
relationship models are directly compared side by side. The therapist guides the client in
identifying ways in which the old model may no longer be applicable, given changing circumstances (e.g., the client is out of the traumatizing circumstances, is no longer a child, or
is no longer in a war zone), and the new model may offer opportunities for better relationships. Each model is validated as appropriate for a particular context. Both sets of beliefs
are validated by placing them in the context of time and place, and by acknowledging the
value and possibility of change.
The distinction between the past and the present is reiterated in all sessions. A symptom of PTSD (and a mental characteristic of many survivors of trauma) is that time has collapsed. The traumatic events define reality as it was in the past and will be in the future.
Traditional narration, with its underlying chronological structure, helps clients to anchor
these events to moments in time and to assign them meaning in the context of the passing
of time.

[PAGE 085]

Extending the Narrative
Transforming Shame and Loss


The dark does not destroy the light; it defines it. It’s our
fear of the dark that casts our joy into the shadows.
—BRENE BROWN (2010, p. 82)


The Narrative Therapy phase of the treatment gives clients the opportunity to develop
a coherent life history with various themes that follow the thread of critical, emotionally
charged experiences. In addition to fear, central emotional burdens for those who have
experienced sustained interpersonal trauma (particularly abuse by caregivers) are shame
and loss. There are, however, very few established trauma-focused treatments that intentionally and specifically address these often debilitating consequences. Narrative work is
assumed to be therapeutic in the resolution of fear through repeated exposure to the traumatic memories and the consequent habituation/extinction of the fear-laden responses. As
discussed in Chapter 6, given what is known about emotions, there is no reason to think
that feelings of shame and loss would be resolved through repeated exposure to or systematic reexperiencing of shaming or grief-eliciting memories. Still, it became clear in our own
narrative work that feelings of shame and of grief were almost inevitably brought forth at
some point in the telling of traumatic memories—and, furthermore, that the telling was
therapeutic. We suspect that the aspects of narrative work making the process therapeutic
are the act of constructing the narrative and the task of imbuing it with meaning. Narrative
work contributes to the resolution of shame and grief not through habituation, but through
their transformation via the meaning the client attributes to the trauma and through the call
to action that these feelings often prompt.
Narrative Therapy—which includes both the telling of the story and the particular
meaning analysis that follows—is organized so that clients’ understanding of who they are,
because of where they have been or what they have experienced, is no longer a source of
shame or irremediable loss. Rather, it now supports the evolution of a sense of dignity, purpose, and self-compassion. The reparative actions that transform shame and loss can begin


68

[PAGE 086]

7. Extending the Narrative 69


with the simple act of telling about the event. Narration as an act, through both its process
and its content, is an “antidote” to shame and loss.
Shame, which often arises from a perception of the self as being ineffectual and weak,
is countered by the experience of agency in the creation of the story. Through telling the
brutal facts of their traumatization, clients clearly see, often for the first time, the difficulties of their early lives and can appreciate and even marvel at their success in having survived these difficulties. The telling of their trauma stories in therapy can also liberate the
clients from the dark weight of secrecy that often paralyzes the capacity for self-expression.
If clients can tell about the trauma, they can tell about myriad other thoughts and feelings;
stories begin spilling out; connections are made; multiple past events that have seemed to
follow separate tracks come together; and important patterns are identified.
The act of narration has a similar transformative potential with experiences of loss.
Narration provides a means by whicha ritual for grieving and remembrance can take place.
Telling about and putting words to the loss affirm that the experience has importance. Its
meaning, though, is often discovered only through the process of telling the story. The
loss, often initially understood rather abstractly as an “absence” of something in the life
history (e.g., a loving parent, a secure home), is transformed into something with presence.
This comes in the form of awareness, wisdom, or insight, and ultimately in a conscious and
purposeful decision about what to make of the losses and their assigned role for life in the
future.
This chapter focuses in depth on shame and loss, which, despite their importance, have
historically received relatively little attention in empirically based trauma-focused treatments. Studies implementing treatments that focus on reevaluating the meaning of events
associated with shame and grief have reported reduction in these feelings (e.g., Gilbert,
2010; Kubany et al., 2004; Shear, Frank, Houck, & Reynolds, 2005). From our combined
decades of clinical experience, we characterize shame and loss as we have observed them
in treatment and identify different thematic aspects expressed by clients in the narrative
phase of the work. We present this information to provide some guidance in the exploration
and recovery from feelings of shame and loss. Examples of Narrative Therapy sessions with
these themes are provided in Chapters 24 and 25, respectively.


SHAME


Therapists and survivors alike have been acutely aware that shame is a pervasive emotional
state associated with interpersonal trauma, with far-reaching detrimental consequences. As
Judith Herman (2007) has described, humiliation, degradation, and shame are so central
to a survivor's experience that the resulting posttraumatic stress can be viewed as both an
anxiety and a shame disorder. Only recently, however, have changes been made to diagnostic systems to reflect these lived experiences of survivors. Specifically, in DSM-5 (American Psychological Association, 2013), PTSD has been moved out of the anxiety disorders
category and into its own category of trauma- and stressor-related disorders. PTSD criteria
have been expanded to include the cluster of negative alterations in cognitions or mood

[PAGE 087]

70 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


(Criterion D), and for the first time shame is incorporated as a PTSD symptom (persistent
negative trauma-related emotions, such as fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame). There have
been similar shifts in ICD-11, which now includes CPTSD as a separate diagnosis (Cloitre,
Garvert, Brewin, Bryant, & Maercker, 2013; Maercker et al., 2013), as mentioned in Chapter
1 and discussed further in Chapter 9. In addition to core PTSD symptoms, CPTSD includes
disturbances in self-organization that typically result from repeated or chronic exposure to
traumatic stressors from which one cannot escape. Here too shame has been specifically
added; it is included within the category of negative self-concept (persistent beliefs about
oneself as diminished, defeated, or worthless, accompanied by deep and pervasive feelings
of shame, guilt, or failure related to the traumatic event).
Empirical research on shame is still in its infancy, but continues to expand with
increased recognition of how shame can contribute to difficulties in adaptation across the
age spectrum (Andrews, Brewin, Rose, & Kirk, 2000; Bennett, Sullivan, & Lewis, 2005;
Orth, Robins, & Soto, 2010; Stuewig et al., 2015; Tilghman-Osborne, Cole, Felton, & Ciesla,
2008). Studies have shown a significant association between shame and PTSD symptoms
(Feiring, Taska, & Chen, 2002; Leskela, Dieperink, & Thuras, 2002). In the first comprehensive review of this literature, Saraiya and Lopez-Castro (2016) synthesized results from
47 experimental studies on shame and PTSD. Taken as a whole, this research to date provides evidence for the following:


. The detrimental impact of shame is most pronounced in the aftermath of relational
and repeated traumas characterized by social subordination, powerlessness, and
lack of control.
2. Shame is strongly associated with both psychological and physiological symptoms of
PTSD; has a functional role in the development of PTSD; and is a significant predic-
tor of PTSD, independent of fear.
3. For a subset of individuals with PTSD, shame is the primary response to traumatic
experiences, suggesting the existence ofa shame-based variant of PTSD.
4. Trauma-related shame has an impact on PTSD treatment outcomes. Addressing
shame during intervention may not only expressly diminish shame, but may also
affect overall posttraumatic symptom changes, whereas not effectively ameliorating
shame may impede recovery.


Many of the findings listed above provide corroboration for our view of shame as inextricably linked to fear, the “core” emotion resulting from trauma. Fear is a biologically
hard-wired and evolutionarily ancient emotion; it alerts people to potential life threat and
functions to maximize survival behaviors. Shame includes a sense of threat to survival or
well-being as it relates to how individuals are perceived by others or within a community
or social context. Shame arises in a threatening situation when persons feel that they have
failed, that others perceive the failure as a sign of weakness, and that it places them at risk
for ejection or rejection from the community. Most often the failure is a defeat that is interpersonal in nature, such as a rape, a robbery, or ongoing sexual abuse (see Andrews et al.,
2000; Brewin, 2003). Those so intimately injured feel that they have failed in the essential

[PAGE 088]

7. Extending the Narrative 71


task of self-preservation, as compared to what others might have done or as compared to
what is socially expected.
The beliefs associated with feelings of shame include thoughts that the persons are
marked as inferior, are viewed as blameable for their defeat, and that ultimately they will be
rejected by others. A cycle of shame gets perpetuated as individuals whom experience being
harmed by, rejected, and alienated from their communities are likely to respond by further isolating and withdrawing, which may lead to a further sense of rejection or reinforce
that sense of rejection. Isolation deprives a person from a social network or relationships
that could counter the persons negative beliefs about the self and could provide respect
and admiration for the person—a form of nurturing that can contribute to recovery from
shame. Based on our clinical experience, we have identified four different shame themes
that emerge in narrative work and that are often reflected in the day-to-day functioning of
survivors: “self as inferior,” “self as bad,” “self as annihilated,” and “self as identified with
the perpetrator.”


Self as Inferior

As discussed above, shame commonly emerges following interpersonal traumas when the
traumatized persons carry a sense of defeat or failure. Reactions of helplessness and powerlessness are part of the definitional landscape of a traumatic experience. In contrast, shame
results from the survivors belief that they should have done better—that they should have
been able to protect themselves and did not do so. This belief gives rise to a sense of inferiority: “Others would not have reacted the way I did,” “Others would have escaped this
>> 66


circumstance, or “Others would have fought back, and I did not.” The judgment about self
is in relation to others and relative to the perceived capacities of others for self-preservation.
Shame is especially intense when a survivor responded to traumatic circumstances by
“freezing. Although freezing is an involuntary response, and one that may be most adaptive
in cases where fighting or fleeing is not possible or is dangerous, survivors often interpret
the freeze response as evidence of cowardice or deficiency.
In addition, shame is tied to people's capacities for self-protection as members of a social
group. Individuals who have been victimized by members of their own social network feel
shamed and inferior. They believe that in the social hierarchy, they are “less than” others
who have not experienced this form of interpersonal defeat. Social recognition or observation of defeat by others is threatening, as it carries the identification of the defeated persons
as victims, and therefore as demonstrably vulnerable and at risk for further victimization.
For this reason, many victims of crime feel greater shame when their victimization has
been witnessed by others (e.g., gang rape), and often witnesses themselves feel shame for
the victims. Shame results from experiences of being “acted upon” and having no recourse
or resources to avoid the victimization, escape from it, or emerge victorious.
Thus, for example, children victimized by sexual or physical abuse feel shame and inferiority because they not only did not, but could not help themselves. Feelings of shame and
inferiority are further exacerbated in this as in other sexual or physical crimes, because
the defeat in these events has a specific intimacy—the defeat of one's body, which leads to

[PAGE 089]

72 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


feelings of profound vulnerability and self-disgust. This is the focal point of the inferiority
and shame felt by victims of physical and sexual abuse.
Victims of crime often ruminate about whether they could have done anything differently to alter the outcome of the event. One purpose of replaying traumatic scenes is to determine the critical elements in the victimization. If the trauma can be attributed to unfortunate and unforeseeable circumstances, then the victims may feel that anyone would have
reacted the way they did, and that the outcome does not reflect any intrinsic inferiority. They
are “victims of circumstances, not victims of their own inherent weakness or vulnerability.
Survivors of childhood abuse or neglect also often ruminate about the transgressions
they have experienced. The fact that they were small children with limited resources, and
thus were inherently vulnerable, is of little comfort. In fact, it brings their analyses of the
events to the larger social environment: If they could not be expected to rely on their own
resources for protection, then who should have been providing the protection? The closest
members of their social world—namely, their caregivers. Yet the caregivers were also often
the victimizers, and in any case they provided no protection. Still, these survivors ask,
“Why me?” During the years of maltreatment, the children often construct an answer that
includes and reinforces their own sense of shame: They must have deserved it.


Self as Bad

Children who are maltreated often believe that these events are expressions of their own
intrinsic “badness. This occurs for several reasons. First, explicit statements of the children's inherent badness, inferiority, and worthlessness are frequently made by those who
are inflicting the maltreatment. The children are identified as the cause of these events
(e.g., “Look what you made me do”). This is self-evident in many cases of physical abuse,
where the pain that is inflicted is often called “punishment” for the children's “bad behavior. In cases of sexual abuse where there is little or no pain, or perhaps even pleasure, the
children still understand that these activities are “bad,” “dirty,” or “wrong, because such
activities deviate from typical, day-to-day touching experiences and because they are inevitably carried out in secrecy.
In addition, the perpetrators are aided by children’s cognitive predisposition to interpret experience in a self-referential way. When bad things happen, children tend to view
themselves as the sources of the problems. Beatings, other physical assaults, and sexual
abuse convince children that they themselves are inferior or bad. Both moral and social
justice are filtered through the developmentally immature, self-referential forms of cognitive processes that define childhood. A negative assessment is not circumscribed to an event
(e.g., “A bad thing happened with Daddy”) or designated to another actor (“Daddy did a
bad thing”), but is absorbed by a child as part of their identity: The child is bad for being
involved in something bad. In contrast, adult victims of crime have the cognitive abilities to
differentiate between internal and external causes of events, and can engage in a cognitive
reevaluation that delineates the difference between events that made them feel inadequate
and being inadequate persons. This type of analysis is not typical of children, and may not
even be possible for younger children. Notably, even when children do recognize that the

[PAGE 090]

7. Extending the Narrative 73


adult perpetrators are to blame, they do not necessarily excuse themselves from blame (Feiring et al., 2002; Kolko, Brown, & Berliner, 2002).
Labels of self-blame and “self as bad” stick through the years of adolescence, young
adulthood, and maturity. Looking back on their childhoods, adult survivors can usually see
past the treachery of the self-referential logic of childhood and recognize the vulnerability
of their childish minds to self-blame. This often does not help them to give up, resolve, or
reorganize beliefs of self-blame, however. The resistance to relinquishing these beliefs has
many sources.


Self as Annihilated

Shame is associated with feeling oneself to be inferior to others and of less worth. Beyond
the feeling of being “less than others” is that of being “nonexistent.” One survivor described
it as “being erased.” These are experiences where victims feel that their very lives are of
no value or regard. Brewin (2003) reports that victims of crime sometimes describe having felt that their survival was of no consequence. Prostrate bystanders at a bank robbery
describe being stepped over as impediments to the goal ofa successful robbery, or perhaps
even being used as “human shields” to enable the robbers to escape. Brewin describes such
circumstances as “encompassling] a total surrender of oneself and one’s rights and expectations as a human being” (2003, p. 80).
This intensely disturbing state is often a chronic condition for children who have been
abused or neglected. A sense of self develops in the context of a caregiver who responds to
a child's needs; soothes the child’s distress; laughs when the child is funny; and engages in
play, teaching, and learning. Through all of these interactions, the caregiver reflects back or
“mirrors” the presence of the child, provides recognition of the child as a particular person,
and acknowledges the child's agency. Physical and sexual abuse, and neglect, undermine
these experiences. Like the victims of robbery described above, children who have been
maltreated become objects of another's will. Parents who beat their children in fits of rage
often report that their anger overwhelms them and they lose all ability to see (sometimes literally), to reason, and to control their actions. Empathy for and connection to their children
have vanished, and so have the children.
Although little is known about pedophiles in general or about parents who sexually
abuse their children, some research indicates that such adults do not actually see the children as persons, but rather as objects of desire—objects without any volition or emotional
experience. In an unusual study of convicted pedophiles (Chaplin, Rice, & Harris, 1995), a
series of pictures were developed to look like children in erotic poses and shown to the men,
during which time measures of sexual arousal (i.e., erection, heart rate) were taken. The
emotional states of the children were varied: One set of photos showed distressed children
(crying); in the second set, children looked happy; and in the third, they had neutral expressions. The study results revealed that the levels of sexual arousal exhibited by the pedophiles were the same, regardless of the children's emotional state. These findings suggest
that pedophiles experience children as sources of erotic stimulation—literally as “sexual
objects —and have little empathic connection to the children as persons in distress.

[PAGE 091]

74 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


Annihilation through self-betrayal

If children do not exist in the eyes of their caregivers, they have difficulty existing for
themselves and within themselves. Even if a child’s growing identity incorporates experiences, values, and opinions obtained from outside the family, it is hard to hold on to these
self-constructions while still participating in the family system. Because the sense of self is
anchored in the recognition that parents or other caregivers give to their children, children
are likely to compromise their moral codes to protect the family system.
As a result, children who have been maltreated are agents of their own annihilation
through these routine acts of self-betrayal. Although they wish to tell the truth, they often
find themselves lying about the conditions of their home lives; they hide their bruises and
maintain the secret of abuse or neglect. Adult survivors of maltreatment often feel shame
in recollecting their childhood behaviors. They feel shame in having become accomplices
in something wrong, being held captive by their circumstances, and being ineffective in
escape from these circumstances. And, perhaps most damaging, they experience shame in
betraying themselves and their own dignity.
Children may also preserve important relationships by attributing negative emotions
they are experiencing to their own perceived flaws and deficiencies, rather than recognizing that the harm is being caused by trusted adults (Platt & Freyd, 2012). There are some
findings consistent with this theory, indicating that shame may function in survivors of
trauma by reducing awareness of betrayal in a relationship, especially when it is a needed
relationship (Platt, Luoma, & Freyd, 2017). Although in the short term shame may serve as a
mechanism to maintain necessary bonds with attachment figures, in the long term it greatly
impairs a survivor's ability to develop new and healthier relationships.


Self as Identified with the Perpetrator

Rather than have no sense of self (i.e., in order to avoid annihilation), children who have
been abused will sometimes actively or purposefully participate in abusive behaviors. Some
survivors report instances in which they provoked their own abuse by triggering the perpetrators tempers and getting (although sometimes escaping) a beating, or actively participating in or even initiating sexual activities. In much the same way that having any caregiver
is better than having no caregiver, it seems to be the case that having any self, even a terribly abased self, is better than having no self. Identifying with a perpetrators attitudes and
behaviors provides self-coherence. It means that the victim can move from helplessness and
passivity to active agency. The victim takes on an action plan, so that there is a capacity to
act; takes on victim—perpetrator relational patterns, so that a relationship exists; and takes
on the perpetrator's beliefs, in order to have a system of meaning.
The relationship of the victim and perpetrator is likely to have special meaning, although
not necessarily in any positive sense. It has been reported that relationships among individuals who have survived the same traumatic event have a special quality. It is forged from
the mutual recognition that they have experienced something beyond typical experience
and beyond the power of words to describe in normal conversation or day-to-day life that

[PAGE 092]

7. Extending the Narrative 75


sets them apart from others (e.g., Gurewitsch, 1998). A relationship of a similar nature can
occur between a survivor of childhood victimization and a perpetrator. These experiences
have potent meaning to the victims; the events have formed their view of themselves and
contributed to their self-definition. In the case of sexual abuse and sometimes in physical
abuse, there is often no one else who knows about the experience, no one who was witness
to the events, and no one with whoma victim has shared what happened. Recognition of a
large part of the victim’s identity is bound up with only one person—the perpetrator of the
victimization.

A critical aspect of recovery from trauma is the disclosing and sharing of the event with
a sympathetic person outside the experience. If a traumatized person is able to share and
convey the reality of the experience in this way, it becomes known to a social world beyond
the perpetrator. The bond between the victim and perpetrator, sustained by secrecy, is
loosened and ultimately dissolves. The victim can become known in full to others, and then
can have relationships with others in which the person’s whole history and whole self are
known, understood, and accepted. This work is described further in Chapter 24 (on narratives of shame).


Shame, Social Functioning, and Interpersonal Relationships

Shame burdens survivors of interpersonal trauma with a pervasive sense of alienation from
others and diminished confidence in social interactions. Avoidance, often employed as a
strategy for managing toxic shame, furthers isolation and strengthens negative beliefs such
as “If you knew I was abused as a child, you would not connect with me.” The survivors have
internalized a view of themselves as “bad,” “weak,” “ineffective,” “damaged,” or “defeated.”
> ¿€


These beliefs are reflected in reports of their interpersonal problems, as described earlier,
with problems such as assuming blame for events they are not responsible for (“If something
is wrong, it must be my fault”) and being too controlling (“T am not going to let anything
bad happen again”). In addition, when survivors do confront difficulties, they often exhibit
a “blind spot” about calling on social support to help resolve a problem. This disinclination may be based on a general sense of being “outsiders” or not part of a particular social
network or community. It may also be a result of what they have experienced and learned
from their traumatizing situations: “Help” was not forthcoming then, and is now no longer
expected. Some may believe that asking for help would expose them as the “weak” persons
they fear themselves to be. In circumstances where help from others is necessary to complete a task or reach a goal, this attitude leads to failure and defeat, reinforcing the view of
themselves as weak, ineffective, and critically regarded.
Survivors negative and critical views of themselves also affect their evaluation of others. The trauma has led survivors to view certain characteristics as unacceptable—not only
in themselves, but in others as well. For instance, survivors who internalize the views that
vulnerability is weakness, and that weakness is bad, not only view themselves with contempt but judge others in the same fashion. These survivors may prize self-confidence and
self-sufficiency in others, and derogate those who show confusion, emotionality, vulnerability, or limited competence. The familiar mode of critical regard that is applied to the self is

[PAGE 093]

76 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


applied to others. The limited compassion that the survivors have for their own past experiences is now applied to others’ experiences. These attitudes diminish opportunities for
positive social experiences and the development of sustained interpersonal relationships.
The development of a sense of self-compassion allows such clients to live much more
easily with themselves, and perhaps even with some pride and enthusiasm for themselves.
In addition, a positive and more generous process of self-evaluation may lead to more generous appraisal of others. Positive changes in self-regard go hand in hand with positive
changes in regard for others. The clients benefit in their relationships with others, as well as
their relationships to themselves.


LOSS AND GRIEF


Childhood maltreatment is inevitably an experience of loss. This includes loss of protective
and supportive caregivers, of a healthy sense of entitlement, and of unencumbered connectedness to others; of a child’s innocent pride and easy comfort within their own skin;
and of what the child “could have been” and the life they “could have had” in the absence
of the maltreatment. Identification of losses can be, at bottom, the most difficult and painful
aspect of recovery. It requires clients to acknowledge that they have received less than they
humanly deserved in their childhood. This can reinforce feelings of shame, because the
survivors may view these losses as a reflection of their personal worthlessness. In addition,
recognition of these losses can ignite feelings of grief and anger.
These losses, while very real and painful, have not been addressed in any systematic
way in established trauma-focused treatments. The incorporation of themes of loss in the
Narrative Therapy component of our treatment is intended to alleviate this gap. Indeed,
the use of narrative to address and resolve loss borrows directly from established rituals for
mourning, which almost always include storytelling as a means ofshared remembrance. This
process acknowledges and confers reality on the loss. Stories about the person who has died
elaborate and clarify the importance of that person to the survivors and often formulate ways
of continuing to remember the person. In addition, rituals of mourning are almost always
social processes that bring members of a community together. In this gathering, a network
of social support is formed, reflecting the understanding that grief can be all-consuming and
can paralyze the ability to function and the will to live in the present. The community cares
for and protects those who grieve, and keeps them emotionally and socially engaged in the
present by sharing recognition of the loss and understanding of the consequent pain.
When addressing the clients losses, Narrative Therapy shares many functions with
those observed in socially sanctioned rituals of mourning. As a witness or listener to the
story, the therapist confers a social reality on the client’s losses, even though they are far
in the past. The elaboration of the aspects of loss intrinsic to trauma, especially childhood
maltreatment, is an important step to understanding the past, its impact on the client's present life, and its role in the client's future. In the community of two that is the treatment, the
therapist provides care, emotional support and validation of the client as they recognize and
mourn these losses together.

[PAGE 094]

7. Extending the Narrative 77


In addition, however, the therapist facilitates the transformation of grief into the purposeful selection of changes in loss-related attitudes and behaviors that have restricted the
client’s ability to function and live well. There is a certain paradox in the experience of grief,
in which recognition of loss can ignite energy to repair the damage and even bring forth
greater effort, imagination, and determination to create meaning and value to life than
would have otherwise have been the case.
Below, we have identified some common and specific loss themes that surface in client
narratives. These themes are “loss of protective parental figure,” “loss of childhood innocence and pleasures,’ “loss in interpersonal relationships,’ and “loss of time.”


Loss of Protective Parental Figure

Children tend to accept their lot in life, for the simple reasons that they know no better and
have few other choices. Their reference points for evaluating their relative degrees of life
hardship are their immediate environments, particularly their families. Only through the
exploration of the larger social world, via school and peer relationships in the middle school,
preteen, and early teen years, do children who have been maltreated actually begin to realize that their home lives deviate from those of other youth. By the adolescent years, youth
who have experienced abuse or neglect recognize that the goings-on in their lives differ
from those of other teenagers. They recognize that their peers are not having the kind of
experiences with which they are familiar. It may take many more years for the adult survivors to recognize that they differ from their peers not only in the presence of maltreatment,
but also in the absence of loving care, good regard, and benign adult guidance in the world.
Exploring the reality of abuse or neglect and the context in which it was allowed to
occur through the narrative work often leads survivors to painful clarity about the limited
capacities and caregiving behaviors of their parents and/or parent figures. Identifying relationship models from childhood and comparing these to the ones they are forming in the
present may also highlight survivors awareness that the warmth and comfort they can now
experience, or see others experience and wish for themselves, were not theirs in childhood.
The persons whom they relied on for a sense of worth did not value them. Many survivors
have never known “unconditional positive regard” and have never experienced a parental
figure as a consistent or soothing presence. As awareness of these truths sets in, clients
begin to understand on a more profound level how their most basic human rights—to be
regarded with value, and with respect for their autonomy and agency—were denied them.


Loss of Childhood Innocence and Pleasures

The experience of not being protected and/or of being maltreated by caregivers stands in
stark contrast to the innocence, safety, simplicity, and carefree ways that we, as a society,
usually equate with the childhood years. Even ifa child who is abused or neglected is given
the opportunity to participate in positive childhood rituals, such as playing with friends,
going on first dates, or receiving honors for graduations or sports activities, the effects of
trauma often pervade and overshadow the pleasure and satisfaction of these experiences. In

[PAGE 095]

78 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


particular, abuse and neglect by parental figures significantly decreases children’s engagement with their environment and openness to others, diminishing the typical pleasures of
childhood and positive memories. Such children have experiences beyond or quite different from those of their peer group. For instance, sexually abused children are prematurely
forced into the world of adult sexual knowledge.
At the time of the maltreatment, the survivors may simply feel confused, angry, or alienated from their peers. As adults looking back on the experience, clients often feel aggrieved:
They begin to see themselves as having their innocence—an attitude to life that belongs to
the domain of childhood—stolen from them.


Loss in Interpersonal Relationships

The actual truth—essentially, their betrayal by their parents or other trusted adults—often
takes years for survivors to recognize and to accept. Teens who have been intrafamilially
maltreated often still cling to their attachment for and love of their parents or other caregivers, even when these adults have been egregiously abusive or have repeatedly failed in
parenting tasks. This connection, however, serves to maintain a template of relatedness.
The affection and attachment that a child or adolescent shows to a caregiver, however unresponsive, undeserving, or implausible the caregiver may be, has an important function: It
maintains the young persons capacity for human connection. The template of relationship
models remains intact.
Nevertheless, specific relationship models developed in this context lead to several
problems in adulthood relationships. For example, survivors of abuse or neglect are more
likely to choose relationships with individuals who are unreliable and unavailable—even
to the point of being abusive and/or neglectful—since this is expected and accepted. Even
in relationships where there is potential for support and caring, the clients may not be able
to see or cultivate these aspects of the relationship. Clients sometimes report that while
they can identify the presence of support or help from others, they reject these overtures,
because such giving cannot possibly match what they didnt get and still long for from parental figures. In line with this understanding, our treatment in such a case does not necessarily involve the revision or dissolution of a client’s connection to the caregiver. Rather, the
treatment supports the growth of the client's persistent capacity for attachment. As such, it
sets the goal of helping the client establish alternative relationship models and behaviors in
the service of developing new and different relationships. The treatment helps the client to
identify old working models of relating that were established in the context of maltreatment;
to understand that they no longer need to live by the old models in new relationships; and
to invite them to develop new, alternative, more positive relationship models that include
mutual respect and support.


Loss of Time

Once clients begin experiencing fewer symptoms and improved functioning, review of their
past leaves them aghast at the many years that they have not had the capacity to function

[PAGE 096]

7. Extending the Narrative 79


well and engage in their lives. Clients sometimes feel resentful that they will never recapture the time they have lost. They consider, for example, their teen years when they could
have been studying rather than abusing drugs, or their 20s when they were too angry and
hostile to establish themselves in the work world or to experiment with relationships. Coming to recognize the extent to which their development has been derailed by trauma often
leaves survivors feeling that they were “left behind” and that they will never be able to
“catch up” to their contemporaries.
The developing awareness of the profound and pervasive negative impact the trauma
and related PTSD symptoms have had on a clients life trajectory can elicit anger and dismay. This loss, like many others related to early maltreatment, is irreversible. However, the
client does have the opportunity of the present, which, if spent in anger, will only add to the
mountain of lost hours accumulated through the years. Feelings of anger, resentment, and
sadness are natural parts of understanding loss. But the client and therapist need to titrate
this experience so that it does not exclude the possibility of pleasure and satisfaction. Ideally, awareness of loss can contribute to an understanding of its value and effective use by
the client.
A client brought this insight to her session. She reported:


“On my 30th birthday, I thought about myself as I was 10 years ago at the age of20. I
madea list of all the things that I did not have then (no education, no career training,
no money, no partner) and do not have now. As I made the list, though, I realized that
when I turned 40 I could be doing the same thing: makinga list of all the things I did
not have when I was 30. I realized that it was up to me not to waste my time now—that
I was free to choose what to do and how to do it. When I am 40, I want to be able to turn
back and be pleased by what I did in my 30s. I put my pencil down and felt really free.”


This insight is the gist of the work with all of the losses described above. In recognizing the
losses and their consequences, the client has the opportunity to choose to live differently.
Doing so gives meaning to the past, makes it “count for something,” and so honors it.


Traumatic Loss and Bereavement

As discussed above, interpersonal trauma is always associated with loss. Loss, however, is
not always associated with trauma. It is important to acknowledge the group of survivors
who have experienced traumatic loss, although this type of loss is not the focus of this treatment. According to Barlé, Wortman, and Latack (2017), “a death is considered traumatic if
it occurs without warning; if it is untimely; if it involves violence; if there is damage to the
loved one’s body; if it was caused by a perpetrator with the intent to harm; if the survivor
regards the death as preventable; if the survivor believes that the loved one suffered; or if
the survivor regards the death, or manner of death, as unfair and unjust” (p. 127).
Children and adolescents who lose a family member or significant other through traumatic means face unique challenges, which can interfere with their daily functioning and
development. They often exhibit significant PTSD symptoms, which in turn complicate the

[PAGE 097]

80 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


ability to process grief and may make it impossible for them to remember the person who
has died without being emotionally and physically triggered. In the past, there has been
little overlap between the study of the adaptation to trauma and the study of adaptation to
chronic bereavement. More recently, however, the complex interactions between posttraumatic stress and traumatic grief are being examined more systematically (Layne, Kaplow,
Oosterhoff, Hill, & Pynoos, 2018), and treatment integrating evidence-based strategies from
both fields is available (Pearlman, Wortman, Feuer, Farber, & Rando, 2014).
In work with clients who have had multiple traumatic experiences, it is not unusual for
a traumatic loss to be among these experiences. In fact, traumatic loss in childhood can be a
risk factor for subsequent victimization. For example, we have worked with clients who have
lost a significant caregiver through murder or suicide. As a result, they were placed in living
situations (such as foster care or with other relatives) that were ultimately not safe and led
them to be exposed to additional trauma. In such a case, the traumatic death can be integrated into the therapy as one of the clients several traumatic events and can be included as
part of the clients narrative work in the course of treatment.


SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT


The guiding principle and central purpose of creating a life narrative is to transform a
life viewed with fear, shame, anger, and loss into one that gives the client a sense of purpose, meaning, and dignity. It is unlikely that deeply entrenched feelings of shame and
loss, and associated patterns of thoughts and behaviors, will be entirely transformed during
the course of a single treatment. Given the layers of life experience that shame and loss
have infiltrated, this task is more likely to be a long-term process. However, the narrative
work can establish one or more templates for an improved and alternative sense of self and
relationship to others, and demonstrates a process that the client learns and can use after
treatment ends.

[PAGE 098]

Guidelines for
Implementing Treatment

The paradox of structure is that it demands flexibility
to be stable.
—ANONYMOUS


Treating survivors of trauma poses particular challenges and rewards, over and above
those encountered in standard outpatient psychotherapy. Survivors of trauma have many
and varied difficulties in different domains of their lives. It can be hard for a therapist—and
a client—to decide exactly where to begin. Our treatment program is organized into two
relatively self-contained modules, STAIR and Narrative Therapy, each with distinct goals.
This modular approach provides flexibility in selection of treatment goals and processes. In
addition, the rationale for each treatment module is clearly described in Chapters 5 and 6,
and these descriptions can facilitate the process of deciding where to start and what to do.
In this chapter, we address and provide guidance on potential concerns related to using a
manualized treatment, deciding which clients may benefit from STAIR Narrative Therapy,
developing a strong therapeutic alliance, and addressing issues specific to working with
clients who have experienced early interpersonal trauma. The specific issues we address
include concerns related to trauma memories (seeking corroboration, confronting the perpetrator); client self-harming behaviors; a client’s sharing the trauma history with others; the
role of a couple in individual therapy; and concurrent therapy. We conclude by discussing
therapist self-care.


USING A MANUALIZED TREATMENT


Therapists interested in using STAIR Narrative Therapy come from a variety of clinical
backgrounds and training experiences. When we talk to therapists in the community, many
express concerns about using a manualized treatment in practice with their clients. As
authors of this manualized treatment, we understand these concerns, because all of us have


81

[PAGE 099]

82 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


had extensive training in nonmanualized, nondirective forms of psychotherapy as well as
manualized treatment. For this reason, we would like to address doubts some therapists
have about using a manual for treatment—even one intended to be used flexibly, such as
this one—right up front. Commonly heard concerns are as follows:


“T am a therapist, not a technician.”
“If I use a manual, I will lose myself as a therapist.”
“Manualized treatments are scripted and will feel forced, not allowing for spontaneity
or creativity.”
“I will not be able to give my full attention to my client if I am trying to follow a manual.”
“Therapy is an art, not something you can learn from a rulebook.”
“My client is a unique human being, not a piece of equipment to be fixed.”
“IfI use a manual, [ll be controlling the sessions and wont be able to work collabora-
tively or follow my client's lead.”
“Manuals just dont provide the flexibility needed to manage complex situations.”


STAIR Narrative Therapy: A Guide, Not a Technical Manual

We know that STAIR Narrative Therapy works in the format described in this book.
However, the treatment has been used by all five of us authors in both lengthened and
abbreviated forms, and it has an intentional structure and logic that allows flexibility in its
implementation. Indeed, the treatment has been used in New York City for survivors of the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks with substantial success (see Cloitre, Levitt, Davis, &
Miranda, 2003). Flexibility in use of treatment modules, types of interventions, and number
of sessions, as well as in application to a variety of clients, has led to uniformly beneficial
outcomes—often equal to those obtained in the more restricted conditions and client selection characteristic of an RCT (see Chapter 4).


Flexibility in Use of Modules

Again, this treatment contains two distinct components. The first module is focused on
developing emotion regulation and interpersonal skills. The second is focused on processing the client’s trauma history. In our research, we complete the modules sequentially, with
Module II immediately following the completion of Module I. Nevertheless, a therapist
can choose to use either module alone or to reverse the order of modules if it suits a client's needs and preferences. This flexible multimodular approach is consistent with recommended approaches for individuals with complex trauma (Cloitre, 2015; Karatzias et al.,
2019).
The STAIR module can be flexibly applied in a variety of ways, including repeating
sessions, providing an abbreviated review of other sessions, or even skipping some sessions
if the material is already familiar and the client has mastered it. Some clients, for example, may be relatively skilled in emotion regulation, but have more challenges in managing
relationships. In this scenario, we recommend a condensed review of emotion regulation
skills in one or more sessions, followed by several sessions focusing on the identification of

[PAGE 100]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 83


interpersonal difficulties and development of skills to help manage them. STAIR alone is
also useful for clients who do not feel ready to address their trauma memories, or whose
life situations are unfavorable for their engaging in trauma processing. For example, adjustments to the treatment structure were needed in a case where the client was diagnosed with
cancer during Module I. In order to focus attention on the crisis that the client was now
facing, the Module I component of the treatment was extended with skills training interventions directed to issues relevant to the client's current stressors and challenges.
Alternatively, there may be some clients who are prepared for directly addressing their
trauma memories and need only be provided with a few preparatory sessions before entering the Narrative Therapy component of treatment. These may be clients who have successfully completed a skills-based treatment previously and want to address remaining trauma
memories.
Lastly, there are some clients who are curious about their traumatic past and start
treatment with Narrative Therapy, and then realize they still have some issues they want
to address in day-to-day living. In this situation, the clients might begin with Narrative
Therapy and then add STAIR to resolve any remaining daily problems.
Regardless of the starting point, it is critical that a client and therapist spend some
time getting to know each other before engaging in the narrative work. Our research has
informed us that a key factor in good outcome of trauma memory processing in particular is
a strong therapeutic alliance. The alliance is generally established relatively quickly (usually
in three to five sessions) and tends to remain stable thereafter. This early phase of treatment
is useful for showing the therapist's ability to listen empathically, understanding the client's
goals in treatment, identifying the client's coping strategies and current life stressors, assessing the impact of the trauma history on current functioning, and mapping out and agreeing
upon a treatment plan.


Flexibility in Use of STAIR Sessions

Although the development of social skills and the development of emotional skills overlap
and evolve dynamically in relationship to one another, the topics and skills addressed in
STAIR are sequenced in a way that reflects the basic logic of skills development. For example, identifying feelings is a prerequisite for effectively communicating them to others, and
establishing basic skills in communication is useful before attempting to resolve conflictridden or highly charged interpersonal problems.
The therapist can begin treatment with a session and topic that make sense for the
client. For example, some clients are very aware of their feelings and have no difficulty in
naming them or describing situations in which these feelings emerge and are difficult to
manage. In these cases, identifying relationship models and interpersonal patterns or specific problems in issues of assertiveness may be a reasonable place to begin. Our experience,
however, has been that it is useful to do a quick review of feelings identification and other
assumed skills before going forward. This review may take only one or two sessions, but it
establishes a reference point for the client's level of competence and comfort with skills that
will soon be called upon. In a few cases, this review can take as little as one session and a
week of practice exercises.

[PAGE 101]

84 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


Flexibility in Use of Narrative Therapy Sessions

The skills and planning involved in successful use of Narrative Therapy are less variable,
given that these sessions share one central task. It will still be necessary to complete the basic
preparatory work for conducting narrative processing (in the first two sessions of Narrative
Therapy, described in Chapters 21 and 22). This preparatory work is as important as taking a
good life history and identifying the client's presenting problems before initiating treatment.
These sessions involve explaining the overall approach and rationale for the narrative work
and identifying memories from which the narrative work will be drawn. They are the nuts and
bolts of the procedure, and the client must be comfortable and familiar with them in order
to proceed with confidence and a sense of being able to master the task ahead. The actual
material about which the client chooses to create a narrative, however, is unique to the client
and selected collaboratively by therapist and client. In Chapters 6 and 7, we have identified
three emotion-driven themes that are inevitably all part of interpersonal trauma in childhood:
narratives of fear, shame, and loss. The client’s particular history, symptoms, stage of recovery,
and life circumstances will determine which theme is of most importance to them.
If clients are experiencing PTSD symptoms such as intrusive images and flashbacks,
narration of fear-laden trauma memories is a good place to begin. However, some clients
enter treatment with PTSD symptoms but feel more burdened by shame or loss. Often such
feelings come to the surface as a result of recent life stressors. For example, in our work with
survivors of 9/11, 60% also had a history of childhood trauma; of those, many experienced
powerful depression, with the PTSD symptoms being of secondary importance. The loss of
so many lives had reawakened unresolved feelings of loss, such as loss of a belief in goodness or in the possibility of a happy future. Treatment included STAIR to support symptom
management, while Narrative Therapy focused on the telling about the losses, clarifying
their meaning, and formulating activities or ways of living that honored the losses intrinsic
to both the clients’ childhoods and to 9/11.


Flexibility in Number of Sessions

This treatment was originally organized into 16 sessions, but now consists of approximately
18-24 sessions. It has been completed successfully in 16 weeks with 8 STAIR and 8 Narrative Therapy sessions conducted weekly (Cloitre et al., 2010), as well as in 12 weeks with
8 STAIR sessions completed weekly and the 8 Narrative Therapy sessions conducted in
a more condensed fashion, twice per week (Cloitre et al., 2002b; Levitt et al., 2007). We
encourage therapists in practice to use as many sessions as needed to address the problems
that are the focus of the interventions. This kind of flexibility can mean either extending the
number of sessions to cover material at a pace appropriate for a particular client, or skipping
material that is not relevant.
In our study of STAIR Narrative Therapy applied to 9/11 survivors (Cloitre et al.,
2003), treatment was flexibly applied so that emotion regulation, interpersonal problems,
and trauma memory processing all were expected to be addressed to some degree, but the
number of sessions selected for each problem cluster was matched to each client’s problems and preferences. The number of protocol sessions implemented averaged 18 across all

[PAGE 102]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 85


clients and ranged from 12 to 24. Data suggested that application of the treatment in this
way produced benefits equal to those achieved in the standardized approach. For example,
the effect size for PTSD symptoms in the standard 16-session trial was 1.76 (Cohen's d); the
same effect size was obtained in the flexible application.
Another adaptation of STAIR we have developed is a trimmed-down 5-session version
for clients in primary care settings. STAIR for Primary Care (STAIR-PC; Cloitre, Ortigo,
& Gupta, 2018c) focuses on the development of emotion regulations skills in a way that can
be individualized to clients’ specific needs. Initial findings on STAIR-PC are encouraging.
(See Chapter 27 for more discussion.)
Though these data are preliminary, they give us confidence in the benefits of adjusting
the session number and content to the needs of each client and the specific treatment setting. We recommend that therapists in practice determine how best to structure the treatment on a case-by-case basis.


FORMAL TRAINING AND CONTINUING EDUCATION


In this book, we provide theory, diagnosis, treatment principles, session-by-session instruction, and numerous clinical examples to guide a therapist in a real-world application of the
treatment. Still, a book, no matter how good it is, cannot replace excellent clinical training,
experience, and supervision. We strongly recommend that therapists working with survivors of childhood interpersonal trauma receive specialized workshop education to become
informed about issues specific to working with these survivors and about implementation of
cognitive-behavioral strategies. We recommend that therapists interested in working with
this population complete at least one multiday training workshop provided by experts in
PTSD related to interpersonal trauma and/or in the treatment of survivors of childhood
maltreatment. This type of training experience sets a general framework for thinking about
childhood maltreatment, often provides hands-on experience in intervention demonstration
and practice, provides a forum for asking questions relevant to a particular client or caseload,
and often builds therapists’ skills and confidence to work even more effectively with clients
who have experienced such maltreatment. If trauma treatment is new to a therapist, then
ongoing supervision and consultation are required to implement the treatment effectively.


THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE


The two-module format of this treatment aids in building a strong therapeutic alliance. The
alliance is important, because the therapy requires active participation and collaboration
from both the therapist and the client. In STAIR, the therapist is working with the client to
develop emotion regulation and interpersonal skills to reach real-life goals that the client
values, This work is collaborative, with the goal of improvements in the client's day-to-day
functioning. As such improvements begin to occur, the client’s trust in the therapist grows,
building a strong foundation for the trauma-processing work of Narrative Therapy. During
the Narrative Therapy component, the therapist bears witness to the trauma the client has

[PAGE 103]

86 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


suffered. Thus the client is leading the treatment within certain guidelines offered by the
therapist.


DECIDING WHICH CLIENTS MAY BENEFIT FROM THE TREATMENT

Survivors of Physical Abuse

When we present this treatment to therapists in the community, they often raise the question about who is appropriate for this treatment. The treatment was initially developed specifically for women with PTSD related to childhood sexual abuse. It quickly became apparent that most of these clients had also experienced physical abuse. About 70% of women
seeking treatment for sexual abuse also have a history of physical abuse—sometimes by the
same person, but often by one or more additional persons (see Cloitre, 1998; Cloitre et al.,
2002a). Over time, we provided treatment to women who had experienced only physical
abuse, and found that they did not differ in symptom profile or clinical needs and did just
as well in the treatment (Cloitre et al., 2002b).


Clients with Significant Traumas in Adulthood but Not Childhood

As noted earlier, we provided STAIR Narrative Therapy to adults exposed in some way to
the 9/11 collapse of the World Trade Center. About 60% of our clients also had a history of
childhood abuse. Evaluation of the treatment indicated that these clients showed significant
improvement both in their PTSD symptoms and in their coping strategies—including gains
in emotion regulation and in obtaining and seeking out social support, and decreases in
using alcohol and other substances to cope (see Cloitre et al., 2003). The improvements in
social support were especially striking, because these 9/11 survivors experienced substantial deterioration of social networks (through death, building destruction, and/or job-related
moves), which required them to apply coping strategies that had not been of particular
importance or necessity before 9/11. The use of STAIR Narrative Therapy may be relevant
with clients who have recently been traumatized and are faced with the need to adapt to
new environmental or social realities. We know that among these clients, the treatment provided moderate to large benefit, and that those with and without childhood abuse histories
had equally good outcomes.


Clients across the Gender Spectrum

This treatment was originally developed for women, because the index trauma was sexual
abuse—a form of trauma experienced approximately five times more frequently by women
than by men. Through our work with 9/11 survivors, however, we found that men did just
as well in the treatment as women did (see Cloitre et al., 2003). Indeed, the benefits for
men were greater in certain areas, particularly in reduction of aggressive behaviors and
of alcohol use as a coping strategy. In reduction of PTSD, depression, and other traumarelated symptoms, men showed benefits equal to women’s. Men with a history of childhood

[PAGE 104]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 87


interpersonal trauma tended to have more severe symptoms than men without early life
trauma, but showed changes equal to or greater than those of men without histories of early
trauma. These preliminary findings suggest that the treatment is applicable to men. From
a clinical standpoint, we have observed that the interventions and narrative process are
just as relevant to men as to women, and that men accept and tolerate them just as well. It
remains to be seen whether additional sessions or more refined interventions for certain
symptom areas, such as aggressive behaviors or use of alcohol, would provide even greater
benefits than those we observed.
Despite the fact that much of this research has focused on cis-gender women and men,
individuals across the gender spectrum can likely benefit just as much, as long as the therapist carefully considers that transgender and “questioning” individuals confront additional
barriers to treatment, experience greater trauma exposure rates, and require culturally competent and sensitive client-centered care. Therapists who do not have experience in working
with these issues will benefit from consultation, but the overall nature of the interventions
and theoretical framework still broadly apply. As a reflection of the field’s growing awareness
of gender diversity, we have carefully replaced gendered third-person singular pronouns in
this edition of the book with the gender-neutral “they,” “them,” and “their” We hope that
this concrete change provides one example of how to consider the impact of language when
creating a sense of safety for diverse clients, no matter how they personally identify. As with
any work in the area of diversity, open, collaborative conversations with clients will go a very
long way in ensuring that these issues can be part of the work in treatment.


Clients with Subthreshold PTSD

Our research with people who have “subsyndromal” or “subthreshold” PTSD indicates that
such clients find both the STAIR and Narrative Therapy components of treatment useful.
It seems impractical and nonsensical to exclude individuals from treatment just because
they have less than a full diagnosis. For clients who have minimal PTSD symptoms, the
application of STAIR alone may be sufficient. In some cases, Narrative Therapy can still be
implemented as a method of exploring shame- and loss-related emotions or other important
parts of the meaning-making process after trauma.


Clients with Borderline and Other Personality Disorders

Therapists working with clients who were abused as children often note that these clients
have many features of borderline personality disorder (BPD), even if they do not meet full
criteria for the disorder. BPD is the most common but not the only personality disorder
characterized by significant disturbances in areas of emotion regulation, sense of self, and
relationships with others. These difficulties are precisely the sorts of problems that several
of the STAIR interventions were designed to address. Indeed, we have used this treatment successfully with clients who had several features of BPD, or even met full diagnostic
criteria for BPD and other personality disorders, by mindfully adapting the treatment as
appropriate. Thus, the presence of a personality disorder diagnosis alone does not warrant

[PAGE 105]

88 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


automatically referring a potential client to another treatment. However, certain characteristics of personality disorder symptoms may indicate that another treatment, such as
Transference-Focused Psychotherapy (TFP; Yeomans, Clarkin, & Kernberg, 2015) or DBT
(Linehan, 1993, 2015), would be a better treatment match. For example, individuals with
chronic, severe suicidal ideation and attempts may be appropriate for DBT, as the treatment
has been developed specifically for these types of difficulties and has a successful track
record in managing them (Linehan et al., 2015). Individuals with a severe sense of abandonment and emptiness may benefit more from TFP, a long-term therapy that can help build a
strong and stable sense of self and reassurance about the enduring presence of others.


Clients with Motivation for Skills Development

Our experience suggests two important prerequisites for determining the potential for successful treatment. These are a clients identified goals for therapy and the clients perception of the therapeutic relationship. These two issues are related. Specifically, the client's
motivation and goals for the therapy must be skills-based rather than relationship-based.
We have found that treatment is not effective or appropriate for clients whose treatment
focus is on the relationship with the therapist, rather than on learning skills with the therapist’s guidance. In these cases, the clients’ needs drift toward analysis and feelings about
the relationship, and away from self-reflection, self-transformation, and skill acquisition as
guided by the therapist. For example, one client who we soon realized was inappropriate for
this treatment felt that the between-session exercises were the therapist's way of punishing
her and trying to control her outside of sessions. The treatment quickly became primarily
about the therapist-client relationship, rather than about how the client could develop skills
to help her improve her life. The therapeutic relationship is critical to the success of the
treatment (as we discuss below), but this relationship supports change rather than being the
primary tool or medium for it.


ASSESSING READINESS FOR TREATMENT

Review of Treatment History

Clients who experience strong feelings of emptiness and, in conjunction, report volatile
relationships may be driven by such problems to the extent that they preclude the clients’
ability to set and follow through on skills-based treatment goals. One way to identify risk
of a poor client-treatment match is to review each clients history of prior treatment. Indicators of poor fit would include reports of difficulty in making and keeping commitments
to therapy in the past; having started and terminated many treatment relationships; and
stormy relationships with several previous therapists. Also of note are clients who don't
seem able to view previous therapists as having both strengths and weaknesses, but only
idealize or denigrate them.
Alternatively, a good record of effort in previous treatments might indicate an appropriate match, despite the presence of a full diagnosis of BPD. For example, an assessment of a

[PAGE 106]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 89


30-year-old lawyer who had been sexually abused by her grandfather yielded a diagnosis of
PTSD and BPD, as well as a history of disordered eating behavior (bingeing and purging).
Normally, such a client might not seem appropriate for this or any short-term treatment.
However, the client had engaged in long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy for several
years. She was seeking this treatment in combination with her other therapy, and her other
therapist was supportive. It was clear from this woman’s treatment history that she would
be able to form a collaborative relationship with a therapist.


Engagement during Initial Sessions

In some cases, it is not possible to determine that a client is appropriate for STAIR Narrative
Therapy until the treatment has started. Ifa therapist starts this treatment with a client that
the therapist is unsure about, it is wise to pay close attention to the client's participation in
the early treatment sessions. Does this client participate actively in sessions? Can they identify specific areas of their life they would like to work on? When they do between-session
exercises, are they less focused on learning about themselves and more focused on what
the treatment work says about the therapeutic relationship? Clients may raise objections to
some skills work or may not complete skills exercises for all kinds of reasons. However, it is
notable if a client's reasoning about these behaviors concerns their reactions to the therapist
rather than to the intervention.


THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE


In the introductory chapters of this book, we have reviewed how caregiving environments characterized by sustained maltreatment (sexual, physical, or psychological abuse,
or neglect) disturb the development of healthy attachment, emotion regulation skills, and
relationship models (e.g., Malatesta & Haviland, 1982; Shields & Cicchetti, 1998; Shipman
& Zeman, 2001). Clients bring their attachment difficulties, emotion regulation deficits, and
interpersonal problems into the therapeutic relationship. The success of this treatment, and
indeed of any psychotherapy, depends on the therapist’s ability to build a strong alliance
with the client in spite of these problems.


What Is the Therapeutic Alliance?

The foundation of a strong therapeutic alliance is unconditional positive regard (Rogers,
1951). We believe first and foremost that therapists should, in general, enjoy working with
their clients. It is difficult for a therapist to enjoy the work and to maintain such regard for a
client they do not like. Authentic positive feelings for a client go a long way toward building
an alliance.
Second, the therapists must believe that they can help clients improve their lives. Using
a treatment that has empirical data supporting its efficacy, such as this one, contributes to
holding and conveying that attitude.

[PAGE 107]

90 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


Due both to the complex nature of this work and to the range of interpersonal and
attachment difficulties with which clients present, therapists will inevitably encounter situations in which experiencing and/or maintaining positive feelings for clients is challenging.
In these instances, it is essential that therapists practice self-awareness, take time to reflect
on their own reactions, and increase efforts to understand and accept their clients’ perspectives and struggles. In most cases, a therapist who has a sincere desire and determination to
connect can usually find something positive about working with any client. If, for whatever
reason, the therapist cannot find a way to experience or communicate positive regard for
a client, given the degree to which the therapeutic relationship determines treatment outcome (as detailed below), it is the therapist's responsibility to facilitate a referral to another
qualified therapist. Seeking consultation or supervision from another professional, in order
to manage this situation and process in the most ethical and sensitive way possible, is recommended.


The Importance of the Therapeutic Alliance

Through our research, we have demonstrated the importance of the therapeutic alliance
to the success of this treatment (Cloitre et al., 2002b). In particular, the strength of the
therapeutic alliance established during the first component of treatment predicted successful reduction of PTSD symptoms during the treatments second component (Cloitre et al.,
2002b). Furthermore, this relationship was mediated by participants improved capacity to
regulate negative emotions during the Narrative Therapy module of the treatment. These
data suggest that a strong therapeutic alliance facilitates a client's ability to manage negative
emotions during trauma processing (Cloitre et al., 2004). Other investigators treating clients
with PTSD have reported similar results. In one study, Chemtob, Novaco, Hamada, and
Gross (1997) found that PTSD-related anger symptoms caused ruptures in the therapeutic
relationship that directly compromised treatment outcome, including premature termination. Similarly, Tarrier et al. (1999) found that clients’ feelings regarding the credibility of
treatment—a contributor to the therapeutic alliance—predicted dropout from treatment.
The strength of the client-therapist relationship appears to be a critical common factor across treatment modalities, including short-term CBT, interpersonal therapy, psychodynamic therapy, and gestalt therapy. Notably, the relationship between the therapeutic
alliance and good outcome for clients with childhood abuse histories in STAIR Narrative
Therapy was twice as large as that usually observed in other treatment modalities and populations (Cloitre et al., 2004). This finding suggests that the role of the therapeutic alliance
in the treatment of survivors of childhood abuse is particularly important, which makes
sense, given the interpersonal context in which their trauma occurred. Specifically, a positive alliance may serve to reverse or repair some of the interpersonal disturbances that so
often undermine success in a variety of life tasks.


Threats to the Therapeutic Alliance

When managed well by the therapist and worked through, threats to the therapeutic alliance
can actually improve the client-therapist relationship and model effective interpersonal

[PAGE 108]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 91


communication skills—all of which increase the efficacy of the treatment. This successful
resolution of ruptures can be achieved by framing threats to the therapeutic alliance as
communications from the client to the therapist. Often a client’s apparent difficulties with
the therapist or treatment are ways of conveying fear, conflict, or a host of other problems
that the client may be unable to express in other ways. If the therapist attends to alliance
problems in this way, it is more likely that issues affecting the treatment relationship can be
recognized and directly addressed.
Below, we identify four common problems in the therapeutic alliance that occur with
survivors of interpersonal trauma. Therapists may benefit from reminding themselves about
these patterns from time to time and asking themselves if these patterns are operating in
any of their relationships with clients. If this is the case, or if a therapist feels vague discomfort or confusion about the nature of the therapeutic relationship, consultation with a
trusted colleague can help to determine and resolve these difficulties.


Breaks in understanding

It is inevitable that there will be occasional lapses of understanding between a therapist and
client. To minimize the impact of such lapses, the therapist can at the beginning of treatment predict their occurrence and provide the client with guidelines about how to respond.
The therapist may say something like this:


“At some point, Im going to say or do something that upsets you, makes you angry, or
makes you feel misunderstood. Although Pl try my best to help you, at some point I'll
probably make a mistake. You may not even recognize my mistake at first. You may not
be aware of it until you go home and think about it. When this happens, it’s important
that we have an opportunity to address the issue. If youre angry with me or feel hurt
by me, please come back to the next session and tell me. I want to hear about it and
then make corrections to how we proceed! This is your treatment, so it’s my job to help
it work for you and to help you feel cared for.”


By letting the client know that ruptures in the relationship will occur, the therapist has
taken away some of the ruptures’ power and made it more likely that the client will stay in
the therapy and repair them. The therapist is also showing that they are not unduly afraid of
ruptures in relationships, that these are to be expected in the course of a relationship, and
that they can be overcome. This approach has the added benefit of being an opportunity to
model good interpersonal skills to the client.
We have also found it helpful for the therapist to make extra efforts to reach out to the
client when breaks in the relationship do occur. These may include calling, rescheduling
sessions, and sending letters. As we have discussed in the opening chapters, clients who
were maltreated as children did not develop the skills to address conflict or ruptures in
relationships. They tend to be easily hurt but avoidant of conflicts, and as a result, they may
simply break off relationships when difficulties occur. The extra efforts the therapist makes
reassure the client that the therapist values the relationship and believes in the client's ability to complete the treatment successfully.

[PAGE 109]

92 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


Lapses in perceived empathy

A second issue related to the therapeutic alliance is a client’s uncertainty about the therapist's ability to understand what they have been through. For some clients, this uncertainty
is manifested in a question about whether the therapist is also a survivor of trauma. It is
important for the therapist to avoid taking such a question too literally. Often what the client really wants to know is whether or not the therapist can help them, not the details of the
therapist's trauma history. Even if the therapist is a survivor of trauma, this personal experience does not necessarily make them better able to understand the client's unique experience. In some cases, rather than facilitating understanding, the therapist's own experience
may cloud their ability to see the client clearly. Addressing the concern behind the question,
the therapist might respond with a statement like this:


“No one can really understand someone else without standing in that person's shoes.
And no ones experience is exactly the same. My goal is to understand your experience
as you have experienced it. I will listen carefully to you. In addition, I have worked with
many people who have experienced childhood trauma, and I can share with you things
that I have learned from them, if you think that would be helpful.”


Sexualization

Sexualizing the therapeutic relationship happens often—perhaps particularly often—with
clients who were sexually abused in childhood. Indeed, behaving sexually with therapists
may be almost automatic for some clients. A client may wear provocative clothing to session,
flirt openly with the therapist, and ask the therapist questions about their personal life. The
therapist may react with discomfort or even with horror at finding themselves attracted to the
client and reacting unconsciously or emotionally to sexual advances or flirting in response.
Many clients who act in very sexualized ways are not conscious that they are doing so;
even if they recognize their behavior as such, they do not know how else to act. It is important that a therapist take care to address such behavior without embarrassing or shaming
such a client. A therapist may feel inclined to reprimand the client or tell them directly that
their behavior is inappropriate. In actuality, the client is often merely trying to find some
way to communicate or forge some connection with the therapist. The underlying relationship model at work may reflect the client's belief, based on their abuse history, that “to be
attached means to be sexual” The therapist's task is to recognize how this relationship
model has shaped the clients expectations, and to provide an alternative way of relating.
The therapist can demonstrate in words or actions that the client is important to the therapist for reasons not having to do with their sexuality, and that a sustained connection to
another person need not be expressed in sexual terms.
If the client is looking for a way to connect with the therapist or to experience positive
regard from the therapist, strategic comments will help move the client away from sexualized behavior and toward the exploration of other important and positive aspects of themselves. For example, the therapist can explicitly note and express interest in the client's skills
at their job or ability to compliment others. The therapist can also remark on the courage the
client has shown in coming to therapy and engaging in the treatment tasks.

[PAGE 110]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 93


As a more direct alternative, the therapist may wish to express how they experience
the client's sexualized behavior, but this approach requires great sensitivity. Observations
such as “When you said that, I felt like you were flirting with me,” or “Sometimes I feel like
you are behaving toward me like you might if you wanted to date me, rather than as your
therapist,’ or “Sometimes I feel like you ask me questions about my personal life to distract
us from focusing on you” can be experienced as reprimanding or belittling; the client may
feel “caught being bad.” Rather, reactions to sexualized behavior need to be conveyed with
empathy, kindness, and even humor, and always in a spirit of collaboration.
Ideally, this direct approach is taken only when the therapist feels confident that the
therapeutic relationship is stable and that the client feels respected and well regarded by
the therapist. Under these circumstances, any sense of guilt or blame that the client experiences for the appearance of sexual expression can be quickly dissipated. The therapeutic
goal is to have the client understand that sexualized modes of relating are not inherently
“bad,” but also are not necessary in creating strong and effective relationships. This perspective contributes to the evolution in the client's sense of self and to the development
of more varied relationship models that free them from the narrow constraints of relating
to others in a predominantly sexualized way. The therapist conveys to the client that they
are free to be more than a sexual object or being, and that in the therapeutic relationship,
the strength of the bond comes from growth in areas other than the appearance of sexual
value and attraction. In some cases, explicitly stating, in a compassionate but clear way, that
a sexual relationship will not and must not develop may be necessary. In situations that
require it, unambiguously setting such a boundary can actually be a very comforting and
healing experience for a client.


Conflicts

The therapeutic relationship is also fertile ground for replaying the power and control conflicts that are so frequently part of victim—perpetrator relationship dynamics. For example,
the client may feel victimized by the goal-directed nature of the therapy. The client may
say, Youre forcing me to do these exercises—what gives you the right?” Or “Youre hurting
me by having me think about my trauma.” Alternatively, the therapist may feel placed in
the victim role and maltreated by the client. This dynamic may be expressed in the client's
anger, criticisms, and rejection of the therapist's attempts to provide help (“There's nothing
you can do for me,” “T tried it, and it didnt work”). The client may begin missing sessions
but calling for help on weekends, may come to sessions late, or may not pay fees as agreed
upon. The therapist may feel overwhelmed, incompetent, and helpless to do anything to aid
the client, or may feel exploited and disrespected. If the therapist's reactions go unchecked
and unexamined, they will ultimately lead to countertherapeutic behaviors that may be
expressed directly to the client through verbal attacks, or indirectly in ways that are equally
rejecting. It is important that a therapist in this situation closely monitor their feelings and
behavior toward the client and work to regain empathy for the client’s difficulties.
One goal of the treatment is to address and reframe power/control conflicts in the
therapeutic relationship. A guiding principle of treatment implementation is that the client
takes the lead in setting both the pace and the goals. This philosophy of treatment, and the

[PAGE 111]

94 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


particular goals and pace of treatment, are articulated in the process of the assessment and
initial session work (see Chapters 9 and 10). Ideally, this structure will not so much prevent
as extinguish future conflicts around power and control that could arise. The therapist may
choose to reassert the agreement and remind the client that the client is in charge of the
process. More importantly, it may be useful to ask the client, “What do you really want?”
Often the appearance of resistance to treatment or criticism of the therapist's technique
reflects clients anxiety about going forward in the treatment and resentment about their
predicament. As one client put it, clients often have this simple human desire: “I wish I did
not have to do this. I wish I could be magically better.” This type of question and response
can break the stalemate in the conflicts of power/control and can unify the therapist and
client in working toward the same goals, with adjustments as needed in the pace, process,
and goals of the treatment.


SPECIAL CHALLENGES IN TREATING SURVIVORS
OF CHILDHOOD ABUSE


This section focuses on the special challenges we have encountered in working with survivors of childhood abuse while implementing this treatment. These challenges include issues
involving a client's seeking to validate the truth of their trauma memories (including seeking
corroboration of memories and/or confronting the abuser); client self-harming behaviors; a
client's sharing their abuse history with others; the role of a couple in individual therapy;
and concurrent therapy. We review each in turn.


Seeking to Validate the Truth of Trauma Memories

In our clinical experience, most individuals reporting childhood abuse have always remembered something about what they experienced. At the same time, even those who have
always remembered their abuse have had doubts or questions about some aspect of what
really happened. Many of these clients find themselves wondering whether specific memories or specific details about the abuse are true.
Clients concerns about the veridicality of their abuse memories have several sources.
Many clients find that they experience an increase in memories of abuse and heightened
distress when they begin trauma-focused treatment. Often such memories are not really
“new” ones; they are memories that a client has always had, but that are now more accessible and present because the client is focusing on those memories. Additionally, clients
sometimes report that they now remember more details of their abuse experiences. They
may wonder if these details are accurate. Lastly, some clients find that in the process of
therapy, they come to a different understanding of their histories and may reframe certain
experiences they had previously thought were “normal” as abusive. For example, a client
reported in the initial assessment that her trauma history consisted solely of being sexually
abused by her stepfather. While reviewing her history in therapy, she also reported that her
mother engaged in very severe corporal punishment. In fact, the corporal punishment was

[PAGE 112]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 95


so severe that the client often wore long-sleeved shirts to school in warm weather, to cover
the bruises on her arms. The client had not initially considered those experiences as physical abuse, but over time she came to label them as such and to view them as an important
part of her abuse history that she addressed in treatment.
Many individuals who were abused as children and have come to treatment in adulthood have disclosed the abuse at some point, only to have their experience denied completely or invalidated. At the worst extreme, clients report having disclosed to a trusted
adult when the abuse was happening, and being told that they were lying and punished
for making up stories. Clients also commonly report experiences ofbeing invalidated when
sharing their abuse experiences. Clients often first try to share their abuse stories with
friends in adolescence. Such friends, in their immaturity, are unprepared for these disclosures and may have responded by denying the abuse, minimizing it, or just not wanting to
hear about it. For example, when she was 15, one client told a friend about being sexually
abused by her uncle. Her friend at first responded by wanting all the lurid details, and then
stopped her from talking about it further by saying, “That is really gross. You shouldn't say
those things.” Another client tried to talk to her 17-year-old boyfriend about her experience of sexual abuse by her older brother. He responded by getting angry and calling her
a “whore.” He then tried to pressure her to have sexual intercourse with him, saying that it
should be “no big deal” for her, as she had “done it all before.”
Clients who have disclosed their abuse and received these types of responses may come
to doubt the reality or meaning of their own experiences. Clients may find themselves wondering at times if the abuse really happened or if they did make it up—or, even if they are
sure it did happen, whether they are making “too big a deal” about it. This is especially true
of clients who disclosed their abuse in childhood, found its reality denied, and then continued to be abused. Such clients had to live with two realities: one of their personal reality
in which they were being abused, and one of their social reality in which the abuse was
denied. Minimizing or denying their experience becomes a way of coping with it in such
cases. As a result, even when clients come to understand and accept the abuse they endured
later in life, they still often feel the need for “objective” verification and acknowledgment.


Seeking corroboration of the abuse

By beginning trauma-focused therapy, clients are making a statement that at least some
part of them believes that the abuse happened and is worthy of serious consideration. Some
clients may begin seeking external corroboration of their abuse experiences from family
members or childhood friends. Or they may pore over childhood documents, pictures, letters, and school records, to see if they can find inconvertible evidence that they were abused
and can thus silence any possible doubt. Clients may wish to confront their abusers and, in
some cases, to pursue legal action against them.
What is a therapist's role in such a clients search for “the truth”? There is no one
accepted answer to this question, so we give our opinion, based on our clinical and research
experience with survivors. First, the therapist's job is to help the client explore what they
hope to gain from external corroboration of the abuse. Second, the therapist can help the

[PAGE 113]

96 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


client ponder how they might go about getting external corroboration. Third, the therapist
can help the client think through the consequences of getting or not getting the corroboration they so desire.
Clients’ reasons for seeking corroboration are as varied as their experiences. What
many clients want is understanding from family members or friends. Clients want those
individuals most important to them to recognize that these terrible experiences really happened, that they have caused the clients much pain and anguish, and that they have had
long-term adverse effects on them. Often they have tried to talk with friends or family members about the abuse, but have not felt understood. These clients hope that presenting some
type of corroboration will be more convincing than mere words.
One woman we treated was physically abused in childhood by her mother, who had her
own mental health problems. Her father was caring but usually physically absent: He dealt
with his wife's illness by working long hours and traveling a great deal. The client and her
siblings were therefore often left alone to cope with their mother’s abusive behavior. When
the client reached adulthood, after her mother’s death, her father and siblings talked about
their mothers problems; however, they greatly minimized how abusive and chaotic the
household had been. They also minimized the relationship between the abuse and our client's and her siblings’ difficulties in functioning in their adult lives. This client remembered
receiving medical care related to her mother’s physical abuse—in particular, being taken
to the emergency room for a broken arm caused by her mother’s throwing her down some
stairs. She wanted her medical records to show her father and siblings, so they would admit
how bad her childhood was.
Her therapist asked her, “And if you get these records and show them to your father,
what do you hope will happen?” The client answered, “Daddy will finally admit that my
mother was a terrible mother. That she abused me and my siblings. That he never should
have left us with her. That he should have protected us. He'll say he is sorry and hug me.
We'll be a family again without this barrier—this ghost of my mother—between us.” The
therapist did not argue or debate with the client about whether or not to get the medical records or, if she got them, to show them to her family. Rather, the therapist focused
on helping the client explore how else her father and siblings might react to the medical
records (e.g., with more denial), and how that might affect their future relationship.
Exploring what clients hope to achieve with corroboration is important, because often
the type of corroboration clients can realistically obtain is unlikely to achieve their goals.
Family members, friends, and partners who deny or minimize the clients experiences are
likely to maintain this stance even in the face of external evidence. This response can reflect
some level of motivated reasoning or denial, but is often possible because most corroboration, such as the medical records sought by the client described above, can be explained
in other ways (e.g., childhood accidents). However, obtaining corroboration can be helpful
to clients for other reasons. For example, one client we saw remembered having done very
well in school until she started being sexually abused by her new stepfather when she was
11 years old. She obtained her school records, and they confirmed her memory: Her grades
started dropping when she was 11, and her teachers noted her being more distracted in
class and withdrawn, commenting on her drop in performance. Reading these report cards

[PAGE 114]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 97


was very validating for the client, but they were not helpful in convincing her mother, who
always denied that the abuse occurred.


Confronting the abuser

Many clients, at some point during treatment, consider confronting their abusers. This idea
is particularly common if an abuser is a family member with whoma client still has some
contact. Almost all clients wish for a confession from their abusers—the ultimate form of
corroboration and validation. Many clients imagine the day when they will confront their
abusers, who, in the clients’ imagined view of the confrontation, will break down, confess
their wrongdoing, and apologize.
The therapist's approach to the idea of confronting the abuser is similar to the approach
used with other forms of corroboration. That is, the therapist focuses on helping the client
identify what they hope to accomplish through a confrontation. Many clients are seeking
the ultimate confirmation to themselves that their experiences are real and true. Other
clients want to prove their abuse to those who denied their experiences. Clients may also
be driven by the desire for revenge: to make their abusers pay emotionally, legally, and/
or financially for the pain they caused. Occasionally clients may want to have adult relationships with their abusers, but feel that this option is not possible until the abusers have
acknowledged the abuse. We find that once clients explore what they hope to get from
confronting their abusers, they often realize that the confrontation is too risky or will not
achieve what they hope. After realizing this likelihood, they decide to move forward in a
different way.
For a client who wishes to pursue confronting the abuser, a therapist can help the client
think through and plan the confrontation, so that the client has the best chance of achieving their goals and has a plan in place for self-care, regardless of the outcome. The therapist
can help the client decide when, where, and how they wish to conduct the confrontation.
The therapist can also explore potentially negative outcomes (e.g., denial by the perpetrator)
and ways the client can cope with them. In rare cases, the abuser may be willing to meet
with the therapist and client together. This situation sometimes occurs when the abuser has
been in therapy. In such cases, the abuser's and survivor's therapists may decide that a joint
meeting is most appropriate.


Mandated reporting and other legal issues

Clients also seek confrontations with their abusers for reasons other than corroboration.
For example, some clients are driven by the desire to protect children from potential abuse
if they believe that a perpetrator still has the opportunity to exploit other children (e.g., a
priest or other spiritual leader, or a relative who may be abusing other children in a family).
Situations where clients are reporting abuse by individuals who are at risk of continuing to
abuse others place special ethical and legal demands on therapists. Mandated reporting
statutes differ by state, but in general therapists are required to report an individual if they
believe that the person is at risk of currently physically or sexually abusing children.

[PAGE 115]

98 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


Clients who pursue restitution from their abusers through the legal system also pose
special challenges to their therapists. If a therapist has a client pursuing legal action, we
strongly recommend seeking legal advice from attorneys who have dealt with such cases.
Many professional organizations, such as the American Psychological Association, have contracts with attorneys who deal with these and other mental health issues. The therapist
may have to address issues relating to the confidentiality of therapy records, or may face a
subpoena to testify in the case. Pursuing legal action can also have direct consequences for
clients’ motivation to recover from the abuse. In order to receive financial compensation for
the abuse, clients may have to show that the abuse was mentally damaging in an ongoing
way. This situation may result in clients’ needing to remain symptomatic to obtain a financial settlement. During the period when a legal process is ongoing, a therapist and client
may choose to focus therapy on supporting the client through the process, rather than doing
trauma-focused work. The legal process in itself can be very time-consuming and stressful,
and often leaves clients with few resources to focus on other areas in treatment.


Acceptance of ambiguity

For most clients, part of the therapeutic process involves accepting that they will likely
never receive external corroboration of their abuse or achieve certainty. They may never
know for sure whether specific details of the abuse happened, or be able to fill in lapses in
their memories of traumatic experiences. The evidence for their abuse may never reach the
standard of proof demanded by the legal system. Some clients will continue to have family
members, partners, and friends who minimize or deny what they experienced. Ultimately,
the therapeutic process is different from the legal process: The aim of therapy is not to
determine truth, but to help a client understand their subjective experience, the impact
of that experience, and the process for moving away from the past and more fully into the
present and future.


Client Self-Injurious Behaviors

Some clients who have completed STAIR Narrative Therapy have had a history of selfinjurious behaviors such as cutting or burning. Self-injurious behaviors are common aspects
of the symptom profile of survivors of childhood interpersonal trauma, and clients with mild
to moderate self-injurious behaviors are appropriate for and can benefit from STAIR Narrative Therapy. A self-injurious behavior often functions as an attempt to cope with emotion
dysregulation—either to reduce or organize a “flooding” experience, or to elicit a focused
feeling when acutely distressed by either numbing, dissociation, or fear of lapsing into a
dissociative state (Brodsky et al., 1995). In STAIR, these behaviors can often be resolved
and replaced with more effective coping skills. Developing a more positive view about the
self and the capacity to share urges for self-injury with an empathic, nonjudgmental therapist can contribute to recovery from these maladaptive coping behaviors. Moderate to
very severe self-injurious behaviors (e.g., head banging, deep cutting) need to be addressed

[PAGE 116]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 99


immediately, however, as they create significant and long-term health risks. Such clients
may need to be referred to other providers who specialize in the reduction and prevention
of self-injury.


Sharing the Abuse History and Treatment with Others

When clients begin a trauma-focused treatment, they may also have the desire to share
their trauma history and their treatment with members of their social network. This desire
may be more or less appropriate, depending on the type of relationship a client has with
a particular person. Clients who are survivors of childhood abuse sometimes have not yet
developed good judgment about whom they can trust or who would benefit from hearing
their trauma history. A client may be inclined to tell nothing to their intimate partner, but to
relay a detailed history to a passing acquaintance. Part of the therapy is to help clients learn
with whom they can and cannot safely share their trauma histories, and what exactly about
their experience is helpful to share.
For example, one client who came to treatment was socially withdrawn and had no
close relationships. Her closest “friend” was the elderly woman who worked at the bakery
where she bought her coffee and bagel every morning on the way to work. Each morning,
the client and this woman engaged in small talk about what each was doing that day. On the
day she started treatment, the client told this woman that she was going to therapy because
her father had sexually abused her as a child. The elderly woman responded by saying, “In
my day, one didnt talk about such things!” and walked away. Naturally this encounter was
distressing to the client, who only realized over time that her disclosure in that situation
was inappropriate to the context and relationship, regardless of how hurtful and lacking in
compassion the woman's response was.


Couples Issues

A client who has an intimate partner may wish to have the partner included in the treatment. Although this treatment program was not designed to be used with couples, we routinely meet with a client and their partner if the client requests such a meeting. For those
clients who desire couples therapy, such treatments have been developed for partners of
veterans with combat-related PTSD (Monson & Fredman, 2012) and may be adapted for
working with couples where one member has experienced childhood trauma.
In STAIR Narrative Therapy, we use the meeting to educate the clients partner about
the relationship between the clients history of interpersonal trauma on the one hand, and
their current PTSD symptoms and difficulties in functioning on the other. We find that this
type of meeting can be helpful for a partner who may not understand the source of the client’s problems, or feels hurt by or to blame for them. For example, a partner may interpret
a client’s avoidance of sexual intimacy as personal rejection, rather than as avoidance that
may be related to a history of sexual abuse. Understanding the nature of the client's difficulties helps the partner be more supportive during the treatment. This meeting is also an

[PAGE 117]

100 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


opportunity to let the client's partner know that some of the client's difficulties may temporarily get worse during the treatment before improving, and that this temporary worsening
is to be expected as part of the long-term recovery.
During this session, the therapist can also convey empathy for the partner, who may
themselves be traumatized by the clients difficulties. Partners of survivors of abuse and
neglect often experience anger and sadness on behalf of the survivors, as well as anxiety
about the impact of the maltreatment histories on their relationships. Some partners vicariously experience intrusive thoughts and other PTSD-like symptoms as a result of hearing
about the survivors histories. As a parallel, the mental health field has understood that
therapists sometimes feel overwhelmed by their clients’ experiences and can find themselves ruminating about them at unexpected times. Intimate partners of clients can experience such vicarious traumatization to an even greater degree: They share the clients’ lives
to a much greater extent and are not professionally trained to protect themselves. Partners
may also bear the brunt of the clients’ difficulties in functioning and PTSD symptoms. For
example, a partner is exposed to recurring difficulties when a client has nightmares and
cannot sleep, bursts out in rage, or loses their job because they cannot get out of bed and go
to work. Well-functioning partners may find themselves overcompensating for such clients’
deficits in functioning.
In turn, partners can also contribute to the clients’ difficulties and impede successful
use of the therapy. Partners who are intrusive, insecure, or controlling may be threatened
by the therapy, and particularly about what the clients may say about them in therapy.
Although how much to share is something that always lies within a clients discretion, we
encourage the client to think through what would be in their best interests. For example, in
the case ofa client whose partner wished to listen to recordings of their sessions, we encouraged the client to describe their experiences in therapy to their partner directly, rather than
indirectly sharing these through recordings. This approach allowed the client to preserve
the confidentiality of the therapy sessions, and also ensured that the client did not censor
themselves in therapy.
A therapist often does not have significant knowledge about a client’s relationship until
well into the treatment. It is often impossible at the beginning of treatment to judge the
extent of a partners supportiveness about the client's treatment, the partner's reaction to the
client’s history, and the partners own difficulties that they bring to the relationship. Some
clients have compassionate partners, whereas others have maltreating partners with whom
they are repeating their trauma histories. Meeting with the partner can help inform the
therapist about these issues. A meeting also gives the therapist the opportunity to refer the
partner or couple to therapy ifindicated.


Concurrent Treatment

Although evidence supports this therapy's effectiveness in addressing the central problems
faced by survivors of child abuse, it alone may not always be enough to address a client's
needs. Some may need, or may come to STAIR Narrative Therapy already using, other
forms of treatment (e.g., medication, couple therapy, or supportive therapy), particularly

[PAGE 118]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 101


if they have been experiencing chronically stressful life circumstances. Consequently, we
have routinely worked with clients simultaneously engaged in other forms of treatment. For
research purposes, we have asked that clients not make changes in their other treatments
(e.g., medication dosage or frequency of therapy sessions) during the length of the research
protocol (3 months). The rationale has been to ensure the validity of the research protocol.
This requirement is obviously not necessary in routine clinical practice where there can be
much more flexibility.
Our clinical experience suggests that, given certain prerequisites (such as the agreement of all involved), STAIR Narrative Therapy can be successfully conducted concurrently
with other forms of individual or group therapy or with medication management. In fact,
providing STAIR Narrative Therapy to a client who is already in a long-term treatment
arrangement can be very helpful. For example, we have had clients in long-term psychodynamic psychotherapies with trusted providers seek out STAIR Narrative Therapy because
they also wanted to do some more directed, skills-based, and trauma-focused work. Some
therapists who have been trained psychodynamically and who work in a nondirective way
can see the value in such work, but may not be comfortable with or interested in a shared
treatment. Other therapists, however, encourage their clients to pursue adjunctive care
while they continue their long-term therapy.
Concurrent therapy can only be successful if the clients present therapist is supportive
of it and feels they can collaborate well with another therapist. Occasionally a client appears
to be seeking concurrent treatment, but is actually unhappy with their present therapy and
is exploring other options. If that is the case, it is advisable not to begin STAIR Narrative
Therapy with this client until the client has decided whether or not to continue with their
present therapist. When the present therapist is supportive and the client pursues concurrent treatment, it is essential to maintain open communication among all of the client's
mental health providers. Such communication ensures that all providers have the information they need to treat the client most effectively, and it prevents the client from creating
conflicts between providers.


THERAPIST SELF-CARE

The effects of trauma are catching, and the listener is always in danger of
empathically resonating with the victim and thus converging emotionally
within the same traumatic envelope. ... As Euripides said several thousand
years ago, Where there are two, one cannot be wretched and one not.”
SANDRA L. BLOOM AND MICHAEL REICHERT (1998, p. 145)


Psychotherapy involves “complex demands, human costs, constant risk, and often limited
resources” (Pope & Vasquez, 1998, p. 1). Treating clients who were traumatized, especially
as children, is particularly challenging for two reasons. First, the clients bring their difficulties in attachment, emotion regulation, and interpersonal relating into the therapeutic
relationship. Second, the therapist is consistently confronted with hearing about some of
the most vile behaviors human beings can inflict on one another. These circumstances are

[PAGE 119]

102 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


ones that most people choose to avoid or distance themselves from, but the therapist who
treats clients with trauma cannot engage in such straightforward forms of avoidance. Thus
cultivating self-care is essential for the trauma therapist.
Working with traumatized individuals can leave a therapist feeling disillusioned, alone,
or frightened. Several authors have explained these types of reactions as an effect of “secondary exposure” or “vicarious traumatization” (Baird & Kracen, 2006; Figley & Ludick,
2017). Such traumatization is evident when therapists caring for survivors of crime, abuse,
natural disaster, or combat develop a posttraumatic-like reaction from hearing about the
traumatic incidents and seeing its effect on their clients. Many therapists who work with
survivors talk about being surprised by the intensity of their reactions after vicarious exposure to traumatic material. It is not uncommon to hear descriptions of becoming hypervigilant and anxious, or of experiencing sleep difficulties, nightmares, and feelings of anger
about the injustices clients have described. Some therapists may develop functional difficulties, such as withdrawing socially from their peers or partners. Some therapists have noted
that people on whom they typically depend for support are sometimes unable to understand
the difficulties involved in working with clients who have been traumatized. We do not
review all the principles of good self-care here; rather, we refer our readers to other authors
who have written extensively on the subject (i.e., Mathieu, 2012; Rothschild, 2006; Van
Dernoot Lipsky, 2009). However, we would like to put forward a few principles we espouse
in relation to self-care.
The first is the importance of seeking consultation with other trauma therapists.
Throughout our work on this treatment, we have sought out other professionals’ advice
and wisdom about the challenges of working with survivors of trauma, and these requests
for feedback have led to simple but effective revisions in our interventions. First, we have
learned to be attentive to our appointment schedules. It is good practice to avoid clustering
multiple appointments together, and to give ourselves time to relax, debrief with others, or
take a walk in between client meetings. We have also learned to balance our caseloads. A
full-time practice requires diversity; not all clients should be survivors of trauma. In any
given caseload, it is advisable to avoid the intensive processing of trauma memories with
several clients in the same time period. Although a therapist may feel intellectually prepared for the work, it is almost impossible to remain emotionally engaged and effective with
trauma processing when the therapist is confronting multiple traumas from multiple clients
while attending to their own self-care.
Through our continued work, we have also come to value maintaining a healthy lifestyle through diet, exercise, and enjoyable activities. One of the most important self-care
practices is to monitor and appreciate our limitations. Our limitations make us human,
and being human is a key ingredient in being an effective healer. As therapists, we all have
many demands on our time. If we begin to feel overwhelmed while treating our clients,
it is time to make some adjustments so that we can be more emotionally available to our
clients. Self-care is not some abstract goal we achieve and then from which we can move
on; it is a dynamic variable of which we all must remain mindful. Finally, we have come to
realize that the social support we receive from other professionals in the field is essential.
Many excellent books and websites provide further information on this subject, and we

[PAGE 120]

8. Guidelines for Implementing Treatment 103


recommend that every therapist who does this type of work consider these as important
resources (e.g., Baker, 2003; Pope & Vasquez, 2005).


SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT


This chapter has provided guidelines that highlight how to deliver STAIR Narrative Therapy, how to make decisions about which clients may benefit from the treatment, and how
to adapt or tailor the treatment to individuals’ specific needs and contexts. The chapter has
addressed the needs of the individual client, the needs of the therapist, and their relationship with each other. This chapter differs from several others in that it focuses less on the
nuts and bolts of the treatment than on the real-world issues that confront the application of
a protocol-based therapy (or, indeed any therapy). We expect that this chapter may be one
to which therapists will frequently return.

[PAGE 121]

Assessment of Client and Match
for Treatment


Not all responses to a traumatic event fall within the orbit of PTSD, and
many factors besides PTSD are relevant to establishing a treatment plan . . .
and must be adequately assessed if treatment is to show maximum benefit.
—JOHN MARCH (1999, p. 200)


The primary goal of this chapter is to provide guidelines for assessing clients with trauma
histories and determining whether their needs match what STAIR Narrative Therapy has
to offer. We begin with basic reminders for trauma assessment, as well as suggestions for
beginning an assessment session. Next, we provide suggestions for assessing the trauma
history itself, including particular types of abuse and other traumatic experiences. We then
provide an overview of diagnostic profiles of ICD-11 PTSD and CPTSD, as well as DSM-5
PTSD. We also supply detailed information on these specific assessment domains: classic
or core PTSD symptoms, emotion regulation problems, negative self-concept, interpersonal
difficulties, harmful or risky behaviors, and resilience or coping strategies. We discuss how
to assess each domain, give examples of how these problems may be described by clients,
and recommend measures that therapists interested in performing a more structured evaluation can use. Finally, we talk about giving feedback and treatment recommendations to a
client after the assessment has been completed.


BASIC REMINDERS FOR TRAUMA ASSESSMENT

Actively Support the Client

Some therapists, depending on their theoretical orientation, might generally assume a neutral stance with their clients. Although this approach may be appropriate in certain situations, many trauma clients who have been traumatized react negatively if therapists respond
neutrally to their histories. These clients have often avoided sharing their histories because
of shame or fears of rejection. For such clients, the assessment session may be the first time


104

[PAGE 122]

9. Assessment of Client and Match for Treatment 105


they have acknowledged their histories. Others may have shared their histories previously
but have had them denied or refuted. These clients are especially sensitive to a therapist's
reactions and will quickly interpret neutrality as denial, condemnation, or rejection. Openly
supportive statements that acknowledge such a clients difficulties can go a long way in
building an alliance with the client. For example, a therapist might say, “Thank you for
trusting me enough to share that experience with me,” “That must have been very frighten-
> x


ing/upsetting,” or “I appreciate your difficulty in telling about these events.”


Seek Behavioral Descriptions, Not Value Judgments

The cardinal principle of trauma assessment is to ask questions that describe traumatizing
behaviors, rather than asking a client to evaluate whether or not they have been traumatized. For example, a therapist assessing for physical abuse might ask the client, “When you
were a child or adolescent, did a parent or someone who took care of you ever do something
on purpose to you that gave your bruises or scratches, broke bones or teeth, or made you
bleed?” rather than “When you were a child, were you ever physically abused?” The second
question requires the client to make a value judgment about their experience and to define
it as abuse.
Although clients may have experienced what trauma research typically defines as
abuse, they may not view it in those terms. For example, Marta, a 37-year-old Puerto Rican
woman, at first reported being sexually abused by her father, but denied experiencing physical abuse. However, in response to the first question above, she answered affirmatively
and went on to describe how her mother regularly punished her by making her kneel with
bare knees on gravel for hours at a time. After Marta had done this for a while, her knees
would start bleeding. She would not be allowed to get up to go to the bathroom and would
sometimes wet herself. Marta had not previously viewed this as physical abuse, as her initial
definition only entailed physical beatings, which her parents did not engage in.


Contain the Client’s Narrative

Some clients come to treatment overwhelmed by memories of interpersonal trauma. These
memories intrude on their work, their sleep, and their relationships. The therapist may find
that such clients cant seem to stop talking about their trauma histories once they begin.
Rather than avoiding the therapist's questions, they will talk about their experiences in
great detail. The therapist needs to help such clients contain their trauma narratives during
the assessment. Letting them go into too much detail in the first assessment session may
lead them to feel overly or unexpectedly vulnerable, and make them less likely to return to
treatment. Alternatively, after the assessment, a therapist may determine that a client is not
appropriate for their practice or program. If the client has disclosed a great deal of personal
information, they are more likely to feel rejected and take the therapist's decision personally.
An effective way to contain a client is to describe explicitly the task at hand. The therapist can say something like this:

[PAGE 123]

106 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


“Now I am going to ask you some questions about some difficult experiences you may
have had in childhood. I am not going to ask you to go into detail at this time, but just
collect some general information about things you have been through.”


If the client’s narrative becomes overly detailed or extended, the therapist may say,


“I am going to stop you from going into more detail here. I appreciate the difficulties of
telling your history. But there are still many aspects of this consultation remaining, and
I am hoping to help pace us through it all. Telling all of your history is an important
part of treatment, but not necessary right now, and can be very tiring and painful. Is
this all right with you?”


Keeping an opening for the client to respond is key, as the client may have been working
toward disclosing a critical part of their history.


Model Nonavoidance

Traumatic events such as child abuse are difficult to talk about. Even therapists find it difficult to ask clients questions about their traumatic experiences, for fear of upsetting them or
even upsetting themselves. One of the principles of trauma-focused therapy is that clients’
avoidance of memories, feelings, and thoughts related to their traumatic experiences has
played a role in maintaining their symptoms. Therapists must therefore be careful not to
avoid asking about traumatic experiences, and not to subtly redirect clients who are talking
about such experiences.
This advice may seem contradictory to our preceding recommendation about containing a client. A therapist must perform a delicate balancing act in terms of containing a client
without promoting avoidance. Given that clients are often very sensitive to therapists reactions to their disclosures, they may take redirection from a therapist as a message that the
therapist cant manage hearing about their trauma. Countering this expectation is another
reason why we recommend being openly supportive of a clients disclosure, rather than
maintaining a neutral stance. When containing a client, we use direct language and explain
why we are not going into more details about the trauma at this time. We also state explicitly
that we will go into more detail later.


Expect More

Whatever a client reveals in this session, a therapist can be fairly confident that they have
held back some experiences. Usually clients seem to hold back their “worst” experiences.
For some clients, these will concern their most brutal abuse episodes; for others, these will
be their most shaming or grief-provoking experiences. Clients will reveal more about themselves as they come to know and trust their therapists more.


Below are guidelines for a therapist to keep in mind from the first contact with a client
and throughout the assessment process.

[PAGE 124]

9. Assessment of Client and Match for Treatment 107


INITIAL CONTACT


The first contact between a therapist and a potential client will often take place on the telephone. For some therapists, this contact may merely involve getting the client’s name and
contact information and setting up the initial assessment session. Others may also choose
to obtain information about why the client is seeking treatment. If a therapist’s practice is
primarily trauma-focused, questions concerning current problems and trauma history will
help determine the appropriateness of this type of treatment. Through assessment, it may
become evident that the primary focus of treatment will not be on trauma. For example, if
there are current significant life-threatening behaviors or other disturbances, such as sustained substance misuse, eating disorders, self-injury, or initial reactions/working through
of recovered memories (see Chapter 8 for discussions of the last two issues), the primary
focus will be on these. If the therapist does not specialize in these problems or have consultation available for these types of treatment, a referral, kindly and reassuringly provided,
will save the client time and frustration.


BEGINNING THE ASSESSMENT SESSION


The assessment session will generally be the first time a client and therapist have met in person. It is a time to gather systematic information about whether or not the client is appropriate for the treatment. It is also the first opportunity to start building the therapeutic alliance.
“What brings you to treatment now?” is the most important question to be asked and
answered in the assessment session. This question begins the process of building the therapeutic relationship by demonstrating that the therapist cares about the client’s concerns
and reasons for being there. The client’s answer to this question will provide preliminary
information about their goals and hopes in coming to treatment. The client’s response to
this question will also give the therapist information about the clients level of insight into
the relationship between their trauma history and current difficulties. The answers we have
heard to this question are varied. In response to the question “What brings you to treatment
now?’, clients have said the following:


“I have never been able to get past a first date with a man. If anything remotely sexual
happens—like he tries to kiss me or even just hold my hand—I freeze. Last weekend,
at my friend’s wedding, I met a man I like. He has asked me out, and I don’t want to
blow this chance. I need to find out what is wrong with me. —Susan, a single, hetero-
sexual, 35-year-old Jamaican woman and successful architect

“I visited my parents at Passover for the first time in years. Since getting back to New
York, I have been completely blocked in doing my art. I can’t concentrate, get frus-
trated, and lash out at my studio-mates. I thought it would pass, but it hasn’t.-—Rachel,
a single, lesbian, 50-year-old unemployed Jewish artist

“I find myself losing my temper with James [her 3-month-old son] all the time. It’s all
I can do to stop myself from hitting him, so I end up screaming at him instead. If he

[PAGE 125]

108 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


starts crying and doesnt stop right away, I feel overwhelmed and helpless and like a ter-
rible mother. I know what I am supposed to do, but my feelings just get in the way.
Jane, a 30-year-old European American married woman

“I used to be able to keep going no matter what. I just kept busy all the time, worked
hard, went to the gym, went out with friends, took active vacations, traveled. I just cant
do it any more. I cant keep going. I dont know what to do.’-—Selena, a 40-year-old
Latina advertising executive

“I am here because my husband says he can't take it any more. IfI don’t change, he will
leave. He is tired of my irritability, my yelling, my distance, and my lack of interest
in sex. I dont want to lose him!”—-Kashana, a 35-year-old African American married
woman


As indicated in the examples above, clients will not always state their trauma histories
as the reason they are coming into treatment, even though they may be aware that the service or therapist they are calling specializes in trauma-focused treatment. Rather, clients
tend to focus on the problems that are currently causing them difficulty. Although they recognize that they have been abused, they don't necessarily connect their history with present
problems. Clients typically do not come into a consultation and state, for example, “I am
coming for treatment because I have PTSD symptoms related to being sexually abused as
a child.” Rather, clinicians need to obtain information on clients’ trauma histories through
careful assessment.
Many therapists working in nonresearch settings find it helpful to use standardized
assessment measures. Such instruments can help assure the therapists that they are covering all the relevant domains thoroughly. We have found this especially important with
regard to a clients trauma history, as often a therapist will remember to ask about certain
types of traumatic experiences (e.g., abuse) and forget others (e.g., sudden, unexpected death
of a close friend or relative). Conducting a complete assessment is essential for treatment
planning, as the more information the therapist has in the beginning, the more effective
they can be in connecting the interventions to the client's specific difficulties. Below, we
cover the seven domains we believe are important to assess. As we describe the assessment
process, we also mention and provide references for some specific self-report and therapistadministered instruments that we have used in our assessments.


TRAUMA HISTORY


Before obtaining the client's trauma history, the therapist can say something like this:


“Now that I know why you are coming to treatment at this time, I would like to go back
and ask you some questions about your childhood. In order to make sure I gather all
the information I need to help you, I have a list of questions I ask everyone who comes
to see me. Some of these questions may not apply to you, and other questions may seem

[PAGE 126]

9. Assessment of Client and Match for Treatment 109


very personal or difficult to answer. You dont have to answer anything you dont want
to. Please also feel free to stop me at any time if you want to ask me something or need
a break. OK?”


The therapist can begin eliciting the client’s history in a nonthreatening way by asking
for some basic background information, including where the client grew up, with whom
they lived, whether they had siblings, and so forth. The therapist can then move to asking
the client about abuse and other specific trauma experiences. How the clinician introduces
this topic will depend on whether they are using a specific assessment instrument or conducting an entirely open-ended interview. In either case, the therapist reminds the client
that they should feel free to decline answering any questions about areas the client does not
wish to discuss at this time.
Therapists who do not have experience in assessing trauma histories will need training and supervision in how to conduct a trauma assessment. Using structured interviews
designed to assess histories of child abuse can be very helpful, particularly for therapists
with less experience in this area. Such interviews have been designed to give specific wording on how to ask about different forms of abuse. As we have stated previously, questions
about abuse experiences should be worded behaviorally. We give some examples of such
wording below, following descriptions of the specific types of abuse (most of these descriptions are adapted from those provided by John Briere, 1992).


Sexual Abuse

Sexual abuse includes activities by a parent or caregiver, such as fondling a child’s genitals,
penetration, incest, rape, sodomy, indecent exposure, and exploitation through prostitution
or the production ofpornographic materials. Sexual abuse can also occur between peers or
siblings, if a substantial age difference exists between the victim and perpetrator or if the
sexual activity is performed without the victim's consent.


Sample question: “When you were a child, did a parent, family member, or someone
else in charge of your care ever touch or fondle you in a sexual way?”


Physical Abuse

Physical abuse can range from minor bruises to severe fractures or death as a result of
punching, beating, kicking, biting, shaking, throwing, stabbing, choking, hitting (with a
hand, stick, strap, or other object), burning, or otherwise harming a child. Such injury is
considered abuse, regardless of whether the caregiver intended to hurt the child.


Sample question: “When you were a child or adolescent, did a parent or other care-
giver—such as a grandparent, other adult relative, or babysitter—ever do something on
purpose to you (for example, hit or punch or cut you or push you down) that gave your
bruises or scratches, broke bones or teeth, or made you bleed?”

[PAGE 127]

110 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


Emotional Abuse

Both sexual and physical abuse of children often co-occur with emotional abuse. Emotional
abuse is a pattern ofbehavior that impairs a child's emotional development or sense of selfworth.


Sample question: “When you were a child, did a parent or other caregiver say things
repeatedly to you like “You will never amount to anything?”


Emotional abuse may also include constant criticism, threats, or rejection, as well as withholding love, support, or guidance.


Sample question: “When you were a child, did a parent or other caregiver ever threaten
to hurt or kill either you or someone (a friend) or something (a pet) you cared about?”


Physical Neglect

Physical neglect involves the failure of a child’s caregiver to meet the child’s basic physical
or medical needs.


Sample question: “When you were a child, were you ever not properly fed or clothed
by your parent or other caregiver?”


Emotional Neglect

Emotional or psychological neglect is the failure of a child’s caregiver to provide adequate
nurturing and affection to a child, or a refusal to ensure or delay in ensuring that a child
receives needed attention to emotional or behavioral problems.


Sample question: “When you were a child, did your caregivers show you affection and
make you feel special (for example, celebrate or acknowledge your birthday)?”

Sample question: “When you were a child, did your caregivers comfort you when you
were hurt or distressed?”


When the therapist has completed the assessment of the client’s childhood trauma history, we recommend taking a few moments to check in with the client and ask how they feel
having shared what they did before moving on to assess other traumatic experiences.


Revictimization History and Other Traumatic Experiences

One of the most profound consequences of childhood victimization is subsequent, repeated
victimization in the form of rape, physical assault, and domestic violence (Jaffe, DiLillo, Gratz,
& Messman-Moore, 2019; Messman-Moore & Long, 2000). Women with childhood sexual

[PAGE 128]

9. Assessment of Client and Match for Treatment 111


abuse are acutely aware of these problems, which are often among their most pressing reasons
for seeking treatment. Trauma assessment therefore includes reviewing clients’ adulthood as
well as childhood trauma histories. We have found using a measure designed to screen for a
wide range of traumatic experiences to be helpful in assessing clients’ victimization histories
and other traumatic experiences. Many of these screening measures, such as the revised version of the Life Stressor Checklist (LSC-R; Wolfe & Kimerling, 1997), have been designed for
clients to fill out themselves, but they can also be used to guide a clinical interview.


Challenges in Reviewing Trauma History for Diagnostic Purposes

It should be noted that in order to receive a diagnosis of CPTSD or PTSD, a person must have
experienced a traumatic event, and often the person is asked to identify their “worst trauma”
as a point of reference for reporting symptoms. Since survivors of chronic trauma have often
experienced multiple traumatic events, is most helpful for the therapist to talk about childhood
abuse, domestic violence, or even combat as a set of experiences rather than as discrete events.
During the evaluation, the therapist can ask the client to identify and focus on the experience
that they consider the worst or most impactful. The trauma experience that the client chooses
is not necessarily the event that the therapist views as most severe or distressing, but the one
that troubles the client the most at the time of assessment. Diagnostic instruments such as those
described below often include or identify life events measures by which to assess all potentially
traumatic life events and determine which is currently the “worst” event for the client.


DIAGNOSIS OF ICD-11 PTSD AND CPTSD


Since the first edition of this book appeared in 2006, CPTSD has been formally recognized
as a diagnosis in ICD-11 (WHO, 2018), as noted in Chapter 1. ICD is the diagnostic system that all insurers in the United States use, as do all hospitals, many clinics, and many
therapists in private practice. It is a diagnostic system that includes both mental health and
physical health disorders and is used by all disciplines (psychiatry, cardiology, immunology, gynecology) in hospital and clinic settings. In contrast, DSM, now in its fifth edition
(DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013) is a diagnostic system that is specific to
psychiatry and no other type of health problems. Clinicians have a choice of whether to use
ICD or DSM in making diagnoses and submitting insurance claims. We devote some space
to ICD-11 CPTSD here, because it is a new diagnosis but likely to be relevant to clients with
chronic or prolonged traumas. For those interested in more detailed discussion of the similarities and differences between ICD and DSM diagnosis, we recommend Bisson, Brewin,
Cloitre, and Maercker (2020).


Symptom Profiles

ICD-11 has been innovative in formalizing a conceptual distinction that has long been
proposed—namely, that between PTSD and CPTSD (Herman, 1992). The latter refers to

[PAGE 129]

112 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


symptoms that are typically associated with prolonged trauma such as childhood abuse, intimate partner violence (IPV), or being a prisoner of war (see Brewin et al., 2017, for a review).
ICD-11 PTSD includes the classic posttraumatic reactions of fear and horror, as well as
three symptom clusters: (1) reexperiencing symptoms (constant replaying of images and
thoughts about the event); (2) avoidance of thoughts, places, and feelings that are reminders
of the trauma; and (3) a sense of threat that is manifested by excessive hypervigilance and
or excessive startle response.
CPTSD comprises all three sets of PTSD symptoms, but also what are called “disturbances in self-organization, which include three problem domains: affect dysregulation,
negative self-concept, and interpersonal difficulties (Maercker et al., 2013). CPTSD symptoms thus represent a broader spectrum of problems than PTSD symptoms. The CPTSD
diagnosis acknowledges not only the role of traumatic stressors in generating horror and
fear, but also the consequences that exposure to sustained, repeated, or multiple types of
traumatic stressors have on self-organization, particularly when they occur during childhood. The affect dysregulation is evidenced by heightened emotional reactivity, violent outbursts, reckless or self-destructive behaviour, or a tendency toward experiencing prolonged
dissociative states when under stress. In addition, there may be emotional numbing and a
lack of ability to experience pleasure or positive emotions. Negative self-concept includes
persistent beliefs about oneself as diminished, defeated, or worthless. These can be accompanied by deep and pervasive feelings of shame or guilt related to, for example, not having
overcome adverse circumstances, or not having been able to prevent the suffering of others.
Interpersonal disturbances are defined by persistent difficulties in sustaining relationships. These difficulties may present in a variety of ways, but are exemplified by difficulties
in feeling close to others. Some individuals will avoid relationships or feel incapable of getting and staying close to others, often because managing conflict and engaging in authentic
communication is fear- or anxiety-producing. Others may actually deride or belittle relationships due to past disappointments. In sum, starting relationships is challenging and
anxiety-producing, and maintaining them requires emotion regulation, psychological tolerance, and interpersonal skills the person may not have or cannot use when in a distressed
state.

A substantial literature is accumulating indicating that individuals with CPTSD are
more likely to have experienced prolonged trauma than those with PTSD, supporting the
conceptual basis for this distinction (see Brewin et al., 2017). The practical clinical benefits
of this distinction are that it can facilitate more refined characterization of symptom profiles
for subgroups of survivors of trauma, and, most importantly, can help shape more personalized, effective, and efficient treatment plans (see ISTSS, 2019b).


Measures

There are at least two measures developed for the assessment of ICD-11 PTSD and CPTSD,
both of which have validity and reliability data. The International Trauma Questionnaire
(ITQ; Cloitre et al., 2018d) contains 12 symptom items that assess the three domains of PTSD
(reexperiencing, avoidance, and chronic threat), as well as the three domains related to
self-organization difficulties (affect dysregulation, negative self-concept, and interpersonal

[PAGE 130]

9. Assessment of Client and Match for Treatment 113


difficulties). It is intended to be brief and easily implemented, allowing for a designation of
a probable diagnosis of ICD-11 PTSD or CPTSD. There is also a clinician-administered
interview, the International Trauma Interview (ITI; Roberts, Cloitre, Bisson, & Brewin,
2018), which includes questions covering all of the symptoms described in the ITQ but in a
more detailed way. This measure allows for the client to elaborate on the specific nature of
the symptoms, age of onset of symptoms, and degree to which the client feels that symptoms
are related to their trauma. The ITI is still under development and is not currently available for distribution. The ITQ has been translated into several languages and can be downloaded for free (www.traumameasuresglobal.com). The ITI will be posted on the same site
when it becomes available.


DIAGNOSIS OF DSM-5 PTSD

Symptom Profile

DSM-5 covers many of the symptoms and perhaps even more than those presented in ICD11 PTSD and CPTSD combined, and for that reason it has sometimes been called the “big
tent” approach to diagnosis. DSM-5 is likely to capture a large number of people but without specific reference to type of trauma or salience of symptoms, which may be a benefit
of the ICD-11 system. DSM-5 PTSD shares with ICD-11 PTSD what are considered the
“core” or “classic” symptoms of PTSD—namely, symptoms of reexperiencing, avoidance,
and what is called “hypervigilance.”
DSM-5 also includes symptoms described as “negative alterations in cognitions and
mood, which include symptoms such as negative emotional states (shame, guilt), social
withdrawal (a type of interpersonal problem), and inability to experience positive emotions
(a version of numbing). In addition, DSM-5 includes “alterations in arousal and reactivity, which include the symptoms of chronic threat in ICD-11 (irritable behavior, angry
outbursts, poor concentration, and sleep difficulties). Lastly, DSM-5 includes a dissociative
subtype, which is represented by symptoms of derealization and depersonalization. To date,
there has been no research investigating whether different therapies may be valuable for
individuals who experience or are concerned about particular symptoms associated with
DSM-5 PTSD, although this situation may evolve over time.


Measures

Two validated and reliable instruments are most commonly used to assess DSM-5 PTSD.
The PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5; Weathers et al., 2013b) is a self-report questionnaire with 20 items. The Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5 (CAPS-5; Weathers et al., 2013a) is administered as an interview. Both measures (English-language versions)
are available on request from the U.S. National Center for PTSD.
It will be important to conduct research examining the degree of overlap between individuals who receive a diagnosis of DSM-5 PTSD and those who receive a diagnosis of either
ICD-11 PTSD or CPTSD. ICD-11 PTSD and CPTSD may together represent a similar
population but provide a more refined description of the range of clients’ concerns. Further

[PAGE 131]

114 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


details about these diagnoses, their development, and their similarities and differences are
available in other publications (e.g., Bisson et al., 2020).


SPECIFIC SYMPTOM DOMAINS


Regardless of which diagnostic system a therapist or client prefers, assessment of specific
problems and strengths is part of good clinical evaluation. Below, we describe important
symptom domains associated with trauma, their presentations in the clinical setting, and
measures for assessing them. The descriptions of assessment measures are by no means
exhaustive, but rather are intended to provide some suggestions for interested therapists.
These measures can be given directly to clients to complete or simply to review. Alternatively, a therapist can use them as a basis for further queries. Often, when clients complete
or review the items on these measures, they are surprised but also comforted that the difficulties they experience are identified. Some clients have commented that they are relieved
that their experiences are known and understood, and that other survivors share the same
problems.


Classic or Core PTSD Symptoms

The symptoms discussed below are those that have been consistently identified as symptoms of PTSD across diagnostic systems (DSM or ICD) and across changes within a diagnostic system.


Reexperiencing symptoms

Clients may express that thoughts or images of the trauma come into their minds without warning. They may describe having nightmares about the trauma (or nightmares that
evoke emotions similar to those they experienced when the traumatic events were occurring). At the extreme, clients may have flashbacks, in which they actually feel as if they are
experiencing the feelings, sensations, and thoughts associated with the trauma in a “hereand-now way. Such flashbacks are sometimes so real that they can be misdiagnosed by
clinicians unfamiliar with PTSD as psychotic symptoms. For example, one of our clients,
who had been severely physically and emotionally abused by her mother, reported to her
psychiatrist that she was “hearing voices’ that insulted her and told her to punish herself.
During our assessment of this client, we discovered that the “voices” were actually flashbacks of her mother yelling at her. The client knew that such voices were not real, but when
these flashbacks occurred, she felt as if she was a child and the abuse was happening again.


Avoidance symptoms

Avoidance symptoms consist of clients’ avoiding thoughts, feelings, places, or persons that
remind them of their traumatic experiences. Such symptoms are particularly challenging to
assess in clients who experienced childhood abuse, because often avoidance began early in

[PAGE 132]

9. Assessment of Client and Match for Treatment 115


life and has become such a part of the clients’ ways of being in the world that they are not
even conscious of it. For example, a 47-year-old client who was sexually abused was very
socially withdrawn. She had never had an intimate relationship, had few friends, and supported herself financially by editing scientific publications (which she could do from home).
Her social withdrawal started in adolescence as a way of avoiding sexual attention from
males, because such attention reminded her of the abuse and made her extremely anxious.
At 47 years old, this client had been socially withdrawn for over 30 years. She had structured her entire professional and personal life to avoid being around people, particularly
men. She did not even fully recognize how her avoidance had shaped her life.


Chronic sense of threat

Hypervigilance and exaggerated startle responses are typical expressions of perceived
threat. In a survivor of childhood abuse, chronic hypervigilance may be manifested by general unease around men or discomfort when in close physical proximity to men if the perpetrator was a man. Individuals without trauma histories may also experience exaggerated
startle responses when in an anxious state. Among those with trauma exposure, however,
the startle responses are consistently present, and the clients tend to notice and report them.


The classic or core PTSD symptoms can be assessed via interviews such as those
described above, but it is likely quicker and just as useful for nonresearch purposes to use
self-report measures such as the ITQ (Cloitre et al., 2018d) or the PCL-5 (Weathers et al.,
2013b).


Emotion Regulation Problems

Emotion regulation is the ability to modulate powerful affective states. As noted above,
clients with histories of child maltreatment find themselves fluctuating between two emotional extremes: either being overwhelmed by their feelings or alternatively feeling nothing
or “numb.” Clients report that these extreme states often occur unpredictably. They also
may find that they get highly distressed unexpectedly over minor things, have trouble letting go of upsetting things, and have difficulty calming themselves down. At other times
they feel numb, particularly in circumstances that would typically elicit emotion (including
positive emotion, such as at a wedding or birthday celebration).
“Numbing” refers to the tendency to experience restrictions in emotional experiences.
Some researchers argue that individuals who report numbing are hyperreactive to negative
triggers (particularly those related to the traumatic events), which deplete their capacity
for emotional response and therefore need more intense positive stimulation to experience
positive emotions (Litz & Gray, 2002). Survivors of childhood trauma may describe feeling
at times “numb” or “dead inside” or “nothing” or “like a zombie.” They may report difficulty
feeling love or joy, as well as anger or sadness. They often describe being confused because
things that produce emotion in other people often have no impact on them. Thus numbing
is a component of the emotion dysregulation characteristic of individuals with trauma histories, who tend to cycle between feeling overwhelmed by emotion and feeling “nothing.”

[PAGE 133]

116 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


The therapist may begin the assessment of emotion regulation by saying something like
this:


“Some people who experience trauma have difficulty managing their feelings. Some-
times they may feel nothing, numb, or empty. At other times, for seemingly no reason,
they may be overwhelmed by feeling too much. At these points, they may not even
know what they feel—only that they are ‘upset. Does this sound familiar to you?”


For emotion regulation problems, the 16-item Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale
(DERS-16; Bjureberg et al., 2016) can be used. The DERS-16 identifies five types of emotion
regulation problems, including difficulties in clarifying feelings, difficulties with impulse
control, difficulties in maintaining focus on goals when emotionally distressed, limitations
in skills or strategies to manage emotions and lastly, ability to accept emotional distress. All
five types of emotion regulation problems are relevant to individuals who have experienced
early interpersonal trauma.


Negative Self-Concept

Negative self-concept relates to beliefs about oneself as being worthless or a failure. It can
also be associated with feelings of shame and guilt. Survivors of childhood maltreatment
often feel worthless because they have been told this directly (i.e., verbal abuse) by caregivers, who say this to justify their actions. In particular, although sexual abuse is sometimes
framed as a “special” experience for a prized child, the secrecy required suggests that there
is something bad or shameful about it. Often as the child grows up, they become aware
that in fact they have engaged in something inappropriate, but blame themselves rather
than the perpetrator. Assessing feelings of low self-worth is a delicate task that needs to
be approached with support and psychoeducation. For example, clients often have firmly
rooted beliefs of their inferiority and can assume that the therapist is asking about this
problem because their inferiority is so evident. The therapist can introduce the inquiry by
saying something that references the trauma as the cause of the problem, not the person.
For example, the therapist can ask, “One of the consequences of being subjected to abuse
is a sense of worthlessness. Do you have any of those kinds of feelings?” Repeated reassurance that the client is not alone in these feelings (Normalization) will help reduce the client's
shame, guilt, and other negative beliefs they hold about themselves.
A brief and well-established measure to assess self-esteem and sense of worth is the
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES; Rosenberg, 1965), a basic 10-item scale that has been
translated into several languages and used in several countries.


interpersonal Difficulties

As mentioned throughout this book, many clients cite interpersonal problems as their primary reasons for seeking treatment. Therapists can get a sense of clients” interpersonal
difficulties by asking about their social support networks; whether they have close friends;

[PAGE 134]

9. Assessment of Client and Match for Treatment 117


and whether they are in or have ever been in an intimate relationship, and, if so, what those
relationships have been like.
Problems with emotion regulation and mood often lead to interpersonal problems
among those with histories of childhood abuse. Several studies have found that depression
and anger, rather than PTSD symptoms, are the predominant correlates of the interpersonal difficulties reported by individuals with abuse histories (e.g., Beckham et al., 1996).
A therapist can query whether a client has noticed that they get depressed or angry, and
whether these feelings seem to interfere with relationships at home, at work, or in social life.
The therapist may ask (in regard to depression), “Do you cancel social events or call in sick
because you are feeling too down to go out?’, or (in regard to anger), “Do you ever find that
when you are angry, you do or say things that you later regret?”
A study of the types of interpersonal problems experienced by survivors of abuse
revealed that, compared to those who had never been abused, those with abuse histories
reported significantly more problems in being both too submissive and too controlling,
greater difficulty in being assertive, and more problems in taking on too much responsibility in situations for which they might not be responsible (Cloitre & Koenen, 2001). These
data suggest that survivors of childhood abuse often have significant difficulties centering
around issues of power and control in relationships. A therapist can gently inquire whether
a client experiences these sorts of difficulties, with questions such as “Do you find yourself
having difficulties standing up for yourself or afraid of conflict?” or “Do your friends ever
say that you are argumentative or need to have your own way?”
For problems in relationships, the 32-item version of the Inventory of Interpersonal
Problems (IIP-32; Barkham, Hardy, & Startup, 1996) is useful, as it inquires about a range
of interpersonal difficulties we have commonly found among survivors of chronic trauma.
These include difficulties with being either too submissive or too assertive; difficulties with
being too caring for others at the expense of oneself, or, alternatively, difficulties with being
supportive of others; and difficulties with being sociable, including in romantic and intimate relationships.


Harmful/Risky Behaviors and Comorbidity

The assessment of harmful or risky behaviors has been addressed in detail by other authors
(e.g., Linehan, 1993, 2015). The present discussion is limited to the task of identifying
whether STAIR Narrative Therapy is a good match for individual clients presenting with
PTSD or CPTSD. Clients whose difficulties demand immediate attention—such as imminent suicidality, alcohol or other substance use disorders, severely disordered eating behaviors (such as regular bingeing and purging), or severe dissociation that meets criteria for a
dissociative disorder diagnosis—are most likely to need more intensive interventions and
should be directed to a higher level of care or a setting in which these behaviors can be
directly addressed.
Self-harming or risky behaviors are strongly associated with a history of child abuse,
and therefore should be assessed in clients presenting with a history of trauma. Clients
who have these difficulties may be appropriate candidates for STAIR Narrative Therapy

[PAGE 135]

118 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


at a later time, when they are stabilized and are no longer a threat to themselves or others.
We have had several clients who engaged in STAIR Narrative Therapy after successfully
completing an inpatient or residential treatment program for one of the above-mentioned
problems.


Resilience and Coping Strategies

The topics of resilience and coping among survivors of childhood maltreatment are receiving growing attention (e.g., Harvey, Liang, Harney, & Koenen, 2003). We view clients who
were abused as children and are now seeking treatment as showing resilience. Such clients
must have had some coping strategies that were effective for their environments and have
enabled them to survive. Our interest in resilience is reflected in our assessments, which
attempt to gather information about the clients’ resilient domains of functioning and successful coping strategies. Such information can help therapists tailor interventions to best
utilize clients resources and strengths.
A therapist may begin to engage a client in talking about strengths by asking how the
client coped when the maltreatment was going on: “How did you manage to function?” The
therapist can then guide the client toward evaluating those strategies and whether they
continue to work in the present. Another way of talking about the client's strengths is to ask
them what they think they are. However, many clients have trouble identifying anything
positive about themselves. If this is the case, the therapist might have the client talk about
what their boss, best friend, neighbor, or significant other might say are their best qualities. The therapist might gain information on the client’s strengths by talking about their
intellectual or social interests or activities, such as drawing, reading, church/temple work,
or volunteer work.
A well-established and well-known measure to assess coping capacity is the Coping
Orientation to Problems Experienced (COPE; Scheier & Carver, 1985). It is a 60-item
inventory that measures five problem-focused coping styles, including active coping, planning, suppression of competing activities, restraint coping, and seeking instrumental social
support.


ASSESSMENT FEEDBACK
AND TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Match for Treatment

If a therapist is considering using this treatment with a particular client, a simple rule of
thumb is to ask whether the client’s primary presenting problems involve difficulties in
emotion regulation or interpersonal problems that appear to be connected to a history of
trauma, particularly child abuse or neglect. If the answer is yes, and if the client is not at
imminent risk from self-harming behaviors, then it is appropriate to consider using this
treatment with the client. Therapists may wish to use only the STAIR module (Module I) to
address these difficulties, and to use the module or particular sessions as often as needed. If

[PAGE 136]

9. Assessment of Client and Match for Treatment 119


the client also has significant PTSD symptoms, then the addition of the Narrative Therapy
module (Module IT) is indicated.


Readiness for Treatment

If the client’s presenting problems indicate that the treatment is appropriate, the therapist
will want to consider whether the client is motivated and has the time and other practical
resources to participate. STAIR Narrative Therapy requires a commitment of 18 weeks and
additional time to complete between-session exercises. The trauma-processing work during the Narrative Therapy module in particular requires a sustained and consistent effort
for a minimum of 4 weeks (if sessions can be scheduled twice per week). The treatment as
a whole requires not only a time commitment, but a commitment to use all available emotional and social resources to complete the work. During STAIR Narrative Therapy, clients
are asked to confront not only their trauma histories, but also parts of themselves and their
lives that they have avoided for years. Clients who enter into this treatment must therefore
be motivated to make changes in their lives and to commit the practical and emotional
resources it demands.
Clients who cannot attend treatment regularly—say, because of personal or professional demands, or generally chaotic lives—are likely to obtain less benefit from this treatment. For instance, clients who travel a great deal on business and will miss sessions for
weeks will not obtain maximum benefit. Such clients can be provided with supportive or
other forms of therapy until they are able to attend treatment regularly.
It is also common for clients to come to treatment in the middle ofa personal or family
crisis, such as when a parent is terminally ill. Such crises seem to trigger unresolved trauma
histories or exacerbate PTSD and other trauma-related symptoms. However, some clients in
such situations may not be able to commit to an intensive, trauma-focused treatment. They
may benefit from a less directive, more supportive form of therapy until the crisis resolves.
It is difficult to predict ahead of time which clients will be able to commit to the treatment. Therapists will have to think through these situations on a case-by-case basis. Some
clients are able to overcome great odds to participate fully in the treatment. One client we
treated was an impoverished single mother, who worked full-time while raising four children. She was also in recovery from alcoholism and regularly attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). Despite these barriers to treatment, she never missed a session and regularly
completed between-session exercises. This success was partly the result of good planning.
Early in treatment, the client and therapist thought very practically about how to arrange
her schedule to maximize her ability to complete the therapy. The client made backup
arrangements for child care with friends, and got up 30 minutes earlier in the morning to
complete her skills practice. She was also fortunate enough to have a supportive supervisor
at work, who allowed her to attend her AA meetings during the day. Thus this client was
able to activate her social supports in order to commit to treatment, in spite of having few
financial resources and large family responsibilities. We encourage therapists to work with
clients to help them identify barriers to treatment and address those barriers before they
become insurmountable obstacles.

[PAGE 137]

120 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


Feedback

After completing the assessment, the therapist is in a position to give feedback to the client. This includes summarizing the therapist's understanding of the issues the client has
presented, describing the connection between the client's trauma history and current symptoms, and discussing how these are addressed in STAIR Narrative Therapy. This process
can be therapeutic in and of itself. It can provide an experience in which the client feels
listened to and understood, and can offer the opportunity for the client to clarify the therapist’s understanding if needed.
We have found that that most clients, including those who have already been in therapy, have never received this kind of direct feedback. Many have never been assessed for or
diagnosed with trauma-related disorders; have never discussed with a therapist how their
trauma histories continue to affect them; and/or have never been given a rationale for the
treatment being offered and how it will address the difficulties that led them to seek help.


CASE EXAMPLE


Annie was a 35-year-old divorced woman with three school-age children. She worked as
an administrative assistant for an official in a local government agency. Her husband had
left her when her children were very young, and she had since been preoccupied with supporting her family and raising her children. She reported a history of sexual abuse by her
father from ages 7 to 10, and verbal and physical abuse by her mother throughout childhood
(trauma history). She called our clinic after she saw an advertisement for our treatment in a
local newspaper. She came to treatment when she reached her 35th birthday.
In Annie’s initial session, she described herself as “an alcoholic,’ but noted that she had
been sober for the last year. She was actively involved in AA (history of harmful behavior
[substance use] but not current). She reported that since she stopped drinking, she had
become increasingly anxious and irritable, and had difficulty not snapping at people in
response to what she knew was minor provocations (emotion regulation problems). Nightmares of the abuse had become more frequent (PTSD symptoms: nightmares). She also
reported that when she felt particularly down on herself at work for failing to do a task
correctly, she would occasionally have images of the abuse come into her head, hear her
mother’s voice deriding her, and have the urge to crawl under her desk for safety but restrain
herself from doing so (PTSD symptoms: flashbacks). She also noted that she tended to be
on guard all the time, even when doing simple tasks like grocery shopping, and was easily
startled (PTSD symptoms: chronic sense of threat).
Annie reported that she had coped with her symptoms by keeping very busy. She had
been at her current job for 7 years and had a good record (resilience and coping strategies).
Her work experience revealed a consistent pattern of good employment. She appeared to
have a record as an excellent employee, but had never built on that to request any sort of
advancement for herself, such as asking for a raise or new duties (interpersonal problems:
lack of assertiveness). She stated that her agency was currently offering a training program

[PAGE 138]

9. Assessment of Client and Match for Treatment 121


for employees who wished to move from administration to management. Her supervisor at
work wanted to nominate her as a candidate for the program, but Annie was convinced she
would never be selected. She did not believe she “had what it takes” to make it in management, and generally considered herself to be worthless (negative self-concept).
Annie reported several close friendships with members of AA (resilience: good social
support). However, she felt that she would never get into another intimate relationship
again (interpersonal difficulties: problems with getting close). Her husband's leaving her
had reinforced her feelings of failure as a wife and mother (negative self-concept), and she
was terrified to allow herself to be vulnerable again. She struggled to be a good parent to
her children, but frequently found herself caught between being overly indulgent because
she felt guilty about not being more available to them, and being overly controlling and
strict (interpersonal problems). She reported that sometimes she lost her temper and found
herself screaming at them, which left her feeling like a terrible mother and bad person. She
reported impulses to hit her children, but had never done so (emotion regulation problems).
If she found herself particularly enraged, she would lock herself in the bathroom until she
calmed down. She reported suicidal thoughts, but had never attempted suicide and reported
no plans or intention to make such an attempt. She reported a tendency to overeat when she
was anxious or depressed, but denied bingeing or purging (risky behaviors not a priority).


interpreting the Assessment Findings

If Annie was imminently suicidal, actively self-injurious, or currently misusing substances,
she would have been inappropriate for this treatment. If this had been the case, the therapist would have given Annie the reasons for needing to be provided with an alternative
treatment and would have referred her to a treatment program focusing on her suicidality,
self-harm, and/or substance misuse. Often we encourage clients to return to us for treatment after they have addressed problems such as substance use disorders.
Annie was a client who was clearly appropriate for STAIR Narrative Therapy. She presented with PTSD symptoms (flashbacks, nightmares, chronic sense of threat) related to
her history of childhood abuse. She also reported emotion regulation difficulties that were
affecting her interpersonal relationships (snapping at others, difficulty managing her children). Annies alcoholism was under control, and she did not report any other self-injurious
behaviors that would have taken priority at this time.


Therapist Feedback

After completing and evaluating the assessment information, the therapist informed Annie
that her problems were appropriate for STAIR Narrative Therapy. In speaking about how
STAIR Narrative Therapy would help Annie, the therapist focused on three specific issues:
her nightmares and flashbacks of the abuse; her difficulty with managing her emotions in
a range of situations and relationships; and her challenges with pursuing advancement at
work. The therapist spoke with Annie about how part of the treatment would focus on how
to manage her feelings in interpersonal situations to achieve goals she had identified. As an

[PAGE 139]

122 PART II. FOUNDATIONS OF TREATMENT


initial goal to focus on, the therapist suggested that Annie might choose speaking with her
boss about being nominated as a candidate for the training program. She could ask questions and get more information about the program and possible position, so that she could
make a decision based upon her goals rather than based upon fear.
The therapist noted that Annie’ self-esteem seemed to be low, despite such accomplishments as holding a steady job and being a single parent. The therapist also noted that
developing mastery in managing her feelings and developing more skills both at work and
at home might help boost her self-esteem. This might give her sufficient confidence and
security to begin exploring the deeper sources of her negative views of herself, which might
have been rooted in her abuse experiences. The therapist also spoke about how the traumafocused work in the second part of the treatment would help reduce Annie's nightmares
and flashbacks. It would also allow her to reappraise the abuse experience and consider
whether the abuse and insults she had experienced as a child might have had more to do
with her parents’ own difficulties than with who she really was. Through this discussion,
the therapist was able to tie the specific problems Annie was currently experiencing to the
interventions used in STAIR Narrative Therapy.


SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT


This chapter has focused on orienting therapists to the process of assessing clients and considering the match between clients’ needs and STAIR Narrative Therapy. We have discussed
how to talk to clients about their trauma histories. We have provided information about the
ICD-11 diagnoses of PTSD and CPTSD, as well as the DSM-5 diagnosis of PTSD. We
have provided detailed information on specific symptoms and strengths and on how they
may present in the assessment. Finally, we have offered some suggestions for determining
whether a client is appropriate for this treatment and for giving feedback to the client after
the assessment has been completed.

[PAGE 140]

STAIR Narrative Therapy,
Session by Session

[PAGE 142]

Skills Training in Affective and
Interpersonal Regulation (STAIR)
Building Resources

[PAGE 144]

The Resource of Hope
Introducing the Client to Treatment


The very making of an appointment with a total stranger
to deal with the greatest intimacies and vulnerabilities
of one’s life is an act of profound faith.
—DIANA FOSHA (2000, p. 5)


B y the time a client with trauma comes to therapy, they have often reached the limits of
their capacity to function adequately on their own. They are likely to be feeling substantially demoralized and defeated. Visiting a professional is often an act of desperation. Still,
by coming to therapy, the client is holding on to some vestige of hope. The therapist's primary task is to sustain and strengthen this hope. Hope emerges from both a sense of being
understood and cared for, and a belief in the possibility of change. Thus the therapist's first
task is to listen carefully to the client and reflect back an accurate and empathic understanding of the clients symptoms and life circumstances. In addition, the therapist must
then propose a treatment plan that addresses these problems, and, in a collaborative process
with the client, must come to a shared understanding about the goals of the therapy and the
means by which these goals will be reached.


WELCOME CLIENT TO TREATMENT AND IDENTIFY FOCUS
OF THE SESSION


The therapist begins the session with a warm welcome and polite check-in on how the client
is doing the day of the meeting. The check-in is brief, but if content comes up related to the
client's symptoms or experiences, the therapist provides genuine empathy while containing
any affect and reassuring the client that they are here today to start (or continue) their journey of recovery. The therapist can also let them know the broader goals of this first session,
which are to review the client’s symptoms and goals, orient them to the intervention plan,
and learn their first skill. Box 10.1 outlines the session contents and major tasks.


127

[PAGE 145]

128 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Theme and Curriculum for Session 1
The Resource of Hope: Introducing the Client to Treatment


By the time a client with a history of trauma comes to therapy, they have often reached the
limits of their capacity to function. Still, by coming to therapy, the client is holding on to some
vestige of hope. The therapist’s primary task is to sustain and strengthen this hope. Hope
emerges from both a sense of being understood and a belief in the possibility of change. Thus
the first of the therapist’s tasks is to listen carefully to the client and reflect back an accurate
and empathic understanding of the client’s symptoms and life circumstances. In addition, the
therapist must then propose a treatment plan that addresses these problems, and, in collabora-
tion with the client, must come to an agreement about the goals of the therapy and the means
by which these goals will be reached. The therapist will also give the client “something to go
home with” by beginning skills training in a mind—body exercise (Focused Breathing).


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Review client’s evaluation materials, particularly trauma history, symptoms, and coping skills.
Bring handouts on treatment rationale and Focused Breathing (Handouts 10.1 and 10.2). The
work in the session is estimated to take about 60 minutes; a flexible application is assumed (i.e.,
not every client will need all interventions).


AGENDA


Welcome client to treatment and identify focus of the session.
Review client's evaluation experience, trauma history, and symptoms.
Establish the therapeutic contract.
Provide overview of treatment plan.
Explain goals of Module I: STAIR (emotion regulation and interpersonal skills development).
Explain goals of Module II: Narrative Therapy (PTSD symptom reduction and creation of
life narrative, if relevant to clients treatment plan).
Review rationale for and benefits of a two-module treatment (if relevant to client’s treatment
plan).
Provide a coping skill: Focused Breathing.
Provide rationale for between-session skills practice.
Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
Practice Focused Breathing twice a day.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 146]

10. The Resource of Hope 129


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 10.1. Treatment Overview: What is STAIR Narrative Therapy?
Handout 10.2. Instructions for Focused Breathing


REVIEW CLIENT’S EVALUATION EXPERIENCE, TRAUMA HISTORY,
AND SYMPTOMS

The therapist begins by inquiring about the clients experience of the evaluation process,
which established the client's baseline symptoms and appropriateness for the treatment.
This discussion will provide an understanding of the client's emotional state and potential
concerns about the treatment. If someone other than the therapist completed the evaluation, it will be important to make clear that the therapist has become acquainted with the
evaluation materials and presenting problems. If the therapist completed the evaluation,
it is still useful to summarize the material from the evaluation, including trauma history,
symptoms, and presenting problems. Doing so serves multiple purposes, including verifying that the information is correct and providing the client an opportunity to add anything
further that feels important for the therapist to know.
The therapist is actively working here, conveying that they have made an effort to know
the client, and also that the therapist is not overwhelmed by the client's history or symptoms. At the same time, the therapist is careful not to overwhelm the client by confronting
them with too stark a summary of their trauma experiences. Thus the therapist may often
pause to make room for the client to confirm, clarify, or add information, conveying an
expectation of collaboration. This task may take 10-30 minutes, depending on the complexity of the client’s trauma history and/or inclination to elaborate.
Many clients can be emotionally reactive to hearing their trauma histories summarized.
In fact, a key symptom of PTSD is often a client's experience of being upset upon confronting
memory triggers of what has happened to them. The therapist needs to be alert to this possibility, and addressing it with the client is often necessary. In some cases, previewing this
possible reaction before conducting the review can help prepare the client and reassure them
that their feelings are normal, that these reactions are not signs of weakness, and that the therapist is sensitive and caring about the clients experience. All of these messages help bolster
the therapeutic alliance at this early stage of therapy. Furthermore, reassuring the client that
this treatment will help them better manage these reactions over time can be very important
and motivating. Although reviewing assessments and trauma history may trigger symptoms
in the moment, this reaction will become manageable as the therapy proceeds. In fact, this
phenomenon is a core aspect of many posttraumatic reactions and a key treatment target.


ESTABLISH THE THERAPEUTIC CONTRACT

The initial and perhaps unarticulated agreement when the client walks through the door
is that the client has come to therapy for help and the therapist has agreed to help them.

[PAGE 147]

130 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


How this will take place is the next question, and the answer to it needs to be discussed and
negotiated in a collaborative, respectful way. Alongside the spoken words of this contract
are process-oriented components; both are crucial in establishing an effective contract.


The Initial Treatment Description

Certain parameters guide this process when a therapist plans to implement an empirically
based treatment like STAIR Narrative Therapy. In this situation, the therapist begins with
the proposal that the results of the assessment—particularly the clients identified PTSD
symptoms, problems with emotion management, and difficulties with relationships—
indicate that STAIR is a good match to their needs. The therapist can express confidence in
this approach by saying something like this:


“This treatment was developed specifically for people with problems similar to yours.
The therapists who created it relied heavily on input and feedback from survivors of
trauma who came to treatment and had the same kinds of problems and issues as you.
Because of this history, we know that this treatment works. Its been systematically
evaluated with several hundreds of people similar to you over the last 20 years, and the
results have shown it's effective. People who’ve completed STAIR Narrative Therapy
have also shared that the treatment process itself was, although sometimes difficult, a
positive experience and worth the effort. Because of all of this history and evidence, Im
looking forward to our work together, and to helping you find your way toward recovery
and living the life you deserve.”


If the client is concerned that the treatment may be too rigid or structured and will not
take into account their individual needs, the therapist can reassure them. As described
in Chapter 8, the treatment has built-in flexibility. The therapist can say something like
this:


“STAIR Narrative Therapy has become flexible enough over time to be tailored to
each person's needs without compromising its effectiveness. For example, increasing
or decreasing the number of sessions—as well as the emphasis on some types of skills
training over others, depending on your needs—in no way decreases the effectiveness
of the treatment. In fact, applying the treatment in this way is known to provide even
greater benefits. We'll work together on how to tailor this treatment so that it's most
effective for you.”


Cautious enthusiasm is the most common response to hearing this initial introduction
to treatment. Clients are typically relieved to hear that their problems are not unusual; are
well known to professionals; and (most importantly) have received considerable amounts of
sensitive thought, research, and treatment development. The therapist can then proceed to
a more specific review of the treatment rationale and specific interventions. As described
below, the therapist engages in a dialogue with the client to make sure that each aspect
described is matched to the clients specific needs in a way that is understandable and

[PAGE 148]

10. The Resource of Hope 131


relevant to them. The number of sessions, length of treatment, and areas of concentration
for skills training are discussed and planned, but the client and therapist can be assured that
whatever may come up in the process of therapy, both of them will collaborate to adapt it to
the client’s specific needs and response.


Reminders about the Therapeutic Alliance

The therapeutic alliance is a working partnership between the therapist and the client, and
it is an integral if not critical part of any effective treatment. In particular, therapy settings
“pull” for power dynamics, owing to the therapist's perceived position of authority. The
power balance between therapist and client can be delicate to negotiate, given the client's
experiences of misused authority.
On the one hand, the therapist is placed in the position of an “expert” or an authority
figure, as they have skills that are intended to help guide the client in reaching desired goals.
This role has legitimate aspects and positive value for the client. The therapist's knowledge
and capacity to implement the treatment provide much-needed structure and containment
for the tasks at hand. It also provides the client with a sense of safety and security, which is
a prerequisite for effective treatment.
On the other hand, the client’s reactions to authority figures, especially in the case of
childhood abuse, may include feelings of fear, hostility, and/or suspicion toward the therapist. The client may feel disregarded and controlled by the therapist, and ineffectual in
managing themselves in this setting. To counteract this obviously negative interpersonal
dynamic, the therapist must make clear that their role as an “expert” is in the service of the
client's needs and desired recovery, and that it ideally complements—not invalidates—the
client’s perspective on their personal experiences. The interventions, their use, and their
timing/pace follow the client’s experiences and wishes. The treatment has been developed
to be flexible for this very reason. Given the client's background, they are likely to have had
little opportunity to be attended to, taken seriously, and truly seen and heard. The therapist's attitude of receptivity and responsiveness to the clients experience is a therapeutic
intervention in its own right. For many survivors of childhood abuse, openly sharing their
perspective, especially when it contrasts with another person’s viewpoint, is a very challenging but important opportunity to practice appropriate levels of assertiveness—a skill
more explicitly introduced in the second half of STAIR Narrative Therapy.
Ideally, agreement about the therapy goals and means will be readily established
between therapist and client, and therapy will proceed. Therapist and client will remain
attuned to each other as treatment goals evolve and as the means by which these goals are
to be met are determined. The support of the therapist will empower the client and affirm
their value and crucial role in the effort. The client in turn will appreciate the therapist's
expertise as an instrument of support, rather than as a negation of their needs or experience. Any ruptures that may occur in the therapeutic alliance, as in any kind of therapy, will
require immediate attention, communication, and healing to ensure that the therapeutic
work is effective. Therapeutic ruptures cannot all be avoided, but if they are openly and
respectfully addressed, the repair of ruptures can actually strengthen the alliance and reinforce important lessons about relationships and communication.

[PAGE 149]

132 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


PROVIDE OVERVIEW OF TREATMENT PLAN


The therapist explains that this treatment has two modules, which usually (when combined)
last for a total of 16-20 hour-long weekly sessions. The first module focuses on learning
skills for living more effectively, with specific emphases on emotion management problems
and interpersonal difficulties. In the second module, sessions focus on the emotional processing of the client’s traumatic experiences, as well as continued work on enhancing life
skills. Handout 10.1, Treatment Overview: What Is STAIR Narrative Therapy?, can be used
to provide the client with an overview of the STAIR Narrative Therapy treatment. (Note
that all client handouts are grouped together at the ends of treatment chapters, for ease of
reproduction.)


EXPLAIN GOALS OF MODULE I: STAIR

Emotion Regulation Skills Development

The therapist explains that one main goal of the first module is to help the client develop
emotional awareness and learn skills to modulate negative feelings and tolerate distress.
The client may benefit from learning that many people who were traumatized (especially as
children) have difficulty knowing what they are feeling and/or how to manage their feelings.
Some people feel overwhelmed by their feelings, while others may have learned to cope by
not feeling anything at all—through either numbing or dissociation. The therapist can stop
and ask the client about their experience with these common patterns. It may help to give
examples such as the following: “Some people are never able to feel anger, while others dont
feel able to manage their anger at all, so that they ‘blow up. Does either of these patterns
match your experience?”
The therapist explains that the treatment will involve learning how the client can experience their feelings without becoming overwhelmed. This will first involve the clients
becoming more aware of their feelings and what triggers them. People traumatized as children may have particular difficulty experiencing and labeling feelings, because their feelings were mislabeled or disregarded by others. Again, the therapist both gives examples and
elicits examples from the client.
To get an initial sense of how others responded to the clients feelings when the client
was a child (this subject is pursued in more detail in Session 2), the therapist engages the
client in a discussion. If the client does not spontaneously respond to what the therapist is
describing, inviting them to do so may help with comments such as “Does this strike a chord
anywhere for you?”


interpersonal Skills Development

A second goal of the STAIR module is for the client to learn how to improve interpersonal
skills by using interpersonal goals rather than feeling states to guide their interactions.
The therapist and client will also talk about how the client can use these skills in their

[PAGE 150]

10. The Resource of Hope 133


relationships—specifically, to manage certain emotions that can at times interfere with
or overshadow their relationship goals. The therapist may ask the client about difficulties
they experience in interpersonal relationships, prompting with examples and questions
as necessary—for instance, saying something like: “Some people who were maltreated as
children have a hard time being assertive, or they let people take advantage of them. Is
this familiar to you?” or “Are there certain feelings you have problems expressing to people? What makes it difficult?” The client’s answers likely will highlight elements of their
interpersonal style and areas of concern. Later sessions explore these topics again in more
detail.


Selection of Specific Coping Skills

Finally, the therapist tells the client that the client will have the opportunity to learn a
number of emotion management and relationship skills, and will select what they think will
work best for them from a “menu” of options. The therapist and client will use the results of
any preliminary assessment measures to evaluate the client’s relative strengths in cognitive,
behavioral, and social support strategies for managing current distress. This information
will inform, later in treatment, the selection ofcoping skills that best match the client’s current problems.


EXPLAIN GOALS OF MODULE II: NARRATIVE THERAPY
(IF RELEVANT)


If the treatment plan involves both modules of STAIR Narrative Therapy (or the possibility of continuing to Module IT), the therapist can preview that in the second half of treatment, the client will systematically identify and explore their feelings about their traumatic
experiences. One important goal of this work is for the client to be able to think about
the trauma, or encounter reminders or triggers of it, without experiencing their particular
symptoms at the intensity they do now at the start of treatment. A second goal of Narrative
Therapy is to help the client make meaning of their traumatic experiences—to respect their
history of pain, but also to put it in the past.


Review of PTSD Assessment Results

If not done earlier in this session, the therapist can provide a brief overview of the symptoms that constitute the diagnosis of PTSD or CPTSD (whichever is more appropriate), and
explain how some or all of the client's symptoms fit into the diagnosis. PTSD is described as
a syndrome that can develop after a person has been exposed to a traumatic event, such as
childhood abuse, rape, combat, being in a plane crash, or witnessing a murder. Often PTSD
develops soon after the trauma; however, it can begin at any time after the event. Using the
client’s self-reported PTSD symptoms (obtained from evaluation materials), the therapist
and client together review the four DSM-5 PTSD symptom clusters (i.e., reexperiencing,

[PAGE 151]

134 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


avoidance, negative cognitions/moods, and arousal); determine which of these symptom
clusters match what the client reported in the assessment; and clarify their understanding
of what the symptoms are and how they fit into each category.
Another diagnosis that might be a better match for people who have experienced prolonged trauma is CPTSD, a diagnosis that is now included in ICD-11 (see Chapter 9). In
addition to symptoms relating directly to the traumatic event (such as flashbacks, avoidance of trauma-related material, and hyperarousal), CPTSD identifies three additional sets
of symptoms: difficulties with emotion regulation, negative self-concept, and relationship
problems. The interventions in STAIR particularly help with emotion regulation and relationship difficulties. Negative views of oneself are addressed in both STAIR and Narrative
Therapy.
For example, some people may have negative feelings about themselves because they
feel that they are not competent to manage day-to-day difficulties, have problems in managing their emotions, or have problems managing relationships (or having any relationships
at all). STAIR interventions help people develop skills and resources to address these difficulties. Ultimately, however, traumatic experiences often lead people to feel ashamed of
themselves, guilty, worthless or bad. Narrative Therapy allows a client to go back to the
trauma and reassess where those feelings and beliefs came from and resolve them. This task
is a difficult one, but often very liberating once completed.


Narrative Work for the Purpose of Decreasing Fear
and PTSD Symptoms

The client's current symptoms (nightmares, flashbacks, anxiety, etc.) indicate that there is
“unfinished business” related to the past trauma. The therapist notes that some people try
to cope with this by avoiding traumatic memories and triggers, which is understandable but
ultimately ineffective. Avoidance can work in the short term, but in the longer view, it only
maintains and exacerbates PTSD/CPTSD symptoms. Even when triggers and memories
are avoided to the extent possible, many people find that they cannot completely avoid their
memories and feel overwhelmed by them when they come up. The aim of the treatment is
to help the client process the memories of their trauma in such a way that they attain more
control over them, rather than being controlled by them. The therapist can tell the client
something like this:


“The goal will be to help you make meaningful connections between your feelings and
your experiences in a safe and supportive environment. Staying with these memories
rather than running away from them can be very distressing at first, but over time it
will help decrease the anxiety and fear that are associated with them. This process is
called “deconditioning’ or ‘habituation. It works because the body is drained by the
‘fight, flight, or freeze’ system. That system works to protect us from danger. When
youre not in danger, your body can save its energy. That's the point of this second mod-
ule of treatment. That is, your body will be learning over time that in a safe environ-
ment, remembering is not the same as experiencing the trauma. Dont worry if even

[PAGE 152]

10. The Resource of Hope 135


talking about this approach brings up some anxiety for you now. Well get there when
youre ready, and [ll be here all along the way to support you.”


Narrative Work for the Purpose of Organizing
Traumatic Memories

A second goal of the narrative work is to help the client to assimilate and integrate their
experiences. The therapist can elucidate this more abstract goal with the use of the following analogy:


“The mind can be viewed as a kind of library in which a person's experiences are orga-
nized and stored, helping the person to make sense of them and put them in their right
place. So, for example, children might have a section of their library for “birthday par-
ties, where they store memories of particular parties, plus their growing knowledge
about what one brings to a party, what to expect at a party, and so forth. But where does
a child file and organize the experiences of trauma? Typically, the traumatic experi-
ences are not labeled and discussed. So the feelings and memories continue to interfere
with life in the present, frequently in the form of depression or posttraumatic stress.
The symptoms often reflect the unorganized and unassimilated feelings tied to the
trauma. Part of the goal of processing trauma experiences is for you to be able to orga-
nize these distressing feelings and memories and find a place for them.”


Narrative Work for the Purpose of Developing a Life History

During the Narrative Therapy module of the treatment, the conclusion of each telling (or
a series of tellings) will involve a review of the client’s perceptions of themselves and their
life circumstances during the time of the traumatic experiences, including their relationship with anyone who abused them. These past perceptions will be directly compared to
the beliefs they hold about themselves now and to their perceptions of their current circumstances and relationships. Some perceptions of self and patterns of relating will be
identical to those of the past. The therapist and client will review their current positive
value to the client, and the client will either accept and reinforce existing perceptions or
identify ones that may be due for revision. There will also be observations about the way in
which the client has changed, including how they may have changed for the better. Client
and therapist will identify the client's positive and more adaptive beliefs about themselves
that have developed during Module I, as well as the internal and external resources for life
functioning that have accumulated in response. The comparison of current self and past self
often highlights the positive changes the client is making, which are easy to lose sight of
during the change process. This type of contrasting activity also places a healthy emotional
distance between the clients past and present. Narrative analysis organizes experience as
a story with a beginning, middle, and end. The sense of time this process instills reinforces
the idea that the trauma is in the past and therefore cannot hurt the client. Lastly, this
analysis will yield some understanding of how the past has influenced the present but need

[PAGE 153]

136 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


not continue to do so. With this awareness, the client may begin to exercise choices about
who they will be and what they will do.


REVIEW RATIONALE FOR AND BENEFITS OF A TWO-MODULE
TREATMENT (IF RELEVANT)


For clients who are planning to complete both modules of treatment, briefly providing the
rationale for dividing the therapeutic work as such may be helpful. There are several reasons
for organizing treatment into two modules, each with its own specific goals. The immediate
goal of the therapy is to help the client improve functioning and reduce suffering in day-today life as quickly as possible. The first module of treatment, STAIR, is intended to address
this goal in a pragmatic and straightforward manner. These initial sessions also allow a
period of time for the therapist and client to get to know each other and form a positive
and productive therapeutic alliance. The client has time to become comfortable with the
therapist and satisfy their valid question of whether the therapist is someone they can trust
enough to engage in a process that involves experiencing painful feelings. In a complementary fashion, the therapist will develop a good working knowledge of the client's strengths
and vulnerabilities, which will help the therapist guide the client in titrating the emotional
intensity of the narrative work. During this time, the client will develop better skills in emotion regulation, which they can use during the more emotionally intense narrative work.
The development of emotional and interpersonal resources will also build the client's selfesteem and provide them with greater awareness of their strengths, so that thinking about
the past will be, if not less painful, at least less frightening and overwhelming.
Lastly, both therapist and client may review the number of times they suspect it might
be useful to cycle through specific components of the STAIR module. Repeated use of skills
training components can be reinforcing for some clients, particularly for those who suffer
more from difficulties with daily life functioning than from PTSD-specific symptoms. This
option to repeat or prolong a focus on specific skills of interest or challenge is one important
way that this treatment models healthy flexibility (a theme of the emotion regulation and
interpersonal work) and seeks to individualize the interventions to the needs of the client,
not those of the protocol.


PROVIDE A COPING SKILL: FOCUSED BREATHING


An important and final task for the latter part of the first session is to begin instructing the client in practicing emotion regulation skills. This component of the first session
gives the client “something to go home with.” It is intended to boost the clients hope
that the treatment will improve their functioning in day-to-day life. It also demonstrates
the engagement of both body and mind that is typical of emotion regulation activities,
and exemplifies the collaborative process between client and therapist that effective skills
acquisition requires.

[PAGE 154]

10. The Resource of Hope 137


Rationale for and Overview of Focused Breathing

The therapist begins by explaining the rationale for Focused Breathing to the client:


“One way of dealing with distressing feelings involves decreasing your physiological
arousal through a skill we call Focused Breathing. When people are in an aroused
state, they tend to breathe from their chests and breathe more quickly. This impulse
can actually increase symptoms of anxiety, including dizziness, breathlessness, and
even disorientation. The aim of this exercise is to slow down your breathing and rate
of oxygen intake, which will lead to a decrease in anxiety. It’s like meditation in that
it helps you reduce disorganized thoughts and flooding emotions by helping you focus
on a single sensation and a single task—namely, breathing. Focused Breathing can be
used to manage anxiety, irritation, or anger, and as a meditative tool for feeling calm
and grounded. It’s also an exercise that highlights the relationship between the mind
and the body. By clearing the mind of all thoughts, and by directing your concentra-
tion toward regular breathing, you'll experience the influence of mind over body. In a
complementary fashion, the relaxation of the body that comes from regular breathing
will also reduce your flow of undirected thoughts, completing the circle so that you can
experience the influence of the body over the mind. Both are intimately connected,
and both can help you take charge of your reactions.”


The therapist can emphasize the mind—body connection, which may be novel to some clients. Focused Breathing is an exercise that will help the client connect and integrate experiences of the body and mind in a healthful way, while not dismissing the influence of one
over the other.


instructions for Teaching Focused Breathing

By this time, because its utility is well documented in research and various therapeutic
approaches, many therapists have completed at least informal training in leading mindfulness and breath-based meditations. For the purposes of this intervention, the therapist can
follow these key steps of teaching Focused Breathing:


1. Assess baseline. Observe the client as they breathe in their usual way. Have them
pay attention to their rate of breathing and whether they breathe from their chest or diaphragm.


2. Teach technique. Model breathing from your diaphragm, placing one hand on your
chest and the other on your stomach, and have the client imitate these movements. Explain
that when they are breathing from the diaphragm, only the stomach hand moves up and
down, while the chest remains still. Especially if the client is a parent, it can help to invite
them to think of how a baby sleeps—how only the lower abdomen moves up and down. Or
they might imagine their stomach as a balloon, filling with air and expanding as they inhale,
then letting out the air and shrinking as they exhale.

[PAGE 155]

138 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


3. Slow down rate of breathing. Instruct the client to take in enough air to fill the
space under the diaphragm, then gradually let it out slowly. Sometimes breathing through
the nose is easier because the nostrils are smaller openings, which will help to control the
rate of exhalation. Instruct the client to pause briefly after exhaling before inhaling again.
Some clients will tend to hold their breath too long at first; explain that the pause is very
brief and comes after exhaling. Using imagery to convey the desired movement and flow
may help. For example, the ebb and flow of an ocean wave is a helpful image for some. Alternatively, consider the image of climbing up a slide (inhaling) and then sliding back down
(exhaling), briefly pausing at the bottom before turning around and climbing up again.


4. Introduce meditational component. In order to help the client slow their thoughts
and focus attention on breathing, instruct the client to count their breaths as they inhale—
or, alternatively, to think of calming words like “Relax,” “Just breathe,” or some similar
thought as they exhale. They can continue counting until they get to 10, and then go back to
1. Explain, using wording as in this example:


“It's perfectly natural for other thoughts to come into your mind. Try not to get angry
or frustrated or beat yourself up for not doing it ‘right. Just allow the thoughts to pass
through your mind, without judgment for losing focus, and then gently bring your
attention back to counting. Do this as often as you need. Just like any new skill, mind-
ful breathing takes practice.”


Some people find it helpful to concentrate mostly on the physical sensation of their
breathing, others on the counting or use of calming words. Still others will have other ways
of focusing that come most naturally to them. Encourage the client to do what works best
for them. Doing so models the kinds of flexibility and pragmatism that are key to this treatment approach.


PROVIDE RATIONALE FOR BETWEEN-SESSION SKILLS PRACTICE


A core part of this treatment is independent skills practice to aid the client in newly acquiring and mastering skills. The therapist provides the client with take-home exercises, which
incorporate the skills taught in sessions. There are several reasons for doing so. The first is
that the practice exercises will provide the client and therapist with important data on the
client’s real-life experiences, which then can help inform the choice of interventions in sessions. The therapist can use examples from the client's experiences of independent practice
when introducing new information or skills.
Another reason for between-session practice is that it enables the client to practice skills
in the context of their real life, not just in the more theoretical space of the therapy room.
Generalizing what is learned in session to real life is one of the fundamental principles of
this therapy. Skills must be practical in the real world. If not, then they fail a basic test of
pragmatism—doing what works! The therapist and client can share this common viewpoint,

[PAGE 156]

10. The Resource of Hope 139


while maintaining the client’s motivation to continue practicing long enough to know for
sure whether a skill is effective or whether it needs some adjustments to work best. A further
reason why independent skills practice is key is that because STAIR is typically a relatively
brief and efficient treatment, it asks clients to learn a large number of skills in a short period
of time. The only way for clients to accomplish genuine skill acquisition is to practice on their
own. Some clients may benefit from comparing this kind of therapeutic skill acquisition to
the skill acquisition of learning to ride a bike or play a new sport. The example used can be
adjusted to match the client's experience. The therapist can adapt the following language:


“Think about the time you learned to ride a bike. Even after seeing other people ride
a bike, or hearing someone tell you how to do it, it probably wasn’t easy at first, right?
It likely took a lot of trial and error. But eventually you learned, and it became second
nature. That's similar to what were hoping to do with Focused Breathing and the other
skills youll be learning and practicing in this therapy. Even when it’s hard, you
ll learn
that sticking with the practice is the best way to make it work for you when you need
it most.”


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


At the end of the session (as in all future sessions), the therapist briefly summarizes the session's goals, and situates the session content within the larger framework of the client's treatment plan if helpful. The therapist can reinforce the collaborative, individualized nature of
the treatment by also checking in with the client again to see how they are feeling. If the
client appears in need of further encouragement, the therapist may praise the client for initiating treatment and completing their first skills practice in this session. The therapist can
also assure the client that they will not be alone in their journey of recovery; the therapist
will be their guide and partner throughout the process. In all cases, instilling some level of
hope in the growth the client will experience as they stick with the treatment will be useful,
if not critical.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


At the end of this first session, the therapist gives the client Handout 10.2, Focused Breathing, for use between sessions. They can instruct the client to put aside some time each day
where they will be undisturbed and comfortable, and to practice the breathing skill for at
least 5 minutes twice a day. If it seems useful to revisit these points, the therapist emphasizes that the client’s skill will increase with practice, and that like any practice, it takes
time and patience to work. Only with regular practice will coping skills, such as Focused
Breathing, be readily available and effective when the client actually becomes triggered or
anxious. This emphasis on the purpose of regular between-session practice will continue to
be an important point throughout this treatment.

[PAGE 157]

Treatment Overview: What Is STAIR Narrative Therapy?
RATIONALE

This treatment was originally designed for adults with a history of childhood abuse who suffer from
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms and experience difficulties with emotion management and interpersonal relationships. Over time, it was broadened to apply to people with a range of
traumatic experiences and symptoms.
The first module of treatment, Skills Training in Affective and Interpersonal Regulation (STAIR),
directly addresses current relationship and emotion management problems. Module | of treatment
also prepares you to work effectively in the more intense Module ll, which involves discussing and
analyzing painful memories of trauma.
People often try to cope with traumatic memories by avoiding them. This avoidance is understandable, but ultimately, in the long run, it does not work. The memories return in unpredictable and
uncontrollable ways. The goal of Module Il, Narrative Therapy, is to organize your memories of trauma
and resolve your feelings about them. Doing so helps you control the memories, rather than having
the memories control you.
In addition, the process of describing your past is a way for you to identify deeper beliefs about
yourself and patterns of relating to others. Those patterns might have been adaptive at the time of
the trauma, but no longer are adaptive and need adjustment. This process pairs nicely with the skills
training from Module I, which will help you leave behind old patterns and develop new interpersonal
behaviors and emotion management skills more consistent with your current life goals.


OVERVIEW

This treatment consists of two modules, as described above. You and your therapist may decide that a
different number or spacing of sessions would be most appropriate to your needs. The following table
provides a general overview of the treatment.


Module I: STAIR Module Il: Narrative Therapy

Estimated session 10 weekly 60-minute sessions 8-10 weekly 60-minute sessions
number and format


Focus Learning skills to manage emotions Making sense of the trauma and
and improve relationships processing related memories and
feelings


Goals 1. Develop emotional awareness. 1. Revisit trauma memories to help
2. Build coping skills for handling emotional processing of what
negative feelings and distress. happened.


(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


140

[PAGE 158]

Treatment Overview: What Is STAIR Narrative Therapy? (page 2 of 2)


Module I: STAIR Module Il: Narrative Therapy

Goals (continued) 3. Review how to make decisions 2. Repeat tellings of the events to
about whether tolerating distress habituate to (get used to and
makes sense to reach your decrease) the feelings of anxiety
goals. that the memories trigger.
. Understand relationship patterns Make meaningful connections
and create healthy alternatives to between your feelings and your
unhelpful patterns. experiences.
Learn interpersonal skills to pair . Differentiate the traumatic past
with emotional coping skills to from the present, freeing your
improve relationships. behavior and thinking from the
control of the trauma.
Explore your life and create the
story of your life, taking a long
view of it, where the trauma
is part of but not all of your
experience and story.


141

[PAGE 159]

Instructions for Focused Breathing

RATIONALE

One way of dealing with distressing feelings involves decreasing your physiological arousal through a
skill we call Focused Breathing. The aim is to slow down your breathing to decrease anxiety, breathlessness, and disorientation. In addition, the exercise is similar to meditation, in that it helps you
reduce disorganized thinking or flooding by focusing on a single sensation and single task—namely,
breathing.
Focused Breathing can be used to manage states of anxiety, irritation, or anger, and as a meditative tool for feeling calm and grounded. It is also an exercise that highlights the connection between
the mind and the body. By clearing the mind of all thoughts and by directing your concentration
toward regular breathing, you will experience the influence of mind over body. The relaxation of the
body that comes from regular breathing will also reduce the flow of undirected, distracting thoughts,
which completes the circle with the influence of body over mind.
Practicing Focused Breathing will help you experience the connectedness and integrity of the
body and mind in a positive, healthy way. The ability to engage in Focused Breathing in a meditational
fashion is a challenge and takes practice. So do not become discouraged. Practice regularly and with
patience, and your skill will develop over time.


PROCEDURE FOR FOCUSED BREATHING

Getting Started

Place one hand on your chest and the other on your stomach. Take a slow, deep breath, and pay
attention to which hand moves. When you are breathing from your diaphragm, only the hand on the
stomach should move up and down, with little movement coming from the chest. It may help to think
of how babies sleep—how their stomachs quietly move up and down. Or you might imagine your
stomach as a balloon, filling with air and expanding as you inhale, then letting out the air and shrinking as you exhale.


Slow Down Your Rate of Breathing

Take in enough air to fill the space under the diaphragm, then let it out slowly. Sometimes breathing
out through the nose is easier because your nostrils are smaller openings, which will help slow the rate
of exhalation. Pause briefly after exhaling before inhaling again. Some people tend to hold their breath
too long at first; the pause should be brief after exhaling. Imagery can be helpful in maintaining a slow
and steady rhythm. For example, seeing your breath as a wave, following it as it ebbs and flows, can
be a helpful image. Alternatively, imagine climbing up a slide (inhaling) and then sliding down (exhaling), and briefly pausing at the bottom before walking around and climbing up again.


(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


142

[PAGE 160]

Instructions for Focused Breathing (page 2 of 2)

Meditational Component

In order to help slow your thoughts and focus your attention on breathing, count your breaths as you
inhale, and think “Relax,” “Calm,” or some similar thought as you exhale. Continue counting your
breaths until you get to 10, and then start over at 1. ltis perfectly natural for other thoughts to come into
your mind. Try not to get angry or frustrated; just allow the thoughts to pass through your mind, and
bring your attention back to counting as often as you need to. Some people find it helpful to concentrate mostly on the physical sensation of their breathing, others on the counting or “Relax” statement.
Experiment with different methods, and do whatever works best for you.


Practice

Practice is essential to develop this skill, so that it becomes something you can use to decrease
distress in stressful situations. It is best to practice Focused Breathing in a comfortable, quiet place
where you will not be disturbed. Take a few seconds to relax, and then practice the breathing exercise
for at least 5 minutes. Practicing at least twice a day is the goal. When you are beginning to learn
this skill, it is best not to practice when you are already distressed. The idea is that if you practice the
breathing when you are in a calm state, it will become a habit that you can then call upon more easily
when you are distressed. As you become more skilled at it, you may begin practicing using it in mildly
distressing situations, such as when you are feeling impatient while waiting in a line.


143

[PAGE 161]

The Resource of Feeling
Emotional Awareness


Reality is when something is happening to you and you know it
and can say it and when you say it other people understand
what you mean and believe you.
—ANDREA DWORKIN, quoted by CATHARINE A. MACKINNON
(2005, p. 13)


L aentitying and labeling feelings may seem like a simple activity. But, in fact, many survivors of interpersonal trauma have not had sufficient opportunity to learn or practice this formative process. Feelings are a critical resource for living. They provide information about
potential threats in our environment, guide our choices, and motivate our actions. Feelings also contribute to self-knowledge, as when they inform our preferences (likes and dislikes); subsequently, they can powerfully communicate to others our intentions and beliefs.
Developmentally, awareness of feelings often grows in tandem with naming them. Naming
heightens our awareness of a feeling, clarifies its meaning and potential purpose, and provides a vehicle for its expression.
Chronic trauma, especially in childhood, often leads to pervasive and long-term
impairment in a survivor's ability to identify and name feelings (this impairment is called
“alexithymia”). The ability to identify and name feelings facilitates emotional awareness,
organizes emotional experiences, and supports effective decision making and behavior.
Having difficulty with identifying and naming feelings creates disturbances in all of these
experiences; perhaps most devastatingly, it undermines people’s confidence in the accuracy
of their feelings and perceptions, and in the authority of their actions.
In this session, a therapist helps a client find words to describe their feelings, understand their causes and value, and become aware of the physical sensations, thoughts and
actions associated with them. These skills are learned through instruction and repeated
practice in monitoring feelings. At the same time and of equal importance, the therapist
creates a sense of safety in the client's experiencing and labeling of feelings, helps to clarify
different kinds of feelings and their expressions through three channels of emotion, and
furnishes support for their expression and felt reality.


144

[PAGE 162]

11. The Resource of Feeling 145


Conscious awareness of feelings is a first and vital step in self-discovery. It allows clients to trust in their visceral experiences of emotions. This liberation in emotional experiencing then creates new resources for their management, gives the clients renewed energy,
and contributes to their experience of a real and authentic self. Box 11.1 outlines the theme
and curriculum for Session 2 of treatment.


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


This session and all that follow begin with an inquiry about the client's reaction to the previous session, and about any difficulties they may have had implementing the planned skills
practice over the past week. Clients may have questions that need answering before they
can comfortably go on with the current session. If a client reports significant difficulties
with the skills work from the previous session (in this case, Focused Breathing), the therapist and client will want to plan to reserve time at the end of the session for extra practice.
In this particular session, a client may have questions or concerns about the treatment
plan. Treatment goals and means to reach them must be relevant to the client and also must
be adapted to the client's sensibilities, and so the therapist should address any concerns in
a collaborative way. In addition, what the client has to say at the opening of the session is a
demonstration of or exercise in the expression of feelings—the client's preferences, sense of
collaboration, and fears about the coming weeks of work. The session thus begins with an
experience of the central goal of the session: practice in identifying and expressing feelings.


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


The therapist shares with the client that the focus of this session is emotional awareness,
which involves helping them to enhance their ability to identify and label their feelings, and
to understand the origins of their feelings (as well as of associated thoughts and actions). The
therapist will also work with the client on understanding the function of feelings, clarify the
different kinds of feelings the client has, and support the client in expressing feelings in a
way that feels safe.


INTRODUCE CONCEPT OF EMOTION REGULATION


“Emotion regulation” encompasses the ability to identify, label, modulate, and effectively
express feelings. All these aspects of emotion regulation are addressed in this and the next
several sessions. The therapist conveys the meaning of the concept and explores the client's
experiences with each aspect of emotion regulation. The work for this particular session
focuses only on the prerequisite to all other aspects of emotion regulation: the skill of emotional awareness. Emotional awareness is learned through self-monitoring of feelings via
Handout 11.3, the Feelings Monitoring Form, which gives the client practice in the specific

[PAGE 163]

146 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Theme and Curriculum for Session 2
The Resource of Feeling: Emotional Awareness


Identifying and naming feelings may seem to be a simple activity. But, in fact, many survivors
of interpersonal trauma have not had sufficient opportunity to do this. In this session, the
therapist helps the client enhance their ability to identify and label their feelings, their sources,
and associated thoughts and actions. In addition, the therapist helps create a sense of safety in
the client’s experiencing and naming of feelings, helps to clarify different kinds of feelings, and
furnishes support for their expression and felt reality.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Review client's evaluation materials related to difficulties with emotion regulation. Bring sev-
eral copies of the Feelings Monitoring Form (Handout 11.3), as well as a copy of each other Ses-
sion 2 handout. Prepare examples for the Feelings Monitoring Form. The work in the session is
estimated to take about 60 minutes; a flexible application is assumed (i.e., not every client will
need all interventions).


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Introduce concept of emotion regulation.
Explore and identify difficulties with emotion regulation.
Introduce the Feelings Monitoring Form.
Provide rationale for monitoring and understanding feelings.
Use channels of emotion to help organize experience.
Describe the functions of feelings.
Identify and discuss client’s problematic emotions.
Discuss discrimination among different kinds of feelings.
Practice using the Feelings Monitoring Form together.
Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
Practice Focused Breathing twice a day.
Complete Feelings Monitoring Form once a day.

(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 164]

11. The Resource of Feeling 147


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 11.1. The Impact of Childhood Abuse and Neglect on Emotion Regulation

Handout 11.2. Social Influences on Your Emotional Experiences

Handout 11.3. Feelings Monitoring Form (several copies)

Handout 11.4. Examples of Emotion Regulation Coping Skills for the Three Channel:
of Emotion

Handout 11.5. Three Channels Skills Graphic

Handout 11.6. Negative and Positive Emotions as Messengers

Handout 11.7. Feelings List

Handout 11.8. Feelings Wheel


skills of identifying and labeling feelings and of seeing how they change based on choices
before and after a triggering or impactful incident.
The therapist now introduces the notions that (1) emotional awareness and expression
are skills that are learned (not innate); (2) an important aspect of childhood interpersonal
trauma is that a child’s feelings are often ignored or mislabeled, which itself becomes a
“learning experience, albeit a negative one; and (3) negative or maladaptive habits of selfmonitoring and expression can be unlearned and replaced with more adaptive functioning.
The therapist can more meaningfully discuss and reinforce these ideas in the context of the
clients own history and experiences. Handout 11.1, The Impact of Childhood Abuse and
Neglect on Emotion Regulation, provides a summary of these ideas as they apply to these
forms of trauma; the therapist can give this handout to the client at the end of the session.


EXPLORE AND IDENTIFY DIFFICULTIES
WITH EMOTION REGULATION


To begin the process, the therapist can first engage the client in describing any difficulties
in managing feelings they are aware of and/or would like to change. In our experiences,
two simple questions yield a great deal of information and discussion: “How were feelings
handled when you were growing up?” and “How have your traumatic experiences affected
the way you feel?” These questions will provide specific information relevant to the client's
needs.


Discuss How Feelings Were Managed
When the Client Was Growing Up

Because the childhood experiences of survivors of maltreatment have a strong influence on
their beliefs and management of feelings, queries into family history can be very enlightening. The client can tell about ways in which caregivers responded to their feelings in the

[PAGE 165]

148 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


past. For example, were their feelings considered important? Were they ignored? Were they
mislabeled (e.g., the client was told, “Youre fine, stop crying, when upset)? Did expression
of emotion result in negative reactions from caregivers (e.g., “TIl give you something to
cry about!”)? In addition, the client can share how caregivers handled their own emotions.
For example, did they sweep things under the rug, drink/use other substances, or express
frightening, out-of-control anger?
The therapist can note where appropriate that parental guidance shapes learning via
role modeling, some of which may not have been ideal or effective. Moreover, the client
probably developed ways ofcoping in childhood—some of which are adaptive, but others of
which take a toll on the client’s current well-being. The client and therapist should explore
and identify which emotional coping styles are problematic for the client now.
Handout 11.2, Social Influences on Your Emotional Experiences, is used in this discussion, as it offers a way to determine how emotions were managed in clients’ families as
well as in other important social contexts in their lives. This form is reviewed with the client in session as a way for the therapist to help the client identify their history of learning
about emotions, the messages they got about emotions while growing up, and their ways of
managing emotions in their current relationships and in their community or culture. For
clients who have had military experience, it can be helpful to add a column to this handout
about messages they got about emotions while in the service. Similarly, explicitly discussing
aspects of a clients personal identity, culture, ethnicity, and other forms of community may
prove very important in some cases and even highlight conflicting messages. Sometimes
clients struggle to identify which emotions they were “supposed” to feel, or even share that
there were no emotions they felt allowed to feel. In these cases, the therapist can shift to
asking what emotions the client was most discouraged from feeling or expressing.


Discuss How Trauma Has Influenced Client’s Feelings

The discussion described above often helps the client to describe how any abuse or other
trauma has influenced their “habits” of emotional awareness and expression, and which of
these habits the client wants to change. Below, we outline common themes in responses to
the question “How have your traumatic experiences affected the way you feel?”, which the
therapist can use to guide this discussion.
Not all clients have the same difficulties. For example, a client may have no difficulty
labeling their feelings, but may respond poorly to them or not know what to do with them.
Some clients may need help primarily in being able to attenuate states of intense emotion,
while others may need a lot of work to help them access any feelings at all (as we have often
seen in cases of posttraumatic numbness).


Confusion

Survivors of childhood maltreatment frequently share that the most common feeling they
have, even years later, is confusion. Confusion, while not exactly a core emotion, accurately
represents something about these clients’ state of affairs. The secrecy and denial typical in

[PAGE 166]

11. The Resource of Feeling 149


families of children who have been abused or neglected have made this particular type of
trauma “the problem with no name.” If the problem had no name for decades, it is unsurprising that the feelings associated with it have no names either. With few labels for their
experience, these survivors often do not know what they felt as children and do not know
exactly what they feel now, or how to link their childhood and adult feelings to their origins.


Chronic fear, hypervigilance, and dread

Basic needs of safety are not met and are often violated in cases of childhood interpersonal
trauma. The burden of managing the trauma (which in itself is a threat to the child's physical
and psychological well-being), and the frequent absence of support or intervention, often
create a chronic sense of anxiety, hypervigilance in monitoring for potential danger, and a
sense of dread and hopelessness about the future.


Emotions as a roller-coaster experience

It is also not unusual for clients to experience alternating acute states of overwhelming emotions and numbing—in effect, an emotional roller coaster. In response to these overwhelming emotions, some survivors learn to “shut down” altogether to protect themselves from the
acute reactions of the repeated trauma, as well as the chronic fear and anxiety.


Keeping a distance from emotions

Survivors of childhood maltreatment often like to keep a distance from strong emotions.
As one client who had been beaten regularly during childhood put it, “T have been on the
wrong end of the stick many times, and I know the damage that anger can do to a body and
soul.” Survivors, by virtue of their own experience as victims, are intimately familiar with
the painful and damaging consequences of intense and out-of-control emotions. Many of
them shy away from experiencing intense emotions, because experience has taught them
that intense emotions are linked to negative outcomes. One goal of therapy is to demonstrate to such clients that these negative outcomes are not always the case and less likely
than they think.


Respect the Client and Their Experiences

Two important attitudes to convey in this discussion concern a client's feelings about themselves and about their family of origin. It is important for the therapist to acknowledge that
the coping strategies of the past that create difficulty in the client's life now were almost
certainly the coping strategies that were the best they could do in their given situation.
Sometimes they were completely necessary and the only adaptive responses available. In
addition, many clients have conflictual bonds to those who maltreated them and may feel
the need to defend the perpetrators’ behaviors during their childhood. For example, a client whose parents drank heavily may say, “They didnt know what they were doing. If they

[PAGE 167]

150 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


hadn't been drinking, they wouldn't have done any of these things.” The therapist should
respond in a way that respects this need, and in language that does not imply judgment—for
example, “Your parents, for whatever reason, were not able to/did not help you to cope with
difficult feelings.”


INTRODUCE THE FEELINGS MONITORING FORM


The therapist explains that this session revolves around the introduction and use of the
deceptively simple Handout 11.3, the Feelings Monitoring Form. This form provides a strategy for systematically identifying feelings, their intensity, situational triggers, and associated thoughts and behavioral responses. It is essentially a telegraphic diary of the client's
emotional life and is used throughout STAIR.
The completion of this form over several weeks, and the development of the skills
described above, are intended to accomplish the therapeutic goal of enhancing the client's
emotional awareness. Practice in using the Feelings Monitoring Form facilitates the labeling of feelings and their links to specific events, clarifies differences between feelings, and
identifies the contexts in which they happen. Lastly, the therapist can point out that the
final column of the form, which asks the client to attend to their behavioral reactions to each
trigger and emotion, provides information about how the client responds to difficult emotions, and so lays the groundwork for later efforts in building coping skills.


Value of Self-Monitoring for the Client

The therapist explains to the client that they will be making daily entries on the Feelings
Monitoring Form between sessions. As the task is repeated over several weeks, the therapist
and client can identify the range and pattern of emotions the client experiences. The therapist
can provide some examples of how this form has been useful to other clients. For example,
some clients discover over weeks of diary keeping that they are really almost always angry
with a sister, or almost always anxious during sex. Other clients learn that feeling angry is
really a cover for feeling hurt. Still others come into each session with nothing written down
and report that they have no feelings. For all these clients, learning about their emotional
styles is one aspect of their journey of self-discovery. It may also provide some evidence of
the types of emotional reactions that clients may have during the emotionally demanding
processing of trauma required during Narrative Therapy in Module II of treatment.


Therapeutic Process and the Therapist’s Attitude

Beyond the immediate value of self-exploration, self-monitoring also provides a client with
an experience in which someone (the therapist) is taking an active interest in the client's
feelings—what they feel, how much they are feeling it, and when they feel it. This approach
may be a relatively novel experience for survivors of childhood trauma, whose feelings
have often been ignored, or who themselves believe that their feelings are irrelevant or too

[PAGE 168]

11. The Resource of Feeling 151


threatening, dangerous, or ugly to be given attention. The simple act and process of working
together and attending to a client’s emotional life ideally allows the client to have their feelings validated or feel more “real” by virtue of being named and shared.


PROVIDE RATIONALE FOR MONITORING
AND UNDERSTANDING FEELINGS


Clients need a rationale for why they should take the time to monitor and understand their
feelings. Discussion about feelings may elicit distress, and some clients at this point may
reconsider their desire to come into contact with their feelings, their need to change, and
their commitment to the therapy. It is often helpful for the therapist to provide a supportive
reminder that they have chosen this therapy in order to live the life they want. Some of the
reasons our clients have found monitoring feelings to be valuable are listed below:


“My danger sensor is smashed, and I cant tell what is safe and what is threatening.”
“I never know what I’m fveeling. A friend asks, Are you happy?’ and I dont know!”
“T feel nothing. And then a small thing happens, and I cant get out ofbed.”
“My feelings are unpredictable and seem to come out of nowhere.”
“T cant trust my feelings, so I try not to feel anything.”
“T just feel angry all the time.”


Rehabilitation of the Arousal/Threat System

One of the primary reasons for clients to take the time to monitor and understand their feelings is that accurate perceptions of and reactions to emotions contribute to adaptive living.
For all ofus, emotions provide us with information and help guide our decisions and behaviors. The insights provided by emotions are especially pertinent for a client who requires
assistance in understanding what situations to approach or avoid. One of the clients quoted
above reported that she had been beaten in such an indiscriminate fashion in a series of
unexpected assaults that she felt as if her “danger sensor” was smashed; in other words,
she had lost all capability of distinguishing situations in which she was safe from those that
might be an immediate threat to her well-being. Rather incongruously, she was chronically
hypervigilant and fearful of going outdoors, but on those rare occasions when she elected to
go out, she thought nothing of a stroll through a poorly lit park at night. She had been raped
in broad daylight, and as a child had been assaulted for no apparent reason. The world of
safety-threat cues did not apply. Her threat detection system was badly out of kilter. Persons with a history of sexual abuse are particularly prone to being victimized repeatedly and
will greatly benefit from being able to interpret emotional cues accurately and then make
appropriate choices to keep themselves safe. One goal of this treatment is to rehabilitate the
emotional threat system that has been distorted by interpersonal trauma. Regular review of
the Feelings Monitoring Form to identify feelings of threat (or their absence) is a first step
in this process.

[PAGE 169]

152 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Enhanced Confidence in Using Feelings to Guide Decisions
and Actions

Many survivors of childhood maltreatment have little confidence in their emotional perceptions, and thus feel stymied or suffer severe indecision because they do not trust their
emotional experiences as an accurate source of information. Part of the goal in this series of
interventions is to build such clients’ confidence that they are having emotional experiences
for good reasons, so that these experiences become a resource for the survivors in simplifying daily life. Building and strengthening emotion regulation skills are difficult tasks. Thus
a therapist will want to highlight the evolution of a client's progress through treatment from
developing the ability to identify and label emotions, to gaining the skills necessary to regulate them.


Enhanced Engagement in Living and the Possibility of Pleasure
and Happiness

Awareness of feelings can help clients make decisions not only to live more safely, but also
to live with greater engagement and satisfaction, both about themselves and about their
relationships with others. Once clients feel relatively safe, they can turn their attention
to experiencing positive feelings and identifying positive life goals. A survivor's increasing awareness of positive feelings, and when, where, and with whom they occur, can lead
to greater clarity about the survivor's desires and wishes for their work life and personal
relationships. It can lead to the pursuit of personal goals and values that are intrinsically
pleasurable, satisfying, or meaningful to the client, such as sports, dance, or community
engagement. Lastly, the clients ability to “follow their feelings” can ignite a sense of creativity and self-appreciation that may never have emerged or may have been lost a long time
ago. It is often worthwhile for the therapist to note that approaching pleasure and positive
experiences can be frightening to a survivor, for fear of disappointment or of simply being
overwhelmed with sensation or arousal. One of the treatment goals will be to help such a
survivor modulate their feelings and manage their distress, particularly in the pursuit of
valued positive life goals.


USE CHANNELS OF EMOTION TO HELP ORGANIZE EXPERIENCE


For clients who find learning to name feelings especially daunting, labeling a sensation or
physical reaction is a useful first step. Clients are usually able to identify experiences of
acute sensations or rapid changes in their bodies or physical states, such as sweaty hands
and racing heart. The next step is to identify the associated thoughts and behaviors and
make an inference to an emotional label. For example, a racing heart and the thought “I'm
going to fail my job interview tomorrow’ may describe anxiety. Therapist and client can
review a model of emotion that breaks down emotional experiencing into three channels
or modes: body, thoughts, and behaviors. The client can learn to become more aware of

[PAGE 170]

11. The Resource of Feeling 153


bodily sensations and changes in these sensations as an entry point to connecting to feelings. Awareness of bodily sensations can be followed by questioning or observing associated
thoughts and behavior. All of these combined elements ultimately contribute to the experience of an emotion.
In this part of this session, the therapist introduces the “three channels of emotion”
model. The basic concepts are only briefly described here, as the model is elaborated over
the following two sessions. The causal relationships among thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are multidirectional; a change in any one of these can cause or reflect a change in any
other. We begin this discussion with the body channel, because many clients do not have
experience with systematically linking these sensations to their thoughts and behaviors.
Given that most emotions are linked to physiological changes, an effort to compose a list
of commonly experienced physiological changes is worthwhile. The therapist and client
can generate such a list, including such phenomena as alterations in heart rate, amount of
sweating, muscle tension, and so on. This list can be followed by the names of emotions that
are typically paired with specific bodily changes for the client. For example, an increase in
heartbeat may reflect a myriad of emotions, such as the approach of a potential mugger or
the presence of a romantic partner. Rapid breathing can be a sign of either anger or extraordinary happiness. Once these variations are noted, the client can then begin to link their
own physiological changes with emotion labels, via inference and interpretation from their
thoughts and behaviors.
Essentially, an emotion is a conscious or unconscious feeling associated with or triggered by behaviors or thoughts. The therapist and client should examine methods of how to
recognize these changes and distinguish their meanings. The therapist can use examples,
such as the one provided in Box 11.2, to illustrate how the channels interact in a dynamic
process and serve to organize emotional experiences. In this scenario, the therapist and client can identify corresponding bodily sensations (i.e., muscle tension), thoughts (i.e., “Who
do they think they are?”), and behaviors (i.e., yelling) as a way to arrive at labeling the specific emotional experience of anger. Using this and other examples, the therapist can then
demonstrate to the client how the three channels can then be mapped onto the Feelings
Monitoring Form. In turn, the channel model can also help clients in using the information
recorded on the Feelings Monitoring Form to help them determine more specifically where
their emotional problems lie.
Lastly, once the client understands the elements in an emotion, and knows how to
identify them and how to understand their interrelationships, the therapist can then raise
another important function of the three-channel model—identifying emotion regulation
solutions—and indicate how this goal will be explored in future sessions. Each channel
has corresponding coping strategies. Using the information in Handout 11.4, Examples of
Emotion Regulation Coping Skills for the Three Channels of Emotion, the therapist can
briefly preview some examples of these different strategies to be elaborated in the next two
sessions. At this time the client can also be given Handout 11.5, the Three Channels Skills
Graphic, with the therapist explaining that it will be used regularly from now on to help
the client select some of the skills in each channel, based on their preferences and on the
particular situations they are likely to encounter.

[PAGE 171]

154 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Introduction to the Three Channels of Emotion

EXAMPLE: A couple cuts in line at the supermarket ahead of you.


Body

Muscle tension
Hands clenched
Shallow breath
Increased heart rate


Thoughts Behavior

“Who do they think Yell
they are?” Ask them to get to
“That's unfair.” the back of the line
“Do they think | will let Do nothing
them get away Stew
with it?”


DESCRIBE THE FUNCTIONS OF FEELINGS


In order to fully enlist a client in the central task of identifying feelings, the therapist
needs to help the client understand why it is essential for making meaningful changes and
improvements in their life. The therapist conveys to the client that emotions function in the
following three critical ways: (1) They act as messengers and provide important data that
help guide our decisions and actions; (2) they tell us who we are (e.g., our likes and dislikes)
and help us determine our valued life goals; and (3) they help us to communicate with other
people, especially concerning our needs, limits, intentions, and desires in our relationships.
The therapist shares with the client that after exposure to trauma our emotional systems
are flooded, which can result in feelings’ becoming overwhelmingly intense or shut down.
In both responses, the ability to rely on emotions is disrupted. One goal of STAIR is to help
them tap into their feelings in a safe way so they can begin to trust and use them in helpful
ways. Introducing Handout 11.6, Negative and Positive Emotions as Messengers, is a way
the therapist can discuss some of the specific and adaptive functions of basic emotions.


IDENTIFY AND DISCUSS CLIENT’S PROBLEMATIC EMOTIONS


This part of this session identifies the important and helpful functions of emotion and the
ways in which trauma can disturb the experience and the adaptive function of emotions.

[PAGE 172]

11. The Resource of Feeling 155


Certain emotional states can become chronic for survivors of trauma in a way that is no
longer useful, but instead becomes limiting and painful. The therapist can select for discussion specific emotions discussed below with which the client may be particularly burdened.
This material provides a starting point for talking about how trauma conspires to create
dysregulation of these emotions, and what can be done to bring these feelings “back in line”
or into synchrony with the clients goals of adaptive and healthy functioning. The aims here
are to help the client understand that (1) they feel the way they do for a reason, so that they
become less confused and overwhelmed by their feelings; (2) these feelings have an important and possibly beneficial presence in their life; and (3) a focused treatment goal will be
to have the client learn to master and modulate their feelings. In the descriptions below,
we have identified coping strategies used in this treatment that we have found to be “good
matches’ for modulating these particular emotions.


Anxiety

Anxiety is a state of arousal that often signals some kind of danger. It is common among
survivors of trauma because it is typically generated by experiences that are unsafe, unpredictable, uncontrollable, or unfamiliar—the very characteristics of traumatic events. Anxiety has an adaptive function, which is to ensure readiness for coping with an unidentified
threat. It informs us to stop what we are doing, in order to attend to and plan for response
to an imminent danger. This experience of “heightened alert” often becomes chronic among
survivors oftrauma, however, and as a result no longer serves as a reliable indicator of threat.
This reaction may persist because there are multiple, unidentified traumatic reminders in
the environment that trigger anxiety, or because the trauma has caused the survivors both
psychologically and biologically to adapt to and persist at an anxious set point.
A chronic state of anxious apprehension is very draining. It is often like having one’s
feet simultaneously on both the gas and brake pedals ofa car: The individual is aroused and
ready to go, but resisting the initiation of action. When the physiological arousal initiated by
anxiety is used toward some action (e.g., fight or flight), the arousal may be hardly noticed;
indeed, the arousal and the action can flow as one. If no action is or can be taken, however,
the arousal “idles” and continues uncomfortably until it (and the individual) is exhausted.
Accordingly, it is easy to see why effective modulation of anxiety involves the reduction of
arousal in the body (e.g., Focused Breathing), the evaluation of thoughts (“I am safe here”),
and the selection of behaviors that integrate arousal and movement. Indeed, one of the most
important and long-term goals of the treatment is the perfect antidote to unfocused anxiety—that is, to replace feelings of helplessness and uncertainty with ones of competence
and confidence.


Anger

Anger is a natural feeling regardless of one’s exposure to trauma, and it is certainly a justified response to childhood mistreatment. Anger is adaptive when it prepares us for active
coping, invigorates and sustains our actions, and fuels a healthy sense of power or agency—
all part of a fight response to mistreatment. However, anger becomes problematic when it

[PAGE 173]

156 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


is misdirected toward people or situations unrelated to the trauma or other real threat, or
expressed as violence toward self (e.g., self-injury) or others (e.g., physical assault). Additionally, the intensity of anger, even when it is warranted, can do harm to important relationships or interfere with valued support from others, if it is not communicated in a healthy
manner. Misplaced or intense anger, particularly when it leads to destructive behaviors, can
have long-term negative social and legal consequences.
To use anger effectively, a client must recognize it, modulate it, and direct it appropriately. Anger management strategies often include the combined recognition and delay of its
expression (counting to 10, leaving the situation); reduction of its intensity (Focused Breathing, exercising); appraisal of the outcome of expressing the anger (“What will be the result
of this action? Is it consistent with my goals?”); and appraisal of the accuracy of the source
of the anger (At whom am I angry? What in this situation has made me angry?”) Skills in
the ability to discriminate between feelings and goals, particularly interpersonal goals, are
the topics of several later STAIR sessions (Sessions 6-10).


Sadness

Sadness is an understandable reaction to loss or change. It can serve the purpose of signaling us to slow down and give ourselves time to reflect, rest, and recover. However, when
sadness becomes a more chronic and generalized state, it can turn into depression. In contrast to anxiety, which is a state of high-arousal negative emotion, depression is a state of
low-arousal negative emotion. It is accompanied by a sustained absence of pleasure and
excitement, and by disengagement from the world. Whereas anxiety is a state of heightened
readiness to respond, depression is a state of giving up any active attempt to cope. It is associated with the view and thought that nothing can be done and no effective action can be
taken. Despite their contrasting characteristics, many people experience both anxiety and
depression in alternating fashion. A person may become highly anxious in anticipation of a
feared or threatening event, but may then give up with a sense of severe sadness or become
depressed when the outcome of the event is negative.
It is not surprising that depression is so often associated with chronic maltreatment
by caregivers. Survivors of such maltreatment often reason that it happened because they
deserved it—that they failed in some way, or even that they failed to protect themselves,
regardless of the reason for it. In addition, sexual or physical abuse in particular is essentially a form of profound loss. Those abused by caregivers have been psychologically abandoned and have experienced losses at multiple levels, including loss of safety, security, and
love. Repeated, inescapable physical or sexual abuse also contributes to a sense of helplessness and lack of control. Survivors have often experienced situations where they could not
control their circumstances or create other circumstances where they could feel safe, be
free from suffering, or obtain important nurturance or human warmth and connection.
Thus, unlike normal experiences of sadness, the depression that results from early chronic
trauma involves a lack of agency and a sense of helplessness to change one’s circumstances.
Several components of this treatment serve to counter depression and similar phenomena. The client learns to recognize that their early circumstances—which more than
justified their depression—no longer apply to their current situation. The client now can

[PAGE 174]

11. The Resource of Feeling 157


experience mastery of their environment, and can now actively seek safety and human connection. The reality of this proposal emerges in the treatment through the creation of new
experiences of safety, mastery, and pleasure. These new experiences include the active role
playing of alternative experiences later in the treatment; revision of relationship models;
intentional efforts at experiencing pleasure; and the provision of energy, nurturance, and
support in the therapeutic alliance. The client also experiences general mastery through
growing emotional and social competence. Finally, in the second phase of this treatment,
mastery of symptoms in general and of the clients trauma history in particular results from
the successful completion of narrative work.


Dissociation

Dissociation is an experience in which a person feels cognitively and emotionally removed
from the current environment. Dissociation is an automatic response to overwhelming emotions. It is a protective response in which the individual “escapes” from the pain or intensity
of an unbearable emotion. Dissociation is most frequently a response to severe fear, anxiety,
or acute nonspecific distress. It is a reaction that is fairly unique to specific types of traumatic situations—ones that are so uncontrollable, unavoidable, and threatening that physical escape is impossible.
The therapist should discuss dissociation in this session only for those clients who have
experienced it. A therapist and client will be familiar with the clients tendencies to dissociate as a result of the evaluation. For clients who experience dissociation, a discussion of its
nature and function can evolve as follows.
Dissociation may be seen by the therapist and experienced by the client as an emotional “shutting down,” where the client shifts from a feeling state into an affectless one. In
the cognitive dimension, a client may lose touch with a sense of being present in the here
and now; they may perceive themselves as either “somewhere else” or “nowhere.” Dissociation has a protective function, but also has a substantial cost: The individual loses touch with
present reality, which can put them in greater danger or can delay a response that would
be effective in the moment but will have little value later. Most important, dissociation is
often reported as a distressing experience in and of itself; it can be deeply disturbing and
disorienting.
The intervention for dissociation is essentially prevention, with some intervention at
earlier stages of the experience when possible. Becoming skilled at modulating feelings
will reduce the risk and the need for dissociation. Although dissociation may have been the
only possible coping response for the client during childhood, their life circumstances have
changed, and it is likely that other forms of emotion regulation will now be more effective.
In addition, in the absence of the opportunity to learn other strategies, the client may have
become overreliant on dissociation, so that it is now a response of habit rather than necessity. Through ongoing use of the Feelings Monitoring Form, the client can identify and
track emotions that tend to trigger dissociation, as well as particular individuals and situations that tend to provoke it. The client can then act to avoid these triggers or plan for more
adaptive responses accordingly. The strengthening of emotion regulation capacities, particularly in regard to triggering emotions, typically reduces dissociative responses through

[PAGE 175]

158 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


prevention. Nevertheless, as the client gains new mastery, they may still have moments
of dissociation that need immediate intervention. For moments where the client begins
to notice early signs of dissociation, the therapist can offer various options for grounding
techniques that keep the client in the present moment, aware of their surroundings, and
capable of more adaptive action. Skills such as Focused Breathing, other mindfulness-based
exercises, Soothing the Senses, and Take a Break/Time Out are some examples the therapist
can practice with the client to help them prepare.


DISCUSS DISCRIMINATION AMONG DIFFERENT KINDS
OF FEELINGS


As discussed above, many people with histories of trauma become chronically anxious and
frequently flooded with sensations, which interfere with their ability to differentiate feeling states. In addition, some survivors of trauma have not been encouraged to explore the
wide range of feelings that can be expressed and understood. This restricted knowledge
of feelings limits their self-awareness and their evaluation of and communication with
others.
There are several different methods for enhancing a client's capacity for discriminating
feelings and expanding an emotional vocabulary. First, we have found it helpful if the therapist provides the client with a list of feeling words (see Handout 11.7, the Feelings List). The
client can savor the luxury of a rich set of feeling words and consider which are appropriate
descriptors of either their current experience or their typical mood.
The Feelings Wheel (Handout 11.8) provides a visual organization of feeling states by
valence, type of emotion, and intensity. It allows the client to identify a single emotion and
follow the radial depiction of related emotions, or those that may result from the original
emotion, given certain circumstances. Through reviewing these handouts, the client may
become more aware of the wide variety of emotions and their complex relationship to one
another. The therapist can point out that more than one feeling can be involved in an emotional experience. For example, sadness and anger may go together, as may demoralization
and anxiety. Moreover, contrasting or opposing emotions can occur together, such as hatred
and pity, or love and fear. The client can provide examples of times when they have felt such
combined emotions and how they handled them in specific circumstances.
When to introduce the Feelings List and the Feelings Wheel can be determined by the
therapist and client. Some therapist and clients find it easier to use these tools in an interactive way during the completion of the Feelings Monitoring Form as described below, and
they are most welcome to do that.


PRACTICE USING THE FEELINGS MONITORING FORM TOGETHER


The goal of this and the next few sessions is to impart several simple and individually tailored methods for the client to be able to adequately identify and label feeling states, and to
understand how such interpretations affect behavioral actions. The best way for the client

[PAGE 176]

11. The Resource of Feeling 159


to learn all this, however, is simply to work through the Feelings Monitoring Form with the
therapist.
An ultimate goal of the treatment is for clients to have the freedom and ability to experience emotions with greater awareness (and less intensity, if they wish), and to engage in a
broader range of behavioral reactions than those depicted in this scenario.
Typical examples of emotions that generally appear in self-monitoring exercises are
feelings of sadness, anxiety, or anger. Yet there will be situations where clients will only
be able to write that they felt “overwhelmed” or “upset.” In these instances, the therapist
can provide positive feedback regarding their ability to identify these states, and work with
them to identify and label more completely the specific emotion(s) involved, often by helping a client explore the experience in all three channels of emotion. For example, the therapist can pose questions such as “Were you crying?’, “What were you thinking to yourself?”,
“Did your muscles feel tense?”, or “What other physical sensations were you aware of?” in
order to tease out specific emotions and their indicators.


CASE EXAMPLE: GETTING SPECIFIC


Below, we provide a case example of how a client and therapist discussed and worked
through filling out the Feelings Monitoring Form (Handout 11.3) for the first time after it
was introduced. See Box 11.3 to see what the completed form might have looked like. This
case demonstrates how self-monitoring provided a structure and process that helped this
client develop clarity and insight about the presence and diversity of her feelings, about the
way certain feelings predominated in her daily life, and about the presence of a pattern or
typical mode of reaction to these feelings.
The client, Petra, had been physically and sexually abused by her father, as well as
physically abused by several other caregivers throughout her childhood. Although she was
able to hold a job and had achieved a relative degree of success there, she had few friends
and struggled with binge eating and depression. When the therapist introduced the Feelings Monitoring Form to her, along with the Feelings Wheel, she was intrigued by the
number of words she could use to describe a feeling.


identifying Triggering Situation and Feelings

The situation Petra described when asked to identify a time when she'd had strong feelings
was a conflict with her son. She said she'd felt “upset” when he would not put his phone
away at the dinner table after she had asked him to repeatedly. With the help of the Feelings Wheel and some prompting of “What else did you feel?”, she was able to identify more
specific feelings—anger, shame, and sadness. In addition, it was helpful for the therapist
to ask her how her body felt, so that she could identify some of the physical connections to
her emotions. For example, her fists were clenched, she was flushed, she had a headache,
and she was breathing quickly. After the feelings were labeled, the therapist discussed with
her that it is possible to have more than one feeling at a time, and that while this might be
confusing occasionally, it is normal.

[PAGE 177]

:a¡duiex3 S,eıyad payajdwoy shua94 Sunoyuoy W104

Áysua]ul Aysuayuj
]e 11815 PAEMIJOYY
Buueßßu] uonenys Buijee4| (01-0) |uoneing siybnoyL Jolneyog (01-0) |¿9MJ99H3
vos 4,mpıp and sly sabuy OT JVAIAIS sanoy |
2H us90p 9, 309ds24 ‘aw |
bulgoz v ajoym b ON
auoyd homo 30 ay2 puo ay syxulyz ay vv boq| jo hpuvo
2/902 49440 |parysv 202 abozuvapy jo ‘gm
wily 02 ‘Aypazvadas

awvs aWDYS oT awvSs m] v pog Yayiz0wm awmvS oT ON
160
awvs ssaupvs Z awvs Jl ay pao] ‘aw ay awvs ja ON
pmom Op JOYM |‘So
puv pynom 30U UVM


02 zasdn “aw


uolenys 4sHuljee siybnoyL JO/Ney9g ynsoy

[PAGE 178]

11. The Resource of Feeling 161


identifying Intensity and Duration of Feelings

Together, Petra and her therapist numbered the intensity of each feeling she'd had on a
scale of 1-10, where 10 was the most she could ever imagine feeling something (e.g., so
angry she could explode, so ashamed she felt like “a total failure,” so sad she could not think
of anything positive) and 1 was the least. By labeling the intensity, Petra began to develop
perspective on the degree of emotions she was experiencing in various situations, rather
than having all of her feelings blend into one big, unmanageable, and scary knot. She initially was not sure how long the feelings had lasted, but then remembered that she did not
feel any better until she woke up the next morning, so her feelings lasted for several hours
(from after dinner until she went to bed).


identifying Thoughts

The next step, and one of the hardest, was for Petra and her therapist to figure out the
thoughts that went along with her emotions. Since Petra had never tried to link her thoughts
to her feelings before, the therapist had to help her out with suggestions of things she might
have been thinking. In discussing the situation at home, they noticed that Petra felt responsible for her son's behavior, and that when he failed to do something, she felt like a failure
too. So, her shame and sadness were coming from thoughts like “Im a bad mother,” and
“If he really loved me, he would do what I ask, and would not want to upset me.” She was
also thinking, “He doesnt respect me... , which led to frustration with her son and with
herself. Her anger was connected to thoughts such as “.. . he thinks he can take advantage
of me.”


identifying Responses and Coping Strategies

Eventually, Petra and the therapist would work on replacing this kind of thinking with
more positive and less self-blaming thoughts, but for now they just tried to identify what she
did in response to the feelings. To make herself feel better, Petra ate a whole bag of candy.
She had shared earlier in the treatment that she had developed a problem with emotional
eating when she was younger, and that she continued to find herself turning to food when
she felt particularly distressed. Petra was aware that the comfort and distraction food often
provided were temporary. She understood clearly in this example that eating was not an
effective coping strategy, and, if anything, it had made her feel worse; this was reflected
in her answers when the therapist asked her to rerate the intensity of her feelings after her
behavioral response.


Developing Self-Awareness

Once she had learned how to monitor her feelings in session, Petra was able to complete further copies of the Feelings Monitoring Form over the course of the following week. When
she came back to session she said to the therapist, “I was going to tell you I'd had a good

[PAGE 179]

162 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


week, but when I looked back at my forms, I realized Pd felt bad almost every day!” In looking at the forms together, Petra and the therapist not only noticed when and where she was
feeling bad, they also noticed that whenever she had strong feelings, she either went on an
eating binge, immersed herself in her work, or went to sleep for a long time. Basically, all of
her coping responses for strong emotion involved escape tactics. One of the first therapeutic
tasks became helping Petra find additional coping responses for managing her feelings.


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


Especially in the first few sessions, it is worthwhile for the therapist to review the key ideas
and goals at the end of each session, as many clients will be unfamiliar with these concepts
and may be feeling anxious and somewhat distracted. In summary, in this session, the therapist discusses with the client how the client’s experience of trauma has impaired their ability to identify and understand their feelings. The client and therapist have worked together
to identify the client’s emotion regulation difficulties. The three channels of emotion have
been introduced: body, thoughts, and behaviors. The therapist and client have practiced
using the three channels to help identify how each element is related in a specific emotion
(e.g., anger).
To help the client identify their feelings, the therapist has reviewed the rationale for
and process of self-monitoring feelings. The therapist and client have filled out Handout
11.3, the Feelings Monitoring Form, together. The therapist has also reviewed two other
emotion identification tools with the client: Handout 11.7, the Feelings List, and Handout
11.8, the Feelings Wheel.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


At the end of each session, the therapist presents the rationale for skills practice between
sessions. After doing so, the therapist and client collaboratively plan for specific practice
related to the session. One primary type of practice after Session 2 is completion of the
Feelings Monitoring Form: The client will complete at least one copy of this form per day
until the next session. The form will indicate situations the client faced that raised strong
feelings, and will also provide data on the client’s coping strategies. The therapist and client
will benefit from reviewing the completed forms at the beginning of the next session. This
way, both can address any practical difficulties or misunderstandings regarding the use of
the form, such as what information goes in which column. If necessary, the therapist and
client can again complete the Feelings Monitoring Form together (e.g., if the client has not
completed the work during the week, or if aspects of the experience are unclear to the client).
Once the client has become more adept at completing these assignments, the therapist can emphasize the utility of this form in providing important data for the therapeutic
sessions and allowing the therapist a window into the client’s real-world experiences. It is

[PAGE 180]

11. The Resource of Feeling 163


also beneficial for the therapist to stress the importance of recording the details as soon
as possible after the moment, perhaps by saying something like this: “Filling this form out
soon after the experience or trigger will provide the two of us the most helpful and accurate
data.” The therapist can mention explicitly that the client can add both positive and negative
examples of emotions and outcomes of their feelings. All kinds of emotional experiences can
provide information helpful in helping the client meet their therapeutic goals.
In addition, the client is instructed to continue to practice Focused Breathing twice a
day. The therapist provides the client with several copies of the Feelings Monitoring Form
(Handout 11.3), as well as copies of each of the other handouts from the session (Handouts
11.1, 11.2, and 11.4 through 11.8) for the client’s continued review.

[PAGE 181]

The Impact of Childhood Abuse and Neglect
on Emotion Regulation
For many people, experiences of abuse and neglect in childhood have a powerful impact on emotional functioning in adulthood. Good parenting provides children with emotion regulation skills, which
include the ability to identify feelings, understand their sources, and manage them for optimal functioning. Abuse and neglect elicit a range of powerful and confusing feelings. Often survivors of childhood abuse and neglect have been raised in a family context where caregivers offer poor soothing
during times of distress and poor guidance in modulating feelings. Many survivors feel overwhelmed
by their emotions, or, in contrast, feel numb and unable to experience many or all emotions.


TYPES OF EMOTION REGULATION DIFFICULTIES

Difficulties in emotion regulation vary by person and sometimes by situation. Some people have
trouble labeling and identifying their feelings. They may feel either “bad” or “OK,” and have little
sense of differences between their emotions (for example, anxiety vs. sadness). Other people lack
an understanding of what triggers their feelings. It may seem that their emotions randomly come “out
of the blue” and make no sense. Many people can learn to recognize a “triggering situation,” but will
have more difficulty knowing what to do with the intense feelings that emerge. Such feelings may be
experienced as overwhelming or even dangerous, and people often feel ill equipped to handle them.


THE ROLES OF FEELINGS

Learning how to modulate and attend to feelings is a critical skill, because feelings, once managed,
serve important roles in effective living. One role of emotions is to serve as guides for action. For
example, a feeling of fear can guide you to leave an unsafe situation and take steps to ensure safety.
Anxiety can be adaptive, but when chronic and excessive, it floods the ability to differentiate feeling
states. It causes people to overreact to situations, or to underreact because they are trying so hard
not to overreact.
Feelings also contribute to effectively communicating how you feel and what you need from
others. Some people who have experienced trauma are chronically anxious, angry, or sad, or are so
numbed that they cannot use this kind of information. By working on attending to your feelings and
modulating them, you will be able to make better use of information from your feelings and to express
them more effectively.
Lastly, feelings can be used to inform you about your preferences (likes and dislikes) and to help
guide you in the selection of valued life goals. Awareness of feelings includes awareness of positive
feelings and, in combination with emotion modulation skills, can enhance your experience of life, your
creativity, and your appreciation of yourself.


(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


164

[PAGE 182]

The Impact of Childhood Abuse and Neglect on Emotion Regulation (page 2 of 2)

FEELINGS MONITORING FORM

One way to begin learning how to identify feeling states and their triggers is to monitor your feelings
in different situations. Using the Feelings Monitoring Form, you will practice labeling your feelings and
identifying the situations and thoughts that trigger those feelings. With your therapist, you will review
your completed copies of this form to increase your skills in identifying feelings and their triggers and
to build your awareness of the patterns in your feelings. The completed copies of the form will also
serve as important data for developing new coping strategies.


165

[PAGE 183]

Social Influences on Your Emotional Experiences
What are the messages you have received about emotions throughout your life?


Growing Up Current Relationships Community/Society
(Examples: your family, teachers, friends) (Examples: close friends, romantic (Examples: military, culture, religious
partner) community)

Which emotions
should you feel?


How should
991
you cope with
emotions?


How should you
express your

emotions?


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and
Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page
for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 184]

Feelings Monitoring Form

Intensity Intensity
at Start Afterward
Triggering Situation Feeling (0-10) | Duration Thoughts Behavior (0-10) Effective?


791


Situation Feelings Thoughts Behavior Result


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and
Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page
for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 185]

Examples of Emotion Regulation Coping Skills
for the Three Channels of Emotion
THREE CHANNELS OF EMOTION

To help us explore our feelings, we can think of our emotional experiences as expressed through three
channels: body, thought, and behavior.
The “body channel” is what we feel physically in our bodies. For example, when we're feeling
anxious, we may notice that our breathing quickens, our heart rate increases, and we sweat or shake.
The “thought channel” includes what we say to ourselves, our beliefs, and the attributions we
make. For example, when we're feeling anxious, we may think to ourselves, “I’m such a loser,” or “I
can't trust anyone.” These thoughts contribute to and maintain distress.
Finally, the “behavior channel” consists of what we actually do in response to the distress. For
example, when we’re feeling anxious, we may overeat, get into a fight with someone, or distract ourselves with another activity.
Of course, there are healthier ways to cope and experience emotion in each channel, and that’s
what this treatment is all about!


EXAMPLES OF COPING SKILLS FOR EACH CHANNEL

Because these channels are interconnected, we can target interventions at any one channel. The
bonus effect is that targeting one channel will have an impact on the other channels as well. People
differ about which channel feels easiest to tackle first. Not all people feel relief from using each of
these coping skills. By trying each one, you'll find which skills work best for you!
In the body channel, Focused Breathing helps to reduce the bodily symptoms of distress. That’s
why you have learned Focused Breathing first! Other relaxation techniques can also help in this way,
so you don’t have to stop there.
In the thought channel, Thought Shifting can be effective. Examples of Thought Shifting include
cleaning your home, calling a friend, planning a vacation, recalling pleasant past events, watching a
funny movie, and counting backward by sevens. Positive Imagery can also intervene in the thought
channel. This technique involves calling to mind a situation or setting (real or imagined) in which you
feel calm and happy. To get the most benefit from Positive Imagery, you should make the image as
clear as possible by imagining how the place looks, smells, feels, and so forth. Another thought channel skill is making Positive Self-Statements. When your thoughts are self-critical, it can be useful to
weaken those negative thoughts by formulating positive responses. For example, in response to the
thought “I’m a loser,” you may tell yourself, “m doing my best.”
In the behavior channel, Take a Break/Time Out and Replacement Behaviors are helpful. Time
Out involves leaving a difficult situation for a period of time to reduce your distress before responding.
For example, if you’re having a fight with a friend, you can tell your friend that you will finish the discussion in an hour, and then go out for a walk to give yourself time to calm down. Engaging in Replacement Behaviors entails doing pleasurable or neutral activities to distract yourself from distress.
Note that these are all just examples of many options you can select in each of the channels. You
and your therapist can select what you think works best for you and what might be appropriate for any
given situation.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


168

[PAGE 186]

Three Channels Skills Graphic

Skills Practice
Check which of these skills you want
to practice on your own. Remember,
Body
practicing helps you: Ol Focused Breathing
e Use the skill. Ol Basic Self-Care
e Troubleshoot any problems with O Soothing the Senses
using it. 9
e Add it to your toolbox for when O Progressive Muscle Relaxation
you need it most. O Other Mindfulness-Based
Exercises for the Body


691


Thoughts Behavior

Ol Emotion Surfing O Take a Break/Time Out
Ol Evidence Technique or Slow Down
A \


L] Thought Shifting O Replacement Behaviors

O Positive Imagery Ol Opposite Action

LJ Reminders/Reframes O Ask for Help/Seek Support
Ol Positive Self-Statements O Plan Pleasurable Activities


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and
Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page
for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 187]

Negative and Positive Emotions as Messengers

Emotion Purpose

Fear or anxiety | Keeps you safe.


Anger Provides warning that action may be needed.


Sadness Provides time to rest and reevaluate.


Guilt Lets you review what has been done and make amends as
appropriate.

Happiness Reinforces certain actions and relationships; supports
engagementin life.

Pride Indicates a positive action or result; builds self-esteem/sense
of worth.

Love Helps maintain connection with others, even in times of
conflict!


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


170

[PAGE 188]

Feelings List
Affectionate Glad Relaxed
Afraid Gloomy Relieved
Amused Grateful Resentful
Angry Great Resigned
Annoyed Guilty Sad
Anxious Happy Safe
Apathetic Hateful Satisfied
Apprehensive Helpless Secure
Ashamed Hopeless Sexy
Bitter Horrified Shy
Bored Hostile Silly
Calm Impatient Strong
Capable Inadequate Stubborn
Cheerful Inhibited Stuck
Comfortable Irritated Supportive
Competent Isolated Sympathetic
Concerned Jealous Tearful
Confident Joyful Tender
Confused Lonely Terrified
Contemptuous Loved Threatened
Controlled Loving Thrilled
Curious Loyal Touchy
Defeated Manipulated Trapped
Dejected Manipulative Troubled
Delighted Melancholy Unappreciated
Depressed Miserable Uncertain
Desirable Misunderstood Understood
Despairing Muddled Uneasy
Desperate Needy Unfulfilled
Determined Nervous Unimportant
Devastated Numb Unloved
Disappointed Out of control Upset
Discouraged Outraged Uptight
Disgusted Overwhelmed Used
Disillusioned Panicky Useless
Distrustful Passionate Victimized
Embarrassed Peaceful Violated
Enraged Pessimistic Vulnerable
Excited Pleased Withdrawn
Frantic Powerful Wonderful
Frightened Prejudiced Worn out
Frustrated Pressured Worried
Fulfilled Proud Worthwhile
Furious Provoked Wronged
Generous Put down Yearning


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


171

[PAGE 189]

HANDOUT 11.8

Feelings Wheel


scared


From Treating Surv
ivors of Childhood Abu
se and Interpersonal
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Trauma, Second Edit
Kile M. Ortigo, Christie ion: STAIR Narrativ
e Therapy by Marylen
sion to photocopy Jackson, and Karestan e
this materia] is gran C. Koenen. Copyright
ted to purchasers O 2020 The Guilford
details). Purchasers can of this book for pers Press. Permis-
download additional copi onal use or use with
es of this material (see clients (see copyrig
ht page for
the box at the end of the
table of contents).


172

[PAGE 190]

Emotion Regulation
Focus on the Body


The art of soothing ourselves is a fundamental life skill.
— DANIEL GOLEMAN (1995, p. 57)


Clients who have been traumatized as children appear both to experience more negative
feelings and to have more difficulty coping with feelings than those who have not experienced childhood trauma. Often such clients will vacillate between being overwhelmed by
distress and feeling nothing or numb. Clients often attempt to cope with overwhelming
feelings via strategies that make them feel better in the short run but are ultimately selfdestructive. These attempts to cope include using alcohol or other substances and engaging in other self-injurious behaviors (e.g., self-cutting or bingeing and purging). Session 2
has focused on helping clients know what they are experiencing by learning to name and
describe their feelings. This exercise allows the clients to begin experiencing greater emotional awareness in daily life. The primary goal of Session 3 is to help clients start the process
of developing and strengthening skills that will enable them to regulate feelings without
resorting to self-destructive attempts to cope. Developing new, healthy skills will enhance
their competence and confidence in the process of exploring emotion-laden experiences,
especially for clients who will be going on to the Narrative Therapy module of treatment.
The emotion regulation skills proposed here build on Session 2's organization of emotional responses into three channels or modes of experiencing (body, thought, and behavior).
This session focuses on the concept of emotion regulation, with an emphasis on strengthening capacities for self-soothing in the physical ways emotions are felt within the body—what
we call the “body channel” of emotion. The exercises presented here aim to strengthen
emotion regulation within the body channel as the first target for developing new skills,
for several reasons. First, the connection between body and emotions is fundamental from
a physiological standpoint. Feeling states often start (if not also end) in the limbic system
or the “animal brain.” Humans have developed many higher-order ways to interpret and
understand feelings, but the foundation often remains in the physical body.


173

[PAGE 191]

174 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Second, understanding emotions as expressed in the body is key to understanding how
early trauma affects the developing person. Children who survive trauma may have their
first experiences of their bodies be ones of pain, discomfort, or violation. Connecting with
one’s body then becomes not only a difficult task, but a trauma trigger. Using one’s body to
soothe emotions can also be associated with shame. This pattern is especially seen in cases
of sexual abuse, where a child's first experiences of their physical body may be tainted by
trauma memories. Survivors may implicitly transform the confusion that is often a part of
childhood sexual trauma into shame and avoidance of all body sensations, whether these are
sexual in nature or not. Even in adult trauma, sometimes neutral or pleasurable sensations in
the body can be rewritten as negative ones and thus avoided like any other trauma trigger.
Third, focusing on body channel exercises allows survivors to start with very concrete,
simple (if not always easy) skills for healthier coping. Because most Western cultures have
undervalued the connection between mind and body, focusing first on this connection as
part of healing helps repair broader gaps in popular understanding of feelings. This treatment assumes that body and mind interact with and influence one another as parts of a
greater whole. This integrated understanding can shift perspectives of survivors who have
neglected one or both sides of their experience of physical and emotional well-being.


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


After a brief check-in on the client's current emotional state, the therapist begins reviewing
the clients Feelings Monitoring Form entries and inquiring about the clients progress in
using Focused Breathing. The client's self-monitoring can provide useful examples of emotion regulation difficulties that the therapist can highlight throughout this and following
sessions. If the client did not do either practice, the therapist can take a few moments to
review the rationale for between-session work, to problem-solve any practical barriers, and
to help the client fill out the form, using at least one example.


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


This session expands the previous sessions introduction to the three channels of emotion
and focuses on the body channel. It introduces several body channel skills beyond focused
breathing, including basic Self-Care, Soothing the Senses, Progressive Muscle Relaxation,
and various forms of mindful awareness. Box 12.1 outlines the contents of this session.


ELABORATE ON CONCEPT OF EMOTION REGULATION


The first step after skills practice review and summarizing the sessions focus is for the
therapist and client to continue discussing the concept of emotion regulation. Emotion regulation consists of the responses that individuals develop to help them create an emotional

[PAGE 192]

12. Emotion Regulation: Focus on the Body 175


Theme and Curriculum for Session 3
Emotion Regulation: Focus on the Body


Individuals learn emotion regulation early in life in the context of relationships with caregivers. Clients who were traumatized as children often have caregivers who cannot regulate their
own feelings. Such caregivers may use alcohol or other substances to make themselves feel
better, or may express emotions in frightening ways, such as rage or dissociation. Thus clients
may never have learned positive and effective ways to cope with their emotions. Instead, such
clients may go to extreme measures to avoid difficult feelings or may adopt ineffective strategies they have observed in their environment (e.g., social withdrawal or substance misuse).
Understanding such behaviors as unproductive efforts to cope is a first step in learning new,
positive, and more adaptive skills to manage feelings. This session is the first of two sessions
that introduce specific, healthy coping skills by the emotion channel each set of skills taps. We
start with focusing on how emotions are experienced in the body and how clients can learn to
cope by using healthy, body-based skills.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Review emotion regulation self-report measures to identify patterns that can guide your work
with the client. Bring additional copies of the Feelings Monitoring Form (Handout 11.3) and
copies of the Session 3 handouts listed below. Prepare several examples of emotion regulation
skills for the body channel of emotion. The work in the session is estimated to take about 60
minutes; a flexible application is assumed (i.e., not every client will need all interventions).


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Elaborate on concept of emotion regulation.
Identify and evaluate client's current emotion regulation skills.
Introduce skills for the body channel of emotions:
Basic Self-Care.
Soothing the Senses.
Progressive Muscle Relaxation.
Other mindfulness-based skills for the body channel.
Review misconceptions about emotion regulation work (as necessary).
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 193]

176 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
Complete Feelings Monitoring Form once a day (note positive and negative emotions).
Specify coping skills on the body channel that were used to deal with difficult feelings or
situations described in entries.
Practice one or more new body channel skills once a day.
Practice Focused Breathing twice a day.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 12.1. Healthy and Unhealthy Ways to Cope on the Body Channel

Handout 12.2. Body Channel Coping Skills

Handout 12.3. Basics of Self-Care (A Body Channel Skill)

Handout 12.4. Soothing the Senses (A Body Channel Skill)

Handout 12.5. Progressive Muscle Relaxation (A Body Channel Skill)

Additional copies of Handout 11.3. Feelings Monitoring Form


“comfort zone’ that is neither too intensely high nor too low, and that as such allows them to
function, to learn, and to stay connected with the environment. A metaphor is often helpful
in explaining abstract concepts like the dangers of dampening one’s emotions too much. We
have found that the easiest one for clients to understand is comparing the mind to a soda
bottle and emotions to the soda inside. The therapist can say something like the following:


“Imagine that your emotions are like the soda inside a soda bottle. Because were human,
our emotions come and go throughout the day. If we try to bottle them up inside and
not let them out, though, we might experience a growing pressure. Just like you see in a
soda bottle that’s been shaken but remains closed. What happens when you finally open
that bottle? It explodes and soda gets everywhere. The soda then returns to normal
(though perhaps it’s a bit flat).
“Now imagine instead that youre able to let out a little pressure at a time. You don't
keep the lid on your bottle so tightly, so the pressure doesn't build up as intensely. This
approach is what were talking about when we discuss better ways to manage emotions.
Pay attention to them, express them as appropriate, and take care of yourself in the
process.


This message is important, as part of learning healthy coping skills is allowing clients to
feel, in a manageable way, the emotions they have tried so hard (and often unsuccessfully)
to suppress.

A prerequisite to effective emotion regulation is the capacity to be aware of and to
monitor ones feelings—skills introduced in Session 2. While the term “emotion regulation”

[PAGE 194]

12. Emotion Regulation: Focus on the Body 177


functionally refers to the capacity to manage feelings, it also implies the necessity of a certain degree of emotional awareness. Moreover, emotion regulation is linked to enhanced
life engagement, as it directly contributes to improved functioning in interpersonal relationships, parenting activities, and work efforts.
Emotion regulation includes the abilities to self-soothe and to reduce intense emotional
states of all kinds, including fear, anger, and sadness. It also includes the ability to raise and
sustain feelings that facilitate effective and positive engagement in life. This might include
finding humor in a difficult situation, being curious about how things work, yearning to
spend time with loved ones, or being satisfied with a job well done. When survivors of interpersonal trauma dampen their feelings, they often dampen all emotions, even positive ones.
The therapist can emphasize that emotion regulation includes both reducing overwhelming or negative emotions and increasing positive and helpful ones. A well-regulated
emotional state varies from person to person and from one circumstance to another. The
ideally regulated emotional state is one in which a person is “comfortable in their own skin”
and effectively and appropriately engages in their environment, with the people in it, and in
the tasks being pursued. When positive feelings do come up for some survivors, a reaction
of guilt may immediately follow. Helping clients explore positive feelings is just as much a
part of recovery as helping them cope with negative feelings.


Review the Development of Emotion Regulation in Childhood

Before proceeding to skills work on emotion regulation, the therapist and client can have a
detailed discussion about the ideal course of development of emotion regulation. We have
found that understanding how emotion regulation develops helps clients feel less “crazy”
and understand why they behave the way they do. In addition, emphasizing that emotion
regulation skills are learned behaviors, and not something people are born with, encourages
the clients to learn new, more positive, and more effective ways of managing their moods.
The developmental perspective also helps clients avoid feeling discouraged by emphasizing that emotion regulation develops over years when children are trying to survive in the
environment they have, which for survivors of childhood trauma is far from ideal. Knowing
that they learned these behaviors over years also helps clients understand that learning new
strategies will also take some time. Understanding that emotions, especially early in life, are
often about physical safety can further validate their importance and the need to include
physical, body-based strategies in coping with them.


Provide examples of learning to regulate emotions

Throughout development, a child learns emotion regulation strategies in two primary ways:
through caregivers responses to the child's emotions, and through observing caregivers
management of their own moods (modeling). Children who have been abused often have
parents with deficits in both areas. Such parents are often unable to respond or ineffective
in responding to their children’s needs. Sometimes because of their own trauma histories,
they are unable to cope with their own emotions in positive and effective ways. It is often

[PAGE 195]

178 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


helpful to provide clients examples to illustrate how emotion regulation strategies develop in
the context of normative child—caregiver relationships. Such examples can easily be linked
to the skills clients are learning in the therapy.
The therapist can describe the following (or a similar) scenario. Consider a situation
in which a 4-year-old child who is climbing a jungle gym in the playground slips and falls.
The child starts crying. Ideally, what does the child’s caregiver do? The caregiver runs to
the child and helps the child get up. They ask the child, “Did you hurt yourself? Where
does it hurt?” and inspects the child for physical injury. Finding no real damage but realizing that the child has a scraped knee and was scared by the fall, the caregiver might say
while holding and comforting the child, “I know, I know, it's scary to fall like that. I know
your knee hurts. But Im here; it will be OK.” The caregiver might rinse out the scrape with
some water. Once the child calms down, the caregiver might ask, “Do you want to climb
the jungle gym again?” If the child is hesitant, the caregiver might say, “Do you want me
to help you climb?” Then the caregiver might stand behind the child so that the child feels
safe while climbing.
This scenario provides an illustration of a caregiver acting as an external regulator of
the child’s emotional experience. The caregiver's guidance also acts as instruction to the
child, who, through this and many similar examples, will learn how to manage their own
distress over time. This example includes the prerequisite presence of emotional awareness
in the caregiver for the child. The caregiver is aware of the child’s feelings/reactions and
provides labels for them (“It's scary to fall like that” and “I know your knee hurts”). The
caregiver also signals acceptance of the child’s expression of these feelings by naming and
thus verbally “echoing” them, rather than ignoring or censoring them. The caregiver monitors the child’s emotions from the first instant after the fall, as they hold the child (bodily
soothing and comforting); evaluates the situation and takes action (“It’s not too serious; let's
rinse the scrape out’); and finally guides the child back to the situation and monitors any
hesitation (“Do you want me to help you climb?”). By encouraging the child to climb on the
jungle gym again, the caregiver facilitates reengagement in a pleasurable activity and the
resolution of any remaining fear by helping the child confront rather than avoid the source
of the misadventure.
A child’s capacity for emotion regulation grows out of such experiences. Over time, the
child internalizes lessons in managing distress. Children learn various strategies to soothe
themselves: body-based strategies to create physiological comfort (e.g., running, jumping,
focused breathing, stretching); thought-based strategies (e.g., telling themselves it is going
to be all right, planning solutions); and behavior-based strategies (implementing an action
plan, confronting rather than avoiding). Finally, the example above illustrates the presence
of strong emotional support and attachment, suggesting that requests for help will be met
and so encouraging a final behavioral strategy—recruitment of social support when needed.
The caregiver is giving the child this message: “If you are upset and need help, someone
will listen to you and help you feel better.” By asking if the child needs help, the caregiver is
also teaching the child, “If you need help, let someone who cares about you know.” And, by
standing behind the child while they climb, the caregiver is teaching the child recruitment
of social support: “You can rely on others to give you help if you ask for it.”

[PAGE 196]

12. Emotion Regulation: Focus on the Body 179


Explore the impact of abuse on development of emotion regulation behaviors

How might this example be different for a child whose caregivers are abusive? We can envision a number of scenarios in response to that question. The therapist can provide examples
as relevant to the client’s own personal experiences in childhood. Often the current patterns
of emotion management that the client reports have parallels to those experienced and
observed in the client's caregiving environment. If it seems helpful, the therapist can share
a couple of common scenarios below.
For example, a child who has been abused is often also neglected. In that case, there
may not even be a caregiver around in the playground example. Another possibility is that
the child’s caregiver, even if present, may respond angrily to the child and say, “Stop being
a baby. Youre fine. Stop crying.” The caregiver is thus neither acknowledging the child's
feelings nor helping the child identify these feelings. If the child actually runs to such a
caregiver, the caregiver may push the child away. Or the caregiver may dismiss the child
because the caregiver is incapacitated by depression or substance use. Yet another maladaptive response by the caregiver may be hitting or punishing the child who is crying in this
example. The child then learns that their feelings are not important, and that when feelings
are expressed, they will bring negative responses from others. In fact, here a negative emotional state leads directly to another instance of maltreatment. In this way, negative feelings
really do become triggers for even deeper trauma reactions.
Because of various experiences like those above, survivors of maltreatment often have
not developed the ability to recognize their feelings, or have learned to avoid certain feelings altogether or even to engage in self-destructive behaviors when feelings seem overwhelming or unavoidable. Such clients often do not understand why they behave the way
they do and cannot see a connection between their feelings and behaviors. When clients
begin to see that many of their behaviors are learned responses from childhood, they begin
to feel “sane” and to develop some self-compassion—a theme therapists can preview here
before it is explored more fully in the later sessions of STAIR.


Discuss the Impact of Emotion Regulation Problems on Parenting Skills
(If Relevant)

Talking about connections between early childhood experiences with caregivers and emotion regulation can be enlightening, if not also very difficult, for survivors of abuse who are
now parents themselves. For this reason, another area to explore with clients, if relevant, is
their own behavior as caregivers. Clients who have been abused as children are at higher risk
of abusing their own children. Although most survivors of abuse do not abuse their children,
they often worry about behaving toward their children in ways that their parents behaved
toward them. They often struggle with the question of how best to parent their children.
They do not want to repeat their own parents mistakes, but do not know how to behave differently. When their children are distressed and crying, clients may feel overwhelmed and
helpless, or may even shut down. When their children are angry, clients may feel vulnerable
and victimized. Rather than helping their children learn to regulate their own feelings,

[PAGE 197]

180 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


An Example of How Trauma Can Influence Parenting: Judy

A client named Judy had parents who belittled and made fun of her whenever she cried. Her
earliest memory of this experience dated from when she was 5 years old. Judy was an over-
weight child and would often be teased at school about her weight. One day, walking home
from kindergarten, some older boys followed her, teased her for being “fat,” and laughed when
she tried to run away. She arrived home in tears. Her mother’s response was to say angrily,
“Look at Judy being such a baby. Boo-hoo-hoo.” When Judy cried more, her mother threatened
punishment: “If you dont stop crying, I will give you something to cry about.” As a result, Judy
learned quickly not to cry or to show when she was hurt, afraid, or vulnerable in any way. She
learned this lesson so thoroughly that she developed a very “thick skin” and had difficulty rec-
ognizing any feelings of vulnerability in herself. She also developed little tolerance for vulner-
ability in others. She had internalized her mother's punitive coping style and now inflicted it on
those around her, including her daughter. When her daughter cried, she found herself getting
angry and wanting to yell at her. Knowing that anger was not appropriate, she sometimes shut
down and ignored her daughter instead. At other times, she lashed out like her own mother.
When viewed in the context of her developmental history, Judy’s response to her daughter
was not surprising. Judy was merely repeating what she had learned from her own parents and
applying the same rules to her daughter that she applied to herself. By learning in therapy how
children develop emotion regulation skills, Judy became able to understand herself and her
behavior better. As she learned to recognize her own feelings, she was able to identify how her
daughter's behavior triggered her own history. This insight helped foster greater compassion
for both herself and her daughter. She was then better equipped to differentiate her daughter's
feelings from her own feelings and history. By understanding that emotion regulation skills are
something learned, Judy became empowered to respond to her daughter in a way that would
teach her emotion regulation skills, rather than feeling victimized and overwhelmed in the
face of her daughter's behavior.


clients who were abused as children find themselves reliving their own histories through
their role as parents. This pattern may be particularly insidious, because it can trigger not
only their own trauma reactions, but also further guilt and/or shame about their role as a
parent. To help normalize these challenges, the therapist can provide a case example from
our work (or their own) about such a situation. See Box 12.2 for an illustration of this pattern.


IDENTIFY AND EVALUATE CLIENT’S CURRENT EMOTION
REGULATION SKILLS

Review Relevant Emotion Regulation Assessment

After reviewing the broader importance of emotion regulation, the next step is to have the
client identify their own emotion regulation strategies. Before this session, the therapist
will have reviewed the client’s results on any measures collected about emotion regulation.
Thus the therapist can provide the client with information about their relative strengths and

[PAGE 198]

12. Emotion Regulation: Focus on the Body 181


weaknesses in body channel strategies. The therapist and client can use the results on the
selected measure(s) as a basis for continuing to build on skills already present and to identify
areas of vulnerability.


Review the Feelings Monitoring Form

In addition, the Feelings Monitoring Form (Handout 11.3) informs both the therapist's and
the client’s understanding of the client’s typical emotion management strategies as they
relate to the body (e.g., “I pinched myself hard, hoping the pain would distract me from feeling so helpless’). A lot of times clients will not recognize these activities as efforts to regulate
emotions, so therapists can highlight this connection. The therapist can talk with the client
about each example on the form and help them identify how they respond to each identified
feeling. Some clients may have difficulty with this process because their coping strategies
are not intentional, but are experienced as automatic and unconscious. In fact, body-based
coping strategies are often so ingrained that recognizing and then slowing down the process
from trigger to response can be particularly challenging. Gaining insight from the Feelings
Monitoring Form often requires gentle guidance from the therapist, alongside reinforcement, to help shape the client’s understanding of patterns.


Elicit Examples of Regulation Strategies

If a client has difficulty coming up with examples, it is sometimes helpful to ask, “What
do you do to make yourself feel better when you feel bad?” The therapist can then work
with the client to makea list of the different things the client does currently to make themselves feel better. These activities are attempts to regulate their feelings. Handout 12.1,
Healthy and Unhealthy Ways to Cope on the Body Channel, summarizes common ways
these attempts are manifested in survivors of trauma and lists healthy alternatives.
Once the client provides a few examples, the therapist can start from the beginning and
help them evaluate the strategies used. This process can be facilitated by asking, “Did doing
X make you feel better?” If the client did feel better, the therapist can move on to evaluate
the broader consequences of the strategy. How long did the client feel better? Were there
any negative consequences to this strategy? Personal short-term and long-term outcomes
from the client’s life can be used to determine whether this is a useful, effective strategy for
regulating emotions.


identify Timing of Strategies

Identifying and evaluating the client’s emotion regulation strategies also involves investigating when the client uses the strategies. Timing is especially important, given the automatic
nature of body-based efforts to cope. Many clients are very avoidant in directly addressing
their emotions. As a result, rather than engaging in conscious emotion regulation strategies
when they first start feeling distressed, they suppress their feelings and wait until they are
completely overwhelmed and have no choice but to deal with their feelings (often in unhelpful ways at that point). By learning to identify what they are feeling when they start having a

[PAGE 199]

182 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


feeling, such clients can learn to use coping strategies before becoming overwhelmed. Early
identification of emotions often involves mindful awareness of how one’s body feels—a signal that can precede more conscious experiencing of feeling. Modern Western society does
not frequently emphasize connecting body sensations to emotional states. Thus therapists
may need to spend extra time connecting physical experiences (like headaches) to emotional triggers and stress.
For example, a client may be feeling physically exhausted after having a very difficult
day at work. If the client recognizes that they are feeling anxious and not just physically
tired, they can decide to do something after work that addresses their anxiety and not just
their sense of being tired. The client may call a good friend and ask the friend to go for tea
or go for a walk in the park. If the client does not recognize the feeling of anxiety, or if they
ignore or discount their feelings, they may choose to do something that does not make them
feel better (and in fact may make them feel worse). In this example, interpreting their physical tiredness as the core nature of their experience may lead to going to bed early, which
may be effective in the short term but may prevent them from consciously addressing their
emotional needs when the next day they return to work. Identifying feelings while they are
still at relatively low intensities helps the client manage them early and successfully.


INTRODUCE SKILLS FOR THE BODY CHANNEL OF EMOTIONS


Many different skills are effective in targeting the body channel of emotion. These include
Focused Breathing (discussed in Session 1), Progressive Muscle Relaxation, Soothing the
Senses, and other mindfulness-based techniques. Because each of these skills has been
described in detail by other authors, we only briefly summarize their use here, with special
emphasis on the interventions we have used most commonly in STAIR.
However, a key aspect of all these regulation strategies is that they must be practiced
regularly and in nonstressful circumstances before they can be effectively applied in triggering situations. One of the most common problem clients have in learning body-based
regulation exercises is that clients tend to implement them only under stress. This approach
is like running a marathon without training with shorter distances first; the result would be
likely one of failure instead of empowerment and success. Similarly, with emotion regulation practice in tough situations, clients may be burdened with simultaneously trying to
remember how a new skill works while managing their overwhelming feelings. Skills need
to be practiced regularly and in relatively relaxed and quiet conditions, so that they become
ingrained, relatively automatic behavior patterns that require little effort to initiate under
stress. In a triggering situation, a client realistically has only one key task: managing the
distress in a healthy way. The skills are intended to be resources clients can immediately
recruit and automatically initiate when needed most.
If the therapist has not already done this during the check-in, this session is also a good
time to review with the client their practice of Focused Breathing and any difficulties that have
come up, since it has been introduced first and is a core example ofa body channel coping skill.
Handout 12.2, Body Channel Coping Skills, is a graphic that shows additional examples of
such skills; therapist and client can check these off for continued practice as they see fit.

[PAGE 200]

12. Emotion Regulation: Focus on the Body 183


Basic Self-Care

Sometimes early trauma disrupts even the most basic skills of daily living. Basic Self-Care
includes bathing, eating, sleeping, and exercise, all of which promote both physical and
emotional well-being. Barriers to using this basic skill set for people who have experienced
trauma may include conscious or unconscious efforts at self-harm (often in response to
underlying shame); reduced resources and energy available to be directed toward self-care;
and occupation of a “sick role” because of fear of losing out on needed support if the client
shows any level of improvement. Modeling for the client the importance of Basic Self-Care
as a priority may be particularly important in very severe cases of childhood trauma. It may
be necessary to reassure the client that improvement in managing their physical well-being
can lead to greater self-confidence and ability to manage their mental state and relationships. Sometimes this change will cause “growing pains’ in relationships, but ultimately
the results should be stronger, healthier relationships with the self and significant others.
Handout 12.3, Basics of Self-Care (A Body Channel Skill), reviews components of self-care
that therapists can use with clients to create a simple self-care plan.


Soothing the Senses

Basic human experience often involves various dimensions of sensations in the physical
body. Unfortunately, it is easy for clients to get distracted by external and internal stimuli
that limit their experience. Survivors of trauma, may routinely ignore or devalue certain
senses, because their attention is diverted to avoiding trauma cues or painful emotions or
thoughts. Soothing the Senses is a skill that guides clients to attend to each major sensory experience (sight, sound, touch, smell, taste) one at a time, with a special emphasis on
pleasurable or relaxing stimuli. Note that for clients with any type of sensory impairment,
therapists can collaborate with the clients to make modifications.
Clients ideally will choose at least two senses to focus on. Therapists can give examples
of soothing sensations and skills for quickly accessing these sensations in the moment. For
example, saving pictures on a smartphone (even as the background or lock screen) may be a
quick way to conjure up memories of pleasant sensations, such as warmth (a sunny beach),
tactile comfort (a soft blanket), or a preferred taste (a peppermint candy). If possible, actually experiencing the sensations is even better. Clients can bring a small keepsake with
them to touch when they want to feel soothed, or bubble gum to chew. Even comfortable,
soft clothing can make a big difference during times of distress. Whatever is chosen, it
should be specific to the client. See Handout 12.4, Soothing the Senses (A Body Channel
Skill), for more guidance and a worksheet that therapists can use with their clients.


Progressive Muscle Relaxation

A staple relaxation skill for decades, Progressive Muscle Relaxation is an excellent tool for
learning to attend to the body as a whole and to release tensions that may not enter conscious awareness. The skill involves guiding one’s attention slowly and methodically to each
major part of the body, usually going from head to toe (or vice versa), while carefully tensing

[PAGE 201]

184 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


and releasing the relevant muscles. This skill can be practiced anywhere and in many ways.
Clients with any chronic pain issues can adjust the exercise to their needs. A client can practice Progressive Muscle Relaxation lying down, sitting, or standing, as long as the person
is safe, comfortable, and aware of their surroundings. Handout 12.5, Progressive Muscle
Relaxation (A Body Channel Skill), is a written description clients can take home.


Other Mindfulness-Based Skills for the Body Channel

A welcome side effect of practicing body-based skills can be a greater awareness in the moment
of sensations both internal and external to the client. Mindfulness has been practiced in some
form throughout recorded history, and today it has proven to be a useful skill for gaining
insight into the present, fostering a sense of peace and relaxation, and even expanding one’s
sense of consciousness. Not only is mindfulness a body channel skill itself (it spans all three
channels of emotion), but introducing it as such may give clients access to a challenging yet
powerful set of practices. For clients who have experience in or enjoy mindfulness, therapists
can encourage its use beyond the skills (Focused Breathing, Soothing the Senses, and Progressive Muscle Relaxation) described to this point. Some further examples of mindfulness-based
skills include mindful awareness of one’s immediate environment (which can be especially
grounding during times of internal distress), mindful eating (either a small snack or an entire
meal), mindful walking (focusing on the full experience of walking, feeling toes inside shoes
as one takes each step), and mindful meditation on a specific object (e.g., watching the flame
of a lit candle). Although the practice of mindfulness can be hard, the concept is simple—just
being present wherever one is without giving in to distraction from thoughts, memories, and
plans. This stance of mind is quite hard for everyone in the modern world, but especially for
survivors of trauma, who may have had few experiences of feeling safe and at ease in the present. In fact, for clients who have learned to dissociate to cope with trauma, mindfulness is the
exact opposite of their automatic response. As with teaching other new skills, therapists can
encourage self-compassion. There is no wrong way to practice mindfulness. Every attempt is
a success. Every moment clients realize they are distracted and then choose to bring themselves back to the present moment, they are succeeding in practicing mindfulness.


REVIEW MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT EMOTION REGULATION WORK
(AS NECESSARY)


Some clients resist learning emotion regulation, either as a whole or through specific channels of emotion. This resistance often stems from fears or misconceptions about its nature
and consequences. Attempts at healthy emotion regulation do not intend to produce any of
the circumstances below. The therapist reviews each point as necessary for each client.


Distress Reduction Requires Rejection or Denial of Feelings

Some clients think that regulating emotions means not having them at all, or not showing
them if they have them. The developmental perspective can help clients understand that

[PAGE 202]

12. Emotion Regulation: Focus on the Body 185


emotions, both positive and negative, are typical parts of being human. Whether emotions
are pleasant or not, we all have them, and that is actually a good thing! What clients are trying to learn, therefore, is not to turn off their emotions, but to learn from them and to cope
with them in healthier, more effective ways.


Distress Reduction Trivializes Feelings

Some clients feel as if their pain is so great that using some type of coping skill will merely
trivialize it. If so, the therapist can take time to make clear that the aim of distress reduction is
to give clients control over their feelings, and some choice in how and when to tolerate distress.
We are not suggesting that simply thinking positive thoughts will make everything fine, but
it does offer a way out of unproductive ruminating or self-criticism and escalating emotional
distress. Once clients can experience emotions at a tolerable level, they can use them to gain
insight into their other experiences, their perspectives, and ultimately their personal values.


Distress Reduction Invalidates Trauma

Even if clients come to believe that these skills could make them feel better and improve
their lives, they may feel a need to hold onto their suffering as a testament to what was done
to them. They may think, “TfI feel better, it means that what happened to me was not that
bad.” The therapist will need to assess this resistance and gently address it, emphasizing
that obtaining relief from suffering does not trivialize or invalidate it. In treatment, we commonly use the example of a scraped knee. We ask such clients, “What would you do if you
had a scraped knee?” Clients will easily answer that they would clean it, put a bandage on it
ifnecessary, and take an over-the-counter medication for the pain if necessary. We then ask,
“What if the reason you had the scraped knee was that someone pushed you? Would you
treat your knee any differently? Would you go without relief?” Clients will of course answer
that they would not. The therapist can then make the analogy that if a client were pushed
and fell and had a scraped knee, putting a bandage on the wound would not take away the
right to be angry at the person who pushed them. In fact, later in this treatment, exploring
ways to express anger and make sense of such of an event are important areas of focus.


CASE EXAMPLE: MOVING TOWARD HEALTHY EMOTION
REGULATION ON THE BODY CHANNEL


Cathy was sexually and physically abused by her mother and stepfather. As an adult, she
experienced overwhelming feelings of sadness and anger, often flying into violent rages,
which took a toll on her physically as well as on her relationships. She recalled that her
mother and other family members regularly invalidated her feelings and denied that the
abuse even occurred. On one occasion, Cathy came home crying after being teased at
school. Rather than comforting her, Cathy's stepfather slapped her, saying, “No daughter of
mine will be a sissy! Next time, you better fight back! Be a grown woman!” Cathy claimed
that she never cried in front of anyone in her family again.

[PAGE 203]

186 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


THERAPIST: In the last session, we talked about starting to identify your feelings—
learning to know what youre feeling when youre feeling it. In this session, were
focusing on emotion regulation—that is, how you cope with your feelings, espe-
cially negative or difficult ones. So let's start with a general question: When you
feel bad, what do you do to make yourself feel better?

CATHY: I dont know. I feel bad most of the time. Nothing I do really seems to work;
that’s why I am here. I feel hopeless.

THERAPIST: I can understand why youd feel that way, given everything youve tried
and what you had to go through as a child. Part of what we'll be doing is helping
you learn new, more helpful ways of coping with difficult feelings. But before we
do that, we need to understand what you do now when you feel bad, whether or
not it really helps. Let's start with what you brought up earlier today—the negative
evaluation you received at work. On the Feelings Monitoring Form, you said that
after you met with your boss, you felt really depressed and hopeless.

CATHY: Yeah, that’s how I feel most of the time. But I felt even worse after I got that
bad review.

THERAPIST: What was your boss critical about?

CATHY: She said she and other coworkers noticed I had been late for work a lot. She
said my work had lots of errors in it, was often overdue, and wasn't the quality they
were used to from me.

THERAPIST: Lets start by labeling what you were feeling when your boss said this. Do
you remember last week when we talked about the three channels of emotion—
body, thought, and behavior? Since weve focused on the body channel first, let's
start there. What did you feel in your body while your boss was speaking?

CATHY: I felt anxious as soon as she started, because I knew the review wasnt going
to be good. My heart was racing, and I had butterflies in my stomach. It made me
sick.

THERAPIST: That sounds really awful to have to feel during a meeting with your boss.
What did you end up doing in the meeting?

CATHY: I just sat there and didnt say anything. She even asked if anything was going on
with me personally that would explain everything. She actually looked concerned,
so I just looked at the floor the whole time so I didn't have to look her in the eyes.
I just shook my head no and said, “Everything's fine,” and left. I'm afraid now it
came across like I didnt care.

THERAPIST: What did you do after you left the meeting?

CATHY: I went back to my office, slammed the door, and punched the wall. It really hurt
my hand, and one of my coworkers heard and came by to see what was going on.
Then I just told him everything was fine and stormed out. I haven't been to work
since then, and that was 2 days ago.

THERAPIST: So it sounds like you were angry, then embarrassed.

[PAGE 204]

12. Emotion Regulation: Focus on the Body 187


CATHY: Yeah, I guess I was.

THERAPIST: And you tried to cope with being upset and express it somehow. You
slammed the door, you punched the wall, you stormed out after your coworker
checked on you, and youve avoided going to work since.

CATHY: Yeah, it sounds pretty bad when you put it like that.

THERAPIST: I'm just struck with how intense those feelings must have been. Im sorry
you experienced that. Did any of these things you did make you feel better?

CATHY: At the time, I felt so. But maybe I was just overreacting. Now Im worried that I
will get fired because of it. I cant lose this job! And I feel guilty, because I actually
like and respect my boss a lot, and she was right about what she said. I haven't been
doing my best lately at work

THERAPIST: Well, it's understandable from how you grew up why you responded
the way you did. Remember when we talked about the time you were teased at
school—the last time you cried in front of your family? What were you told to do?

CATHY: Fight back.

THERAPIST: So, actually, we can be thankful that you had enough self-control not to
fight your boss in the meeting. If you had followed your stepfather's example, you
would have punched her!

CATHY: I never thought about it that way.

THERAPIST: Right. How about we replay the situation and see if there might be a better
way to cope with your feelings? Maybe by using one of the body channel skills we
talked about today? Since you started feeling anxious before the meeting, would
that have been a time to practice a skill?

CATHY: Yeah, probably because I knew it was only going to get harder.

THERAPIST: I think youre right. What do you think could have helped you calm your
body down?

CATHY: I really liked what we were talking about today with Soothing the Senses. I
have a keychain from a vacation I took with my wife last year to the beach. I could
have brought it out and rubbed it while remembering what it felt like—tfeeling the
waves of the ocean. It makes me feel better now just thinking of it.

THERAPIST: That's a perfect example, and what a great memory to use, too. Maybe if
you are able to calm yourself down, using that keychain as a reminder, you can face
the stress of going back to work. Im glad you have that keychain to help in future
situations.


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


To segue to the end of the session, briefly remind the client ofthe overall goals of the session
and how the specific skills discussed fit into the bigger framework of STAIR. Not all clients

[PAGE 205]

188 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


will take to all the coping skills discussed in this chapter, especially given some of the challenges we have mentioned about the body channel of emotions. The therapist can encourage
a reluctant client to give things a try, but convey that they can focus on skills they find most
helpful first. For the body channel, clients may need extra support in knowing how to feel
grounded in their bodies and allowing themselves to experience pleasure and relaxation
in physical ways. A therapist may omit certain skills and encourage others, based on their
understanding of each client. For example, a very avoidant client may have trouble with
Progressive Muscle Relaxation, but can tolerate Soothing the Senses. We have described
these healthy skills in the form of handouts for the client, and the therapist can encourage
the client to continue reviewing these handouts on their own.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


At the end of the session, the therapist can briefly summarize the body channel skills discussed in the session before talking with the client about ways to practice these new skills
before the next session. For skills practice during the week, the therapist requests that the
client continue to fill out the Feelings Monitoring Form once a day, and this time include
any body channel skills the client may have used to help cope. Outside of these specific situations, the client can choose one or more of the new body channel skills to practice daily. If
the client has trouble choosing a skill, the therapist can use their own judgment about which
skill may be easiest and/or most effective for the client to practice. Finally, the client also
continues to practice Focused Breathing twice a day.

[PAGE 206]

Healthy and Unhealthy Ways to Cope
on the Body Channel
Check any of the following if they seem familiar to your own experience. All of them are common
among survivors of trauma.


UNHEALTHY EFFORTS TO COPE

O Poor sleep habits

O Poor diet (examples: fast food only, overeating, undereating)

O Use of harmful substances

O No or limited exercise

O Pushing your body too much or too much exercise

O Ignoring your body (examples: not treating illness, not visiting the doctor or dentist, ignoring
physical discomfort like being too hot or too cold)

O Self-harm to cope with negative feelings or to help with numbness (examples: pinching yourself,
cutting, burning, etc.)

O Poor hygiene (examples: not showering, not shaving, not combing your hair)

Others?

O

O

O


Check any of the following that you'd like to practice for coping better with your feelings.


HEALTHY EFFORTS TO COPE: BODY CHANNEL SKILLS


O Focused Breathing

O Basic Self-Care

O Soothing the Senses

O Progressive Muscle Relaxation

O Other mindfulness-based body exercises (sitting meditation, walking meditation, etc.)

Others?

O

O

O


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


189

[PAGE 207]

Body Channel Coping Skills

Skills Practice
Check which of these skills you want
Body
to practice on your own. Remember,
practicing helps you: Ol Focused Breathing
e Use the skill. O Basic Self-Care
e Troubleshoot any problems with O Soothing the Senses
using it. g
e Add it to your toolbox for when O Progressive Muscle Relaxation
you need it most. O Other Mindfulness-Based
Exercises for the Body


06 L


Behavior


A \


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and
Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page
for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 208]

Basics of Self-Care (A Body Channel Skill)
IMPROVING YOUR EMOTIONAL HEALTH

Your emotional health is like your physical health: It needs nurturing. When it does not get care, you
begin to show more strain, and it has an impact on what triggers you, how you respond (thoughts/
feelings), and how you behave as a result.


WHAT WOULD IT TAKE TO REFUEL YOUR EMOTIONAL TANK?

e Meet your basic needs.

o Stress and lack of attention to your body (hunger, thirst, rest, illness, discomfort/pain, hygiene,
and exercise) can influence your mood.
o Routinely refuel your body. Treat your body well with a good diet, adequate sleep, regular
exercise, and other healthy behaviors.

e Exercise. Take a walk, run, or stretch.

e Improve your physical environment to make yourself feel comfortable. When possible, notice
your response to temperature, clothing, colors/textures, sounds/noise, and clutter. Small changes
in your surroundings can increase serenity and positive emotions.

e Create a Basic Self-Care health plan. Make one commitment to do something to improve your
physical health, starting today. Schedule and track your activities related to this commitment. You
can use the Feelings Monitoring Form to track how specific Basic Self-Care practices you try out
affect your mood, thoughts, and behavior.

O Sleep

O Eating

O Exercise

O Your environment


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


191

[PAGE 209]

Soothing the Senses (A Body Channel Skill)
In addition to basic refueling and other aspects of self-care, you can learn skills for reducing stress.
You have already learned the Focused Breathing exercise, which you should keep on using. The
Soothing the Senses skill is about exploring ways that your bodily senses can help calm you. You
can pick any or all of the sense experiences below to explore, but pick at least two. For your chosen
senses, write down specific soothing examples that come to mind. It helps to choose ones that you
can either imagine vividly or actually experience when you want to relax.


GET IN TOUCH WITH THE ENVIRONMENT,
USING ALL FIVE SENSES

Sight

e What can you carry with you to look at that is soothing?


Sound

e What can you listen to that is soothing, or which person can you call?


Smell

e What can you smell that is soothing?


Taste

e What can you taste that is soothing?


Touch

e What can you touch that is soothing?


Try to target more than one sense at a time, to help you relax more quickly and effectively.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


192

[PAGE 210]

Progressive Muscle Relaxation (A Body Channel Skill)
Brief description: You'll be alternately tensing and relaxing specific groups of muscles. After tension,
a muscle will be more relaxed than it was before the tensing. Concentrate on the feel of the muscles—
specifically, the contrast between tension and relaxation. In time, you will recognize tension in any
specific muscle and will be able to reduce that tension. This exercise may be especially helpful for
people with chronic pain and/or dissociation.


How often do you practice it? Do the entire sequence once a day if you can, until you feel you are
able to control your muscle tensions.


Before the exercise: Sit in a comfortable chair or lie down on a bed. Get as comfortable as possible—no tight clothes, no shoes. Also, don’t cross your legs.


Be careful: If you have problems with pulled muscles, broken bones, or any medical contraindication for physical activities, consult your doctor first. Don’t do things that hurt. If you have pain
in a specific area, skip that area.


Directions: Take a deep breath; let it out slowly. Again. Don’t tense muscles other than the specific
group at each step. Don’t hold your breath, grit your teeth, or squint! Breathe slowly and evenly and
think only about the tension—relaxation contrast.


e Each tensing is for 10 seconds; each relaxing is for 10 or 15 seconds. Count “one-one-thousand,
two-one-thousand . . .” until you have a feel for the time span.

e Note that each step is really two steps: one cycle of tension—relaxation for each set of opposing
muscles.

1. Hands.

. Biceps and triceps
YON
. Shoulders.

Neck

Mouth.

Tongue

Eyes.

Back.
OONAAAR Butt.

. Thighs.
O

oo . Stomach.
ZA N . Calves and feet.
— wo . Toes.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


193

[PAGE 211]

Emotion Regulation
Focus on Thoughts and Behavior


Human freedom involves our capacity to pause between the stimulus and
response and, in that pause, to choose the one response toward which we
wish to throw our weight. The capacity to create ourselves, based upon
this freedom, is inseparable from consciousness or self-awareness.
—ROLLO May (1975, p. 100)


The focus of this session is expanding on the thought and behavior channels of emotion—
first by identifying trauma-driven thoughts and behaviors, and then by exploring alternative
ways of coping along these channels. Survivors of trauma often have thought and behavior
patterns that are fear-driven and consequently narrow, rigid, and limiting. A primary goal
of this session is to help clients learn more flexible ways of thinking. This includes, for example, weighing the evidence for a belief and considering alternatives; learning to approach
(vs. automatically avoid) frightening beliefs, as well as to move away from unproductive,
ruminative thoughts; and finally learning how to generate and attend to positive thoughts
and images. Unlike traditional cognitive restructuring, the work in this early phase of treatment is not primarily about challenging old beliefs and providing alternatives, although
indeed some exploration of this type will occur. The focus here, instead, is on helping clients
create alternative ways of thinking and experience a sense of agency about what and how
they choose to think about things.
In a similar vein, the other primary goal of this session is to introduce flexible behavioral choices in response to emotional triggers. Environments of repeated trauma are typically highly controlling and give individuals very little choice about what happens. For
example, a child in an abusive home is told to obey a parent or stop complaining (or even
stop feeling sad), “or else.” The “or else” punishment can be severe, such as being denied
dinner or being shut in a closet, but even the vague threat itself creates an environment of
hostility. Threatening environments by definition use fear to shape and direct a person’
behaviors and thoughts. In regard to behavior, a person might have found that it was necessary to walk a “straight and narrow’ path to survive their environment.


194

[PAGE 212]

13. Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behavior 195


The purpose of this session, thus, is to introduce a client to new ways of thinking and
behaving, in order to awaken in them a sense of freedom of choice. The work invites the
client to think and do things differently than they might have learned to in their traumatic
environment. As a result, they can begin thinking about themselves, others, and the world
differently and in ways aligned with their personal values and goals.


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


As in previous sessions, the therapist begins with a brief check-in on the clients current
emotional state and completion of between-session skills practice. The therapist begins
reviewing the client’s Feelings Monitoring Form entries, and asks specifically about the
client’s practice of Focused Breathing and one or more of the body channel skills learned
in the previous session. The therapist provides genuine positive feedback for completing
skills practice, filling out forms, and sharing any successes the client has had since the last
session. The client’s self-monitoring may provide useful examples of emotion regulation difficulties that the therapist can highlight throughout this phase of treatment and explore,
using different, healthier alternative skills from the previous session and this current one.
If the client did not do one or more agreed-upon practice activities, the therapist
reviews the rationale for between-session work and helps the client problem-solve any practical barriers. The therapist broadly reinforces the importance of daily practice of skills by
stating, “The more you practice a skill, the better at it you will become.” If the client has
not completed a Feelings Monitoring Form entry, the therapist can say something like this:


“Today we will be learning new skills. After we review them, we can take a few minutes
to complete a Feelings Monitoring Form entry about a difficult situation and consider
ways to apply some of the skills that we are reviewing today. Over time, it'll get easier,
almost automatic, to choose skills that will help in a particular situation.”


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


In the previous session, the therapist has introduced the client to various body channel
skills, aimed at reducing physical experiences of emotional distress and discomfort. By this
session, the client's skills practice has ideally started moving the client away from the oftenconfining physical experience of intense emotion (e.g., fear or shame) and toward an opening “window of opportunity” where they can deploy resources for engaging in new ways of
thinking and behaving. The practical goal of this session is to help the client select, learn,
and practice new skills in the thought and behavior channels of emotion that better match
their personal and interpersonal aspirations. The therapist and client select tools according
to the client’s preferences and abilities. Before and throughout the session, the therapist
thinks ahead about which tools might resonate most with the clients strengths and therapeutic goals. Box 13.1 outlines the theme and curriculum for Session 4.

[PAGE 213]

196 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Theme and Curriculum for Session 4
Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behaviors


The focus of this session is on introducing and exploring trauma-driven maladaptive thoughts
and behaviors, and exploring alternative ways of thinking and behaving. This session completes
the introduction and review of the three channels of emotion. The body channel interventions
from the previous session ideally help the client move away from a sense of chronic crisis or
threat, which in turn opens a window of opportunity for the client to become curious and open
about what changes might be of value to them. The goal of the session is to engage and motivate
the client to select, test, and practice alternative thoughts and behaviors that match the client’s
personal and interpersonal aspirations. The tools selected should be based on the client's pref-
erences and strengths. The ultimate goal of the session is to integrate all three channels and
demonstrate how they all work together.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Bring extra copies of the Feelings Monitoring Form (Handout 11.3) and copies of the Session
4 handouts listed below. Review the skills for the thought and behavior channels, and consider
which might be a good match for the client. The work in the session is estimated to take about
60 minutes; a flexible application is assumed (i.e., not every client will need all interventions).


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Review trauma-related patterns of thinking.
Review and select thought channel skills.
Review trauma-related patterns of behaviors.
Review and select behavior channel skills.
Explore positive emotions and plan pleasurable activities.
Complete Summary of Three Channels of Emotion Skills checklist.
Apply new skills to Feelings Monitoring Form.
Summarize the goals of the session.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 214]

13. Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behavior 197


Plan skills practice:
Complete Feelings Monitoring Form once a day (note positive and negative emotions).
Specify coping skills in any channel that were used to deal with difficult feelings or situ-
ations described in entries.
Practice at least one skill identified in each of the thought and behavior channels (con-
tinue practicing body channel skills as helpful to client).
Continue to practice Focused Breathing twice daily
Do something pleasurable.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 13.1. Typical Trauma-Related Thought Patterns

Handout 13.2. Thought Channel Skills for Emotion Regulation

Handout 13.3. Emotion Surfing

Handout 13.4. Examples of Positive Self-Statements (Affirmations)

Handout 13.5. Typical Trauma-Related Behaviors

Handout 13.6. Behavior Channel Skills for Emotion Regulation

Handout 13.7. Time Out (A Behavior Channel Skill)

Handout 13.8. Opposite Action (A Behavior Channel Skill)

Handout 13.9. Pleasurable Activities List

Handout 13.10. Summary of Three Channels of Emotion Skills

Additional copies of Handout 11.3. Feelings Monitoring Form


REVIEW TRAUMA-RELATED PATTERNS OF THINKING


The therapist reviews the examples in Handout 13.1, Typical Trauma-Related Thinking
Patterns, and uses the client’s Feelings Monitoring Form as a way to ground the discussion.
This process will facilitate understanding of the client’s typical negative thought patterns,
such as “black-and-white” thinking or generating “doomsday” scenarios.


REVIEW AND SELECT THOUGHT CHANNEL SKILLS


The client may already have obvious strengths in using the thought channel to regulate
their emotions. If so, the therapist notes them and identifies ways in which the client can
generalize already existing skills. For example, on the job, a client may recognize how they
or others can slip into black-and-white thinking; see that it limits successful communication
and problem solving; and then easily shift to an approach that involves evaluating alternatives and asking, “What other way of thinking about this situation might be helpful?”
This more flexible approach to problem solving might be harder for the client to apply in

[PAGE 215]

198 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


more affectively charged situations, such as conflicts at home with loved ones. The therapist makes it clear that the same skills can be applied to different situations and different
people, and that practicing across all of these contexts helps build the greatest flexibility in
using skills. Later sessions will expand upon this theme of flexibility and context. To aid the
discussion in session, the therapist uses Handout 13.2, Thought Channel Tools for Emotion
Regulation.


Emotion Surfing

Emotion Surfing is a technique that uses a metaphor of how the experience of an emotion
can feel like waves in the ocean. The waves crest, slowly fall, and then may rise again—but
by noticing the flow of the experience, the client can realize that no feeling, no matter
how distressing and intense, can last forever. Moreover, one wave of emotion may flow into
another wave of a different emotion. Clients can visualize riding the waves of their emotions
as they “wait for the surge to pass,” so to speak. Handout 13.3, Emotion Surfing, provides a
step-by-step guide for clients to use after the session.


Evidence Technique

Another skill to explore is the Evidence Technique. The therapist invites the client to
consider their belief with an attitude of curiosity and interest (as opposed to one of judgment). The approach to the evidence technique is not confrontational, as it can be in some
cognitive-behavioral approaches. The key steps in the process of conducting this inquiry
are as follows:


. Validate initial viewpoint. (Therapist acknowledges that trauma-generated beliefs
served a purpose at some point.)
2. Ask, “What other ways of thinking about it are there?” (Therapist invites client to
consider alternative beliefs, now that the trauma is over.)
3. Ask, “How strong is the proof for your original viewpoint?”, followed by “What
about the alternative ways of thinking?” (Therapist listens and balances the original
thought with alternatives.)
4. Invite client to consider a more helpful alternative and “try it on for size.”
5. Invite client to “let the old belief go” and recognize that it may no longer be helpful.


Material from the clients completed Feelings Monitoring Forms can help highlight
areas of negative self-talk that could be countered with more helpful statements. For example, many clients report fearful cognitions about experiencing and expressing feelings. A
client may report thoughts such as these:


“IfI let myself get angry, Pl lose control and become abusive.”
“If I show my true feelings, my partner will think I'm weak and wont love me.”
“It doesnt matter what I feel. No one cares.”

[PAGE 216]

13. Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behavior 199


The therapist can gently ask whether these statements are true and whether there could be
alternatives to consider and test in the world. The therapist may need to be very active in
proposing alternatives. Here are some examples of alternative statements:


“It's OK to feel angry. It’s what I do with my anger that's important.”
“I can manage my anger in a positive, effective way.”
“Expressing my feelings is courageous.”
“By expressing my feelings, I let my partner be more supportive of me.”


Therapists can focus on other skills for clients who respond to less elaborate approaches (as
compared to the Evidence Technique). Examining evidence can be powerful for clients who
are willing to try and open to trying the approach; however, some clients may have either a
degree of rigidity that prevents deeply questioning core beliefs, or proclivities to obsessional
thinking (which may not respond as readily to the Evidence Technique). In these cases,
other skills described below may be more effective.


Thought Shifting

An alternative and complementary thought channel strategy we introduce to clients is
Thought (or Attention Shifting). That is, when clients recognize they are having a traumarelated thought or dwelling on a problem, they acknowledge it and then make the decision
to shift their attention to something else. Thought Shifting can be particularly valuable as
a way to get out of repeating “thought loops” or rumination. These types of thoughts often
do not lead to solutions to problems, and may indeed lead to worsening or reinforcing of
a negative mood. For many clients, Thought Shifting works best if it involves a change in
activity as well. For example, a client has an intrusive thought while in their office writing
a report for work. Through therapy, they have learned to acknowledge the thought, but
instead of internally arguing with it or diving deep into the thought (and its subsequent
chain of related thoughts), they know they have another option. They choose to get up and
take a moment to water the nearby office plants. They are not avoiding the thought, because
they consciously acknowledge its presence—but they choose to shift attention away from
that thought, in a mindful, nonjudgmental way, so that they can act in a more useful way in
the moment. Examples of activities that can be used with Thought Shifting include cleaning
the house, calling a friend, planning a vacation, recalling pleasant past events, and counting
backward from 100 by sevens. Over time and with experimentation, clients will figure out
what types of activities or thoughts are most likely to facilitate a helpful shift for them.


Reminders/Reframes

An additional thought channel skill is to counter negative cognitions with predetermined
alternatives—Reminders or Reframes—when confronted with a distressing situation that
typically provokes an automatic negative thought. Whereas the Evidence Technique can
help generate an elaborated, alternative assessment of a distressing situation, this skill is

[PAGE 217]

200 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


quicker and focuses on the client's reminding themselves of an alternative, positive assessment when confronting a situation similar to one already analyzed. For example, a client
who is having a difficult moment and is very self-critical may remind themselves of a counterstatement, such as “I am doing the best I can.” In another example, whena client is feeling angry and becomes self-critical, they can remind themselves: “It is OK to feel angry; it
is what I do with it that matters.”


Positive Self-Statements

For any people who have experienced childhood maltreatment, the maltreatment has included
emotional abuse/neglect. This means that a client may never have received acknowledgment
of their positive attributes. The presence of positive beliefs about the self is distinct and separate from the resolution of negative beliefs. For example, a client may be able to accept that
they have not failed at a particular task, but this acceptance does not automatically fill a void
about what is good about them, such as “I am friendly and compassionate toward others.” In
this exercise, the therapist helps the client identify positive attributes, and in doing so can help
shape and reinforce positive perceptions that the client may not be able to see for themselves.
The Positive Self-Statements skill provides the client with the experience of positive regard—
first from the therapist, and then from the self. The statements that the client can agree with
can be committed to memory, as well as written down and posted somewhere the client can
easily find them. Obviously, the therapist must help select positive attributes that the client
can authentically endorse. Sometimes the client can identify the attributes, and the therapist
need only endorse and possibly elaborate on the clients observations. Handout 13.4, Examples of Positive Self-Statements (Affirmations), provides a list the therapist and client can
review and add to—either in session or as part of the client’s skills practice between sessions.


Positive Imagery

A final important skill along the thought channel is the use of Positive Imagery. Such work
has proven useful in effecting positive emotional states. This method requires the evocation
of specific memories or images that induce positive (nonhurtful or, preferably, pleasureproducing) thoughts or feelings. These images should be fully elaborated, so that each detail
can serve as a retrieval cue, thereby increasing the ease with which clients can recall these
images. It is often helpful to cue the client with a question such as “Can you think of a time
when you felt content?” or “Picture a situation in which you felt relaxed,’ and ask the client to try to describe it in as much detail as possible, remembering how it felt as vividly as
possible. During times of distress, clients can summon their identified images in order to
combat the negative effects of invading thoughts or circumstances, and to induce more positive emotional states.


Using the Feelings Monitoring Form with Thought Channel Skills

All of these techniques can help clients stop negative thoughts from spiraling into fully
distressing reminders of their trauma. To prevent this spiraling, clients first must learn to

[PAGE 218]

13. Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behavior 201


identify the thoughts that accompany their feelings. Doing so involves using the Feelings
Monitoring Form. Once clients accomplish this goal, they may then proceed to practice the
array of skills described above for addressing these thoughts.


REVIEW TRAUMA-RELATED PATTERNS OF BEHAVIORS


Together, the therapist and client review the examples in Handout 13.5, Typical TraumaRelated Behaviors, and the client adds to the list any behaviors specific to their experience.
The goal here is for clients to recognize that survivors of trauma use a range of behaviors as
attempts to manage emotions (i.e., efforts at emotion regulation). Some of these behaviors
work better than others in the short run, but in the long run all have significant downsides.
The therapist can use a recently completed Feelings Monitoring Form or example already
discussed by the client to identify which behaviors are most typical of them as emotion
regulation strategies. Note that in this treatment, we assume that almost all behaviors have
or have had some benefit for emotion regulation (and/or even survival) in the past.


REVIEW AND SELECT BEHAVIOR CHANNEL SKILLS


Behavioral emotion modulation skills are often the easiest for clients to identify, because
they include anything people do in everyday life to make themselves feel better. Such strategies may include calling a friend, watching a movie, preparing for a meeting, going for
a run, taking a bath, or making a favorite food. To focus the discussion on healthy coping
skills, the therapist can use Handout 13.6, Behavior Channel Tools for Emotion Regulation.


Time Out/Take a Break

Time Out/Take a Break means leaving, for a set period of time, the environment that is
creating the emotional disturbance. This purposeful break is not to be used as an avoidance strategy, but as a modulation strategy. The distinction lies in the client's intention to
return to the setting or goal once their feelings have returned to baseline or have settled to
a level that allows them to reengage effectively. In some cases, Time Out lasts for only a few
minutes; in other cases, it may last for days or weeks. The therapist reviews the recovery
timeline for several emotions and notes how the range in time to recovery depends on the
emotion and its context, with the goal of normalizing this variation. High-distress reactions
can occur rapidly and unexpectedly. The client’s work in emotion awareness can help them
identify the type and intensity of feelings, as well as situations, that are likely to lead to a
negative interaction or outcome.

The client can combine thought channel and behavior channel tools to prepare particular self-statements, mantras, or behaviors to use on an as-needed basis. Clients may rely
on phrases such as “I cant productively continue this conversation right now, but why don't
we plan to resume later?” when they feel their distress rising too high. Ifa reaction is very
intense (say, a strong anger reaction), and the words that will spill out will be negative or

[PAGE 219]

202 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


hurtful, the client can do a short Time Out from the conversation (by counting to 10) or a
longer one (by simply keeping quiet and listening). For example, asking for a break to go to
the restroom is often an easy, hard-to-argue-with strategy that anyone can use. If a client
is beyond words and moving into aggressive action, the client needs to be ready simply to
leave the room or location, even without saying a word. The potential embarrassment of
such abrupt behavior is far less than that which follows letting loose with a verbal tirade or
getting into a fight. Handout 13.7, Time Out (A Behavior Channel Tool), provides an overview to use with clients.


Replacement Behaviors and Opposite Action

Clients often find themselves engaging in old, ingrained emotion modulation strategies
automatically and in a fixed, repeated pattern. Such patterns are hard to break, and the
drive to move into such an action is nearly unstoppable. These actions include reaching for
a drink or a pill, cutting, binge eating, or engaging in impulsive and/or unsafe sex. These
strategies are often successful in their initial aim, which is rapid emotional relief. Their
often immediate, short-term success greatly reinforces the pattern. Still, a client often pays
a high price in the later consequences of such strategies. One method of breaking such a
behavioral habit is to replace it with another action pattern that can be speedily introduced
and has the same end result (reduced arousal), but does not cause the collateral damage.
Rather than engaging in compulsive behaviors, the client can engage in other activities that
have their own fixed action patterns. These Replacement Behaviors may include cleaning
the house, running a jogging circuit several times, returning items that have been on loan,
mowing the lawn, washing the car, jumping rope, taking a bath, or going to the gym.
A variation on Replacement Behaviors is the skill of Opposite Action, in which a person
chooses not to give in to an immediate impulse, but instead chooses to do the opposite (if it
indeed is a safer, healthier alternative). Examples by type of emotion are provided in Handout 13.8, Opposite Action (A Behavior Channel Tool).


Ask for Help/Seek Support

Social support is a strong predictor of recovery from life's stressors, including traumatic
events. In this session, the therapist introduces the importance of reaching out to supportive, caring others when needed. Although access to social support is straightforward for
some clients, it can be complicated for others who have years of isolation, experiences of
emotional numbness, and/or strong distrust in the motives of others. Still, most people have
at least one or two people they can call on during periods of distress. These people can range
from mental health professionals to close friends, family members, and romantic partners.
In the most extreme situations of distress or lack of access to others, clients should know
that crisis hotlines exist for 24/7 support. In noncrisis situations, clients can learn to reach
out to others and talk on the phone, go for coffee, or ask to watch a movie. The options for
Ask for Help/Seek Support are endless, and the therapist encourages the client to come up
with ones that highlight specific people in their lives and that resonate with their interests.

[PAGE 220]

13. Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behavior 203


Using the Feelings Monitoring Form
with Behavior Channel Skills

All of these skills in the behavior channel aim to intervene directly with observable effects
of emotional distress. For this reason, they target a key treatment goal—the improvement
of functioning. As with other channels of emotion, the Feelings Monitoring Form can help
clarify behavioral patterns and show how they are connected to environmental triggers,
physiological experiences, and patterns of thinking. Intervening at the level of behavior is
ultimately pragmatic, as long as the client can commit to these fundamental changes. The
therapist elaborates on the power of behavioral change in the next part of this session by
expanding on the final behavior channel skill—Plan Pleasurable Activities.


EXPLORE POSITIVE EMOTIONS AND PLAN
PLEASURABLE ACTIVITIES


Making time for enjoyable activities is an essential part of life and thus an essential behavior
channel skill. It is so powerful that we recommend spending extra time with clients reviewing ways to incorporate pleasurable activities as part of their skill practice and treatment
plan. This section explores ways to expand upon this topic.


Review Rationale for Experiencing Positive Emotions

As briefly mentioned previously, this session also introduces the goal of experiencing positive emotions through actively seeking out pleasurable activities. Emotional numbing is
the flip side of hyperarousal, reflecting the “all-or-nothing” emotional responsivity of some
survivors of trauma. Some individuals describe being numb or “emotionally dead” most of
the time, with occasional extreme reactions to mild stressors. The final task of this session is
to highlight that emotion regulation means not only working toward reducing distress, but
increasing opportunities to experience positive emotions. The therapist reviews reasons to
engage in pleasurable activities, with the awareness that it may feel uncomfortable or even
scary for the client at first.


Positive emotions are rewards for distress reduction efforts

The therapist conveys to the client that emotional numbing may protect them from disabling arousal, but it also decreases or eliminates their opportunities for taking pleasure
in ordinary events. People who have experienced chronic trauma often have only a limited
capacity to respond to their environment, including the positive aspects of day-to-day life.
Increasing skills at distress reduction will make time and energy available to the client to
open up and engage in positive events, but this change too will take practice. Practicing
skills for feeling positive emotions may provide the client with “rewards” for focusing on
more taxing efforts in distress reduction activities.

[PAGE 221]

204 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Positive emotions are a form of distress management

Developing skills in experiencing positive emotions is itself a form of distress reduction.
Positive feelings can extinguish, cancel, inhibit, or attenuate negative feelings. Amusement
can extinguish anxiety. A joke can soften anger. Feelings of tenderness for someone can
modulate disappointment.


Positive emotions direct action

Just as distressing feelings of fear or anxiety do, positive emotions predispose a person to
action. Positive feelings also support the development of discipline and perseverance, which
are required for the completion of long-term goals. Enthusiasm for a particular goal or
accomplishment keeps a person working on a variety of tasks, which may not be of great
interest in themselves but are necessary to reach the desired goal.


Positive emotions enhance motivation and a sense of future possibilities

As the preceding point indicates, positive emotions can be motivation enhancers. Indeed,
they can ultimately give people the mental and physical energy to tap into their creativity
and to begin experiencing the possibility of developing and pursuing long-term life goals.
This latter possibility may be overwhelming and intimidating to a person with chronic
PTSD who is just trying to get through the day at hand; the therapist considers whether to
introduce this idea in a later session once such a client has experienced some initial relief.


Positive emotions produce greater self-awareness and connection to others

Positive emotions inform us about our preferences and give us confidence in our decision
making. Feelings of warmth toward certain other people inform us that we might want to
spend more time with them. Feelings of enthusiasm for certain activities or places confirm
for us what we would like to do or where we would like to go. Positive feelings provide us with
a surer sense of who we are and greater certainty about personal decisions. Similarly, access
to positive feelings increases our attunement to others’ needs and wants, and enhances our
capacity to empathize with others more fully. The ability to read others’ “social signals” helps
us to negotiate the first steps in relationships and to maintain them successfully.


identify and Plan Pleasurable Activities

A general strategy for modulating mood through enhancing positive emotions is to Plan
Pleasurable Activities. The therapist can begin this process by simply asking clients what
they enjoy doing or what things they do to make them feel happy. Although many clients
can answer this question, doing so may not be as simple as it sounds for other clients. Some
individuals may respond, “I dont know,” or “I dont really enjoy anything.” They may really
need to take time in or out of session to reflect more, and can be encouraged to look at this
reflection as an experiment. Is there something new they have always wanted to try? If it

[PAGE 222]

13. Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behavior 205


ends up not being pleasurable, then they can try something else. If such a client cannot
imagine enjoying anything, the therapist can ask them if they can think back to a time in
their life when they did get pleasure out of activities and start from there. The therapist may
provide suggestions or resource guides as a way to get the client thinking about specific
activities (see Handout 13.9, Pleasurable Activities List).


Review Misconceptions about Positive Emotions and Pleasurable
Activities (as Relevant)

Positive emotions require time and money

In response to being asked to engage in pleasurable activities, some clients respond, “I dont
have enough time.” For clients who view engaging in pleasurable activities as a luxury, the
therapist will need to reframe it as an essential part of recovery from trauma and discuss in
more detail how the clients can carve out some time. Other clients may say, “I dont have
enough money to do anything nice for myself.” For that reason, it is important that at least
some of the activities scheduled should not cost money. The therapist works with each client to create a list of at least three pleasurable activities they can incorporate into their life.
The client can expand on this list of ideas over the course of treatment and keep it handy.
The therapist explains that since the client is doing hard work by facing distressing aspects
of their life, they should also take the opportunity to reward themselves by building in positive activities. At first this may feel forced, but if they make the effort in the beginning, it
will become easier and more natural. This intervention provides a way for clients to expand
their range of feelings, with the idea that by allowing for and tolerating negative feelings,
the clients will also become more open to positive feelings that have been cut off as a result
of avoidance.


Positive emotions are inconsistent with self-image

It is important to keep in mind that a client may not feel they deserve to enjoy or nurture
themselves. If so, the therapist explores this issue with the client and discusses how feeling
like a “bad person” or having low self-worth is a common reaction to interpersonal trauma,
particularly childhood abuse and/or neglect. Not engaging in pleasurable activities further
confirms the client's negative self-image and perpetuates the damaging idea that they are
not entitled to positive experiences.


Doing things to create positive emotions feels “fake”

Finally, a client attempting to pursue pleasant activities may report, “It feels fake.” If so,
the therapist can suggest continuing to do so as an experiment during the treatment. The
therapist explains that low self-esteem and poor self-image are common reactions to interpersonal trauma. Some clients find the analogy of friendship helpful. The therapist can ask
such a client, “If a friend of yours is going through a hard time, and you want to encourage
this friend and make them feel better, what would you do?” The client might answer that

[PAGE 223]

206 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


they would spend time with the friend doing things they both like to do, maybe buy the
friend a small gift, or do something similar. The therapist can suggest that the client think of
engaging in pleasurable activities for themselves similarly. The client is learning to encourage and support themselves while they are doing something difficult. Often over time, the
client will find that engaging in pleasurable activities begins to feel more natural.


COMPLETE SUMMARY OF THREE CHANNELS OF EMOTION SKILLS


One of the last tasks of the session is to summarize the tools that the client has selected in
Handout 13.10, Summary of Three Channels of Emotion Skills, a set of three checklists
identifying skills the client can plan on using in the future. While the client is completing
this handout, the therapist can highlight several aspects of breaking down problems into
the three channels, as well as the benefits of introducing solutions along the three channels.
It is important to make clear to a client that the skills they plan to use are not designed
to cover over or avoid feelings, but to improve the client’s ability to manage emotions in a
more positive and effective way. In addition, the therapist can remind the client that they
can use different skills in different situations—whichever they think will work. Obviously,
most skills will influence more than one channel. Moreover, as one skill is strengthened,
others may become easier to develop. Both flexibility and practice in application are key
ingredients to improved coping.
The client should be made aware that they can slow down the movement from one
mode or channel of experiencing to another, particularly the transition from arousal (body)
to action (behavior). This experience is one with which individuals who have had trauma
or live in a chronic crisis state tend to be unfamiliar. Lastly, the therapist and client revisit
their discussion of positive emotions. For some survivors, strong emotions of any kind can
be frightening, even those that are positive. The therapist highlights again (if necessary) the
functional value of positive emotion, as well as assurances that emotion regulation skills
apply to managing positive as well as negative emotions.


APPLY NEW SKILLS TO FEELINGS MONITORING FORM


The therapist can consolidate the work of the session by using a Feelings Monitoring Form
to rework one of the problems already described on a previous copy of this form or reported
by the client. This reworking also gives clients who did not complete this form during the
week an opportunity to do so. Below is an example of how this might go.


CASE EXAMPLE


Varnella was a survivor of human sex trafficking that occurred when she was between the
ages of 15 and 19. She quickly learned to avoid her feelings and numb herself in order to

[PAGE 224]

13. Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behavior 207


function. In treatment, Varnella was beginning to identify her feelings as well as healthy
coping strategies for the first time in her life. She completed several entries on her Feelings
Monitoring Form, and together she and the therapist decided to begin with Varnella's difficulties completing an assignment she needed to do for her adult continuing education class.


THERAPIST: I see from your Feelings Monitoring Form that you really struggled to
work on the assignment that Professor Brown gave you, and it’s due the end of this
week.

VARNELLA: Yes, I just felt completely terrified and frozen. Maybe I should just drop this
class. I dont really have anything valuable to contribute anyway.

THERAPIST: Well, earlier today we were talking about how when you feel distressed,
you often have negative thoughts about yourself. Let's spend some time working
through this together, and see if we can call upon skills from all of the three chan-
nels to help reduce the intensity of your distress. Then we can see what might be
feasible as well as consistent with your goals. Youve told me before that obtaining
your associate's degree is very important to you. But on the Feelings Monitoring
Form for this week, you wrote that your thoughts were “Im never going to be able
to do this. No one will want to read what I write anyway. I am too dumb to do this.”

VARNELLA: WhenI see it all written out like that, I realize I really do have a lot of nega-
tive thoughts. It's kind of hard seeing how mean I can be to myself.

THERAPIST: Yes, it can be very difficult to realize that, but one of the important pur-
poses of the Feelings Monitoring Form is that it helps make you aware of nega-
tive thinking styles that might be impacting your emotions. So let’s start with the
thought channel. What are some coping skills from the thought channel that might
be helpful here?

VARNELLA: I really liked the Positive Self-Statements. I could say to myself, “I have
been through hard things before and I can do this.”

THERAPIST: Yes, that sounds great! Encouraging statements like that can really help.
Also, 1 wonder if we might use the Evidence Technique here to examine the
thought “I am too dumb to do this.”

VARNELLA: It’s hard for me to believe it, but I do have some evidence that I can do
things. I passed the qualifying exam, and my grades have been pretty good so far
this semester.

THERAPIST: Nice! So youre able to acknowledge some compelling evidence to counter
the belief that youre not smart enough to do your assignment. That is really excel-
lent! ... Lets bring in skills from the other channels now. I see that on your Feel-
ings Monitoring Form you listed crying and going to sleep as efforts to cope.

VARNELLA: Yeah, that tends to be what I do—just give up and shut down.

THERAPIST: So let's move over to the behavior channel. What are some tools we dis-
cussed today that you could see yourself trying?

[PAGE 225]

208 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


VARNELLA: I could try putting on music. I always forget how helpful that is for me.
Sometimes I even find myself singing along, and I feel inspired to do things. I can
also go for a walk. I guess that’s kind of Opposite Action to my urge to go to sleep
and just shut down. That might even help me come up with more ideas of what to
write about for my assignment. I dont need to give up; other ideas might come to
me if I get moving. Wow, sometimes I can really be my own worst enemy!

THERAPIST: You identified some great options from the behavior channel. And remem-
ber to give yourself a bit of time to learn these new ways of coping. It can be really
empowering to see how healthy coping skills can reduce the intensity of feelings,
or even change the feeling entirely. But it takes time and practice. Let's finish with
the body channel that we discussed last week. What are some skills from that
channel that might be helpful?

VARNELLA: I have been practicing the Focused Breathing. It really helps. If I had just
remembered to breathe, maybe I wouldn't have been so frozen and terrified.

THERAPIST: Yes, Focused Breathing can really work nicely with skills from the other
channels. It can help your body and mind slow downa bit so that you have space to
incorporate other approaches. Anything else from the body channel?

VARNELLA: Lavender. I love to smell it. I have some lavender incense, and I'll keep it on
my desk to remind me to use it when I'm doing schoolwork. I think that will really
help me to relax and focus.

THERAPIST: This is a terrific example of Soothing the Senses! Weve discussed skills
from each of the three channels that you can use together to help you manage your
feelings. These will enable you to do this class assignment, which I know is very
important to you.

VARNELLA: Yes, its very important. I really want my degree, and, truthfully, I dont
want to give up. I just felt desperate. But now I'm actually sort of eager to try put-
ting all these skills together.


SUMMARIZE GOALS OF THE SESSION


As part of the final moments of the session, the therapist briefly reminds the client of the
sessions overall goal and notes how the specific skills discussed fit into the larger treatment
approach. The ultimate goal of this session has been to put all three channels of emotion
together and demonstrate how each can support the others in a multidirectional fashion. The
therapist can note that some of the tools the client has learned today may help them with the
previous sessions body channel skills, as all three channels interact and support each other.
Also, the therapist may predict that new skills from the past two sessions can further help
with approaching challenges. Not all clients will take to all coping strategies, but now that a
large array of options are available, the therapist encourages the client to choose what skills
they want to practice the most. The therapist encourages a reluctant client to give new skills

[PAGE 226]

13. Emotion Regulation: Focus on Thoughts and Behavior 209


a try, but convey that they can focus on ones they find easiest first. For example, although a
very intellectually driven client may prefer thought channel skills, the therapist may want
to suggest behavior channel skills to balance out the client’s internally oriented tendencies.
In other cases, a therapist and client may choose to ease the path toward mastery by narrowing the focus to the clients innate strengths in one or more channels. Because we have
described several healthy skills in each channel of emotion in handouts for the client, the
therapist empowers the client to choose for themselves which handouts to review in more
detail, alongside their actual practicing of the skills on their own. In most cases, though, the
therapist gives the client copies of all handouts so they can review them as needed.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


The therapist and client should decide collaboratively what new skills the client will practice before the next session. The therapist should ask the client to continue to complete the
Feelings Monitoring Form once a day, but now include any thought or behavior channel
skills they use to help them cope, in addition to any of the body channel skills they choose
to continue using. As part of their routine, planned skills practice, the client can choose to
practice daily at least one thought channel skill and at least one behavior channel skill. If
the client has expressed interest and benefit, then they certainly should be encouraged to
continue doing any body channel skills they have found helpful (in addition to the twicedaily Focused Breathing, which should be maintained). If the client has trouble choosing a
skill from the thought and/or behavior channels, the therapist can use their own judgment
about which skill may be easiest and/or most effective for the client to practice. In addition
to this practice of new and previously learned skills, the therapist should remind the client
to engage in at least one of the enjoyable activities from the Pleasurable Activities List that
they chose earlier in the session.

[PAGE 227]

Typical Trauma-Related Thinking Patterns

O Assuming that you are not safe

O Assuming that no one is there for you or won't help you

O Avoiding thinking about your own negative emotions

O Refusing to trust others and/or yourself

O Tuning in the negative and tuning out the positive

O “Black-and-white” thinking (everything is either one way or the other;
there are no in-betweens)

da “Doomsday” thinking (“What's the use?”)

Being tyrannized by the “shoulds” (“shoulda, woulda, coulda...”)

Avoiding thoughts and memories

Thinking nonstop about problems; trying to prolong negative feelings

OoOdda “Blanking out” or dissociating


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


210

[PAGE 228]

Thought Channel Skills for Emotion Regulation
e Emotion Surfing

o Imagine your emotions are waves in the ocean, rising and falling; notice how they change
naturally over time.

o Be aware of your feelings, but just “ride on top” of them.

e Evidence Technique

o What's the proof? List the evidence for and against the accuracy of a negative thought.

o How strong is the proof? Compare the evidence for and against the accuracy of the thought, to
determine how realistic or valid it is.

o What else could it be? Consider alternatives; ask friends or people you trust for ideas.

o Try it on for size. Live with each alternative for a while, and consider the benefits.

o Let go. Be willing to let go of inaccurate or unhelpful automatic thoughts.

Thought Shifting
o Temporarily shift your attention, rather than focusing on your worries, until your distress is down
to a level where you can think clearly and act appropriately.

o Shift to another thought: Focus on something else in the room (e.g., colors, lights, smells), or
replace your thought with another thought—a positive thought/statement, memory, or image.
o Shift to a healthy activity: To help change your focus, go for a walk, listen to music, watch a
video, clean/organize, call a friend, or complete some easy tasks that remain unfinished.

Reminders/Reframes
o These are predetermined positive interpretations. Especially good are ones about accepting
your feelings, such as these:
“Feelings are just feelings, and thoughts are just thoughts; they are not facts, and they
don't have to control my behavior.”
“Feelings are short-term and will not be there forever.”
“Stuffing feelings inside only makes it harder.”

Positive Self-Statements

o These are positive thoughts, mantras, or goals to repeat regularly and commit to practicing.

Positive Imagery

o Imagine/visualize a situation or setting (real or imagined) where you feel calm and good.

o Make that image as clear and vivid as possible by imagining how the place looks, smells,
sounds, etc.

o Keep it handy. Keep pictures or symbols to remind you of the image/memory (in your phone or
wallet, or on a keychain) to help remind you of the positive setting when you're distressed.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


211

[PAGE 229]

Emotion Surfing

1. Notice your emotion.


2. Notice how it feels in your body.


3. Notice your thoughts.


4. Notice your behavior.


5. Notice the intensity of the emotion.


6. Notice how the emotion crests, like a wave.


7. Notice how the emotion (body, thoughts, behavior)
slowly changes and diminishes over time.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


212

[PAGE 230]

Examples of Positive Self-Statements (Affirmations)

e “| choose to LIVE!”

e “Excellence does not require perfection.”

e “lam letting my feelings drive my actions and beliefs. | don’t have to.”

e “If try, | can succeed.”

e “| can ask for help.”

e “lam willing to forgive.”

e “| don't have to act on this feeling. | can make choices about how | behave.”

e “The most common way people give up their power is thinking they don't
have any.”

e “This too shall pass.”

e “One day at a time.”

e “| write my own story.”


Your own personal mantra:


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


213

[PAGE 231]

Typical Trauma-Related Behaviors

Check which of these behaviors are true for you:


O Avoiding necessary daily activities to avoid anxiety (example: not opening
mail or paying bills because doing so feels like “too much”)

O Getting stuck in addictive behaviors: alcohol, drugs, food, gambling,
pornography, shopping, video games

O Purposefully avoiding taking care of yourself: restricting food intake, stopping
self-care

O Acting aggressively to distance others

O Avoiding family and friends

O Taking care of other people to avoid your own problems

Ol Avoiding having experiences that are positive or pleasurable

O Using controlling behavior to avoid feeling unsafe in situations and in
relationships

O Treating people badly when you are struggling with negative feelings

O Other:


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


214

[PAGE 232]

Behavior Channel Skills for Emotion Regulation

e Take a Break/Time Out

o Take a Break/Time Out:
= Remove yourself from the situation.
= Identify and communicate (if possible) a time you will return.

e Replacement Behaviors and Opposite Actions

o Replacement Behaviors:
= Plan to do something as a replacement for a less helpful habit or addictive behavior.
= Choose (ahead of time) options that are enjoyable.

o Opposite Actions:
= Don't give in automatically to your initial impulse when under stress.
= Choose a healthy action to counter your emotional urge.

e Ask for Help/Seek Support

o Call or text a friend/family member/sponsor/provider, and share your frustrations or ask for help.
o Attend a meeting or group.

o Ifin crisis, call a 24/7 hotline (identify your local number).

e Plan Pleasurable Activities (see Handout 13.9, Pleasurable Activities List)

o Routinely engage in meaningful and pleasant activities to increase your enjoyment.
= When distressed, use pleasant activities to improve your mood.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


215

[PAGE 233]

Time Out (A Behavior Channel Skill)
e Goal: Allowing yourself to take a break from a stressful situation until your emotional level has
decreased and you are less upset. This is deliberately choosing to take a break, not avoidance
that is automatic and unhelpful.

e When to use it

o You are struggling with an automatic response that feels overwhelming.
fe) You think you may make the situation worse.
o You are so worked up that you cannot think clearly enough to be effective in the situation.
o Example: You become very angry while arguing with a family member and think you may say
hurtful things or become violent.

e How to use it effectively

o Simply stop the discussion that is provoking your increased distress, and/or leave the situation
that is causing your escalation.

o Communicate to others what you are doing, why, and when you will be back.

o Example: *l am feeling really angry, and | need a Time Out before | say or do something | will
regret. I’m going to take the day to cool down. When | come back and you are willing, | would
like to continue this conversation.”

o During Time Out:

= Do not try to purposefully hold on to the negative emotion, increase the emotion, or try to
suppress/avoid it.
= Notice the emotion and watch it slowly ebb away.
= Engage in an activity (like a walk) or other coping strategies that will help you deescalate your
distress. Time Out can also be used with other strategies, and you may want to think about
activities that would best suit you and your needs.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


216

[PAGE 234]

Opposite Action (A Behavior Channel Skill)
Your Emotion Your Urge Opposite Action

Anxiety Avoid Approach.

Do it anyway (repeatedly).

O00 Start small.


Anger Attack/punish Practice empathy and sympathy.

Do something nice.

O00 Disengage from conflict or stressor.


Sadness Isolate/withdraw Be active.

Do things that make you feel competent.

000 Do things that you enjoy.


Guilt Hide/punish self Understand whether this feeling is justified or not.
or others
Identify and repair wrong as needed.

OOo Commit to doing things differently in future, accept
consequences, and let go.


Shame Hide O Understand whether this feeling is justified or not.

Accept and have compassion for self.

Commit to doing things differently in the future, accept
consequences, and let go.


O0 O0 O0 O0 O0
Feeling Shut down/avoid Slow things down.
overwhelmed
Be present in the current moment.

Makea list.

Start with small steps.

Do it anyway (repeatedly).


Hopelessness Give up Do it anyway (repeatedly).

OO Start small.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


217

[PAGE 235]

Pleasurable Activities List

Arts and crafts Listening to music

Bike riding Meditating

Browsing in a bookstore Painting

Camping Pampering yourself (haircut, shave, manicure/
pedicure, facial, etc.)
Cooking
People watching
Dancing
Photography
Drawing
Playing music
Exercising
Playing board games/cards with friends or family
Fishing
Playing with pets or kids
Gardening
Reading a book
Getting a massage
Relaxing in the park
Going for a drive
Sitting in a coffee shop
Going hiking
Supporting a cause
Going on a picnic
Swimming
Going to church
Taking a long hot bath
Going to a library
Taking an interesting class
Going to a play or concert
Taking a walk
Going to a museum
Talking on the phone with a friend
Having lunch/dinner with a friend
Visiting friends
Hanging out with a good friend
Viewing beautiful scenery
Helping a friend
Volunteering
Jogging
Watching a game on TV
Journal writing
Watching a favorite movie
Lifting weights

Others:


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


218

[PAGE 236]

Summary of Three Channels of Emotion Skills

Skills Practice
Check which of these skills you want
to practice on your own. Remember,
Body
practicing helps you: Ol Focused Breathing
e Use the skill. Ol Basic Self-Care
e Troubleshoot any problems with O Soothing the Senses
using it. 9
e Add it to your toolbox for when O Progressive Muscle Relaxation
you need it most. O Other Mindfulness-Based
Exercises for the Body


6l¢e


Thoughts Behavior

Ol Emotion Surfing O Take a Break/Time Out
Ol Evidence Technique or Slow Down
A \


L] Thought Shifting O Replacement Behaviors

O Positive Imagery Ol Opposite Action

LJ Reminders/Reframes O Ask for Help/Seek Support
Ol Positive Self-Statements O Plan Pleasurable Activities


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and
Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page
for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 237]

Emotionally Engaged Living
Distress Tolerance


To the degree that our emotions get in the way of or enhance
our ability to think and plan, to pursue . . . a distant goal,
to solve problems and the like, they define the limits of our
capacity... and so determine how we doin life.
— DANIEL GOLEMAN (1995, p. 80)


For many survivors of abuse, the only alternatives to living painful and out-of-control lives
are emotional avoidance, social withdrawal, and limited pleasure in daily activities, all of
which severely limit actualization of their potential. In this session, therapists encourage
clients to identify positive goals for themselves, to articulate their desires and wishes, and to
consider ways in which they may realize them. Starting to break away from the familiarity
of an avoidant lifestyle will raise anxiety and distress in the short term. Clients will need
support from their therapists as they develop skills centered around choosing which goals
to attempt, pacing the pursuit of goals, weighing the costs and benefits of any new experiencea, and planning for managing any expected distress that may emerge. This concept of
“distress tolerance” and the skills associated with it are key interventions in this effort.
The concept of distress tolerance may seem counterintuitive to both therapists and
clients. As one client said, “I have spent my whole life being distressed. I don't want to tolerate it any more. I want to learn to stop it!” What we have found, however, is that clients are
often not tolerating distress when doing so would actually be most helpful to them. Rather,
they have developed ways of avoiding distress that feels overwhelming and out of control.
The primary goal of Sessions 3 and 4 has been to help clients feel empowered by developing
coping strategies for emotion regulation. Now that clients are learning to manage their emotions, this session focuses on enabling clients to accept their feelings and tolerate distress for
an important purpose: the pursuit of valued goals.
Clients will often balk at this idea, for the reasons mentioned above. It is therefore very
important to link the introduction of distress tolerance to the pursuit of valued goals. Clients
have often lived with distress that had no discernible purpose or personal value, but was


220

[PAGE 238]

14. Emotionally Engaged Living 221


simply the result of having the impulses and the will of others imposed upon them. Now clients learn that tolerating distress does not have to be revictimizing, but that it can, at times,
be adaptive and can even help them reach goals they have set (instead of goals others have
set for them). Rather than being victims of their distress, clients can choose distress tolerance with a purpose and as a form of empowerment. In addition, and as an extension of the
previous sessions introduction to positive emotions, this session encourages clients to value
positive feelings as a guide to goal identification, and to engage in “approach behaviors”
toward positive life experiences.


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


As in other sessions, the therapist begins with a brief check-in on the client’s current emotional state, followed by a review of the clients between-session skills practice. The Feelings Monitoring Form entries provide the best overview of the client’s use of applied skills.
The therapist also asks about the client's progress in practicing any specific skills in the
three channels of emotion agreed upon in the last session, as well as their continued use of
Focused Breathing. The client's report may prove useful in this session when considering
the match between goals and skills to tolerate distress. If the client is having difficulty, the
therapist can say that today they will talk about how to match skills to efforts at reaching a
particular goal the client wants to reach. If the client did not complete any part of the practice, the therapist helps problem-solve any practical barriers and reviews the rationale for
between-session skills practice (as needed). If the client has not completed an entry in the
Feelings Monitoring Form, the therapist can say something like: “Today we'll be identifying a goal that’s important to you right now. Doing this might help you use the form to keep
track of how working toward that goal is going.”


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


This session integrates the previous four sessions by introducing the concept of distress tolerance and the importance of making conscious choices about when to use newly acquired
skills to help reach valued goals. A key element of the session is thus the consolidation of
skills learned thus far in STAIR. Box 14.1 outlines the sessions overall content, major tasks
and topic areas.


PRESENT CONCEPT OF DISTRESS TOLERANCE


The therapist can introduce the idea of distress tolerance as follows:


“Distress tolerance is the ability to endure pain or hardship without resorting to actions
or behaviors that are damaging to yourself or others. Distress tolerance is a necessary

[PAGE 239]

222 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Theme and Curriculum for Session 5
Emotionally Engaged Living: Distress Tolerance


This session introduces the counterintuitive idea that tolerating and even accepting some emo-
tional distress can be healthy and can advance the client toward improved life functioning.
A clear distinction is made between distress that results from trauma, and necessary distress
that emerges as part of reaching one’s chosen goals. This session provides clients with practice
in identifying goals, determining the value of each goal in relation to unavoidable distress,
and deciding to reject or accept the goal and attendant distress. A key task in this session is to
identify and consolidate skills from each of the three channels that are working well for the
client, and to highlight ways the skills can be integrated to help manage a single situation. The
selection of valued goals provides an opportunity for the client and therapist to consolidate the
client’s mastery of skills and integrate their use into daily life. Each of the previous sessions has
introduced new skills. This session provides an opportunity to take a “step back” and review
which skills have been working well for the client, and consciously and purposefully to review
their potential value in reaching a valued goal. Lastly, the therapist encourages the client to
value positive feelings as a guide to goal identification, and to engage in “approach behaviors”
toward positive life experiences.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Review concept of distress tolerance. Bring extra copies of the Feelings Monitoring Form
(Handout 11.3) and a copy of each of the two handouts for this session. Prepare several exam-
ples of tolerating distress in pursuit of valued goals that may be relevant to your client in the
treatment. The work in the session is estimated to take about 60 minutes; a flexible application
is assumed (i.e., not every client will need all interventions).


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Present concept of distress tolerance.
Assess the client's distress tolerance skills.
Connect distress tolerance to client’s goals.
Present and practice skill of assessing Pros and Cons.
Match distress reduction strategies to goals.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 240]

14. Emotionally Engaged Living 223


Introduce practice of distress tolerance during life’s “random moments.”
Discuss role of positive feelings in pursuing goals.
Prepare client for work on interpersonal problems.
Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
Complete Feelings Monitoring Form once a day (note positive and negative emotions).
Specify coping skills in any channel that were used to deal with difficult feelings or situ-
ations described in entries.
Identify three emotion regulation skills relevant to client’s needs and practice one each
day, especially in situations where tolerating distress is helpful.
Continue to practice Focused Breathing twice daily.
Schedule at least one pleasurable activity per week.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 14.1. What Is Distress Tolerance and Why Should I Do It?

Handout 14.2. Using Three Channels of Emotion Skills to Reach Goals

Additional copies of Handout 11.3. Feelings Monitoring Form


skill that most of us practice on a daily basis. For example, you practice distress toler-
ance when you effectively control your anger in confronting a friend who you feel has
wronged you. In your work life, successful distress tolerance may involve managing
your anxiety when you are receiving a performance review from your supervisor. By
managing your anxiety, you can be open to what your supervisor says and can calmly
assert yourself when you feel theyre mistaken. Skillful distress tolerance is particularly
important during periods when we want to make changes in our lives. Change, by its
nature, often creates some level of anxiety, fear, or other strong feelings in ourselves and
in those around us. That’s normal. Managing these feelings so that we can make the
changes most important to us requires distress tolerance.”


Once the therapist has explained what distress tolerance is, the next step is to work
with the client to help them understand why it is beneficial to learn to recognize and tolerate distress. Below, we have outlined some of the reasons we talk about distress tolerance
with clients. The therapist can also use Handout 14.1, What Is Distress Tolerance and Why
Should I Do It?, to help guide the discussion with the client.


Distress is a catalyst. Distress is a catalyst for change in recovering from childhood
trauma. For example, it is often distress that prompts clients to come for treatment. These
feelings of distress are signals that something is wrong; they indicate areas of the clients’
lives that they need to attend to or change. It is important to help clients understand that

[PAGE 241]

224 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


preparing to make significant changes in life is very likely to involve some anticipatory anxiety and discomfort. If clients do not allow themselves to be in touch with this distress, there
will be no motivation to make important changes.


2. Avoiding distress saps energy. Clients who were abused as young children have
often developed fairly elaborate ways of avoiding distress that require a great deal of energy
to maintain. For example, one client who became very distressed when alone at night always
worked the night shift. Not only was this strategy draining to her physically; it forced her
into a schedule that impeded her from developing relationships. She spent her energy organizing her life around avoiding uncomfortable feelings, rather than spending it pursuing
things that were important to her.


3. Avoiding distress restricts positive feelings. Learning to tolerate more negative, difficult feelings has the benefit of allowing a person to be more open to experiencing positive
feelings as well. It is impossible to avoid only negative feelings, so when clients try to do so,
they also end up restricting positive ones as well. As a result, many survivors of trauma have
a very restricted range of emotions; they often report feeling “numb” and unable to enjoy
things in their lives even when they consciously want to do so. This pattern, unfortunately,
also disrupts their ability to connect with loved ones.


4. Avoiding distress interferes with achieving desired goals. Enduring some degree
of distress is necessary if people want to accomplish goals that are important to them. Clients coming to treatment will often have limited their lives and experiences in many ways,
in order to avoid distress—and, in the backs of their minds, to reduce their chances of
being hurt again as they were hurt as children. This pattern is often most apparent in their
interpersonal relationships, particularly their romantic relationships. Survivors of childhood maltreatment were often hurt by caregivers on whom they most depended and with
whom they were most vulnerable. Being in an intimate relationship raises these feelings of
vulnerability and fears that if they let themselves trust someone, they will be hurt again. In
fact, this transferring of early experiences with caregivers to later close relationships is the
primary impact of attachment across the lifespan.


5. Avoiding distress contributes to PTSD symptoms. Many clients have come to treatment with a primary goal of decreasing or getting rid of their PTSD symptoms. Given that
many therapists and clients will follow the STAIR module with the Narrative Therapy module, which involves discussion and analyses of traumatic experiences, therapists can remind
these clients of the value of distress tolerance in reaching this goal. Avoiding trauma memories contributes to the continued presence of PTSD symptoms. Distress about childhood
trauma is inevitable, but ignoring or denying this distress or the trauma fails to make the
distress go away. Although attempts to avoid or escape the distress are understandable, they
unfortunately typically result in prolonging and exacerbating pain and suffering. Not having early opportunities to develop healthy coping skills certainly fosters both more severe
and chronic distress. Learning distress tolerance strategies while confronting the emotional

[PAGE 242]

14. Emotionally Engaged Living 225


pain of the trauma will lead to an alleviation of this suffering. Indeed, this healthy tolerating
and confronting of trauma is what makes the Narrative Therapy component of this treatment program so powerful in resolving PTSD symptoms.


ASSESS CLIENT’S DISTRESS TOLERANCE SKILLS

identify Successes

The therapist works with the client to identify specific situations in their life where they
chose to tolerate distress and where doing so produced a positive outcome. All clients have
tolerated distress successfully in some aspects of their lives at some time. Often clients can
easily identify the areas of their lives where they need work, but have little awareness of
areas where they are successful. For example, a client who has managed to complete education or training in a demanding area has had to tolerate and manage their anxiety related
to performing well on exams. Or a client who has carried a child in utero has had to tolerate the distress of pregnancy and childbirth. In coming to therapy, clients have tolerated
the distress of sharing their trauma history and some of their most intimate feelings with
a stranger, in the hopes of feeling better and improving their lives. Linking the concept of
distress tolerance to clients” past successes will make the concept seem less frightening.


identify Maladaptive Strategies

Once the therapist and client have identified how the client has successfully tolerated distress in the past, they can work together to identify ways in which the client has experienced
problems resulting from avoiding distress unsuccessfully. Examples can be drawn from Sessions 3 and 4, in which the therapist and client have reviewed ineffective or harmful coping strategies for negative mood regulation. In our experience, clients tend to move among
several unhelpful approaches: externalization, internalization, and avoidance.


Externalization

Common externalizing behaviors include using alcohol or other substances; yelling and
screaming at others; and behaving in unsafe, violent, or aggressive ways. Clients whose
externalizing behaviors are extreme enough that they put their safety or that of others at
risk—such as current alcohol misuse, physical violence, or serious risk taking—will need to
have those issues addressed first. However, even clients who exhibit some of these behaviors can benefit from this treatment as a means by which to resolve these problems. As an
example, one client came to treatment with a history of getting into “screaming matches”
with his husband, often triggered by his implicit feelings of not feeling valued or prioritized
in their relationship. Over time, he was able to diffuse his explosive reactions and redirect
the energy into communicating his more vulnerable feelings in a calm, collaborative way.
This example also previews the role of communication skills, which are the focus of STAIR
Sessions 6-9.

[PAGE 243]

226 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Internalization

A natural alternative to externalization is, of course, internalization. Often considered a
redirection of anger and fear inward, examples of internalizing behaviors include self-injury
(e.g., cutting, burning, or hitting oneself) and eating disturbances (binge eating, purging,
or self-starvation). For example, a client in one of our studies had the tendency to binge-eat
when she became very anxious, including in anticipation of or following a date. Because
her binge eating was clearly a reaction to a specific trigger and was not frequent enough to
pose arisk to her health, this treatment was appropriate for her. Work on emotion regulation
helped her replace binge eating with healthy behaviors, including exercising moderately
and calling supportive friends. In addition, she accepted that the distress she experienced,
if managed in a healthy way, was worth the opportunity to have a social life.


Avoidance

Clients who have experienced trauma, especially in childhood, often try to protect themselves by arranging their lives to avoid reminders (e.g., particular thoughts, feelings, or
places) of what happened. Avoidance of these generalized triggers also enables them to avoid
confronting distressing feelings associated with the trauma memories themselves. For example, clients may report prematurely breaking off relationships when conflict arises, because
it makes them so distressed. Clients may also have limited their professional lives by not
taking advantage of opportunities or by not advocating for themselves, because of the fear
that if they assert themselves, they will be harmed. In many cases, avoidance has become
so integral to these clients’ lives that they do not recognize it or see it as effortful any more.
Clients must recognize how they are relying on avoidance, learn to tolerate distress, and take
appropriate emotional risks in order to make important changes and reach their goals.


CONNECT DISTRESS TOLERANCE TO CLIENT’S GOALS


As already mentioned, one of the main aims of this treatment is to teach skills for distress
tolerance in relationship to identified goals, instead of having clients learn to tolerate distress for its own sake. The emphasis is on determining whether a client's goals are important
or beneficial enough that tolerating some discomfort and distress in the process of attaining
them is manageable and worthwhile.


identify Specific Goals

At this point, the therapist will have a good idea of what brought the client to treatment and
what their long- and short-term goals might be. In this session, it is important to identify a
couple of goals the client can accomplish or begin to address substantially in the time frame
of treatment.
Some clients may have difficulty identifying specific goals. For example, it is not
uncommon for a client to say, “I just want to feel better.” Although the client will likely feel
better by the end of the treatment, it is important to identify specific goals, so that both the

[PAGE 244]

14. Emotionally Engaged Living 227


Examples of Specific Personal Goals

Completing therapy Sharing history of trauma with a close friend

Asking for a raise Reading personal poetry in public

Performing music in front of an audience Going back to school

Beginning to date or entering a romantic Starting an exercise program
relationship
Asking someone out for coffee

Searching for a new job Recontacting an estranged child
Creating better boundaries with a parent Reestablishing an old friendship

Improving parenting skills Attending a high school reunion
Reaching or maintaining a healthy weight
Helping other survivors of trauma
range
Meeting with a lawyer about custody issues
Discussing with a partner their poor
spending habits

Establishing a regular sleep schedule


therapist and the client can evaluate whether the treatment is succeeding. If the client is
being vague, the therapist might ask, “Why do you want to feel better?”, “What would be
different in your life if you felt better?”, or “Describe what you would be doing lor who you
would be] if you felt better.” Most clients will have unspoken ideas about specific ways in
which their lives would be different if they “felt better.” By verbalizing what they hope for,
a client can begin to brainstorm goals. The client's goals can be of any type in any area of
life. Box 14.2 contains some examples of specific goals our clients have worked on during
and after treatment.
Clients often have many things they would like to change about themselves and their
lives. It is one of the reasons they are in therapy. The greater difficulty will be choosing
which goals they want to prioritize. The first priorities in choosing a goal are (1) its importance to a client, and (2) the positive consequences of pursuing the goal. To identify which
goal is most important, the therapist can have the client identify what they would change
first, which goal is most immediate, or which goal would have the greatest impact on other
areas of their life.


PRESENT AND PRACTICE SKILL OF ASSESSING PROS AND CONS

Introduce Skill and Its Purpose

The skill of Assessing Pros and Cons is a strategy that can aid in determining whether
reaching a specific goal is worth tolerating distress. This skill involves (1) selecting a situation related to reaching an important goal, (2) evaluating the necessity of distress tolerance in pursuing this goal, and (3) identifying a comprehensive list of the advantages and

[PAGE 245]

228 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


disadvantages of tolerating the situation and its associated feelings. The point of this exercise
is for the client to recognize that they do not have to tolerate distress if it does not serve a
purpose. Rather, the client is learning to tolerate distress because it is inevitable and worth
the effort in the context of working toward a life goal. The concept of linking the presence
of distress with identified goals is particularly important when goals require long-term work
and when working toward them does not offer an immediate benefit or sense of relief.


identify the Goal

Sometimes a goal a client proposes will need to be reworked or broken down into more
focused goals for which the therapist and client can identify specific implementation strategies. For example, a client named Alice reported, “I become very scared when I am asked
to show my artwork. When I get scared, I stop working, start avoiding appointments, act
irresponsibly, become depressed, and ruin the show.” Her goal: “T want to be a famous artist.” Alice's desire to be a famous artist was problematic for the treatment, because it was
not within her direct control and was dependent on too many outside forces, including luck.
Through discussion with her therapist, Alice was able to restate the goal more concretely: “I
want to show my artwork publicly, and ultimately be able to support myself financially as a
full-time artist.” This goal could then be broken down into smaller steps that the client and
therapist could address in the treatment, including finding a studio space, joining a support
group for local artists, contacting gallery owners who had shown interest in her work, and
working regularly to prepare for a show.


Evaluate the Necessity for Distress Tolerance

Before working through specific Pros and Cons to evaluate a goal, the client may first consider
whether there is indeed any distress tolerance necessarily involved in reaching the goal. The
concept of “necessary suffering” can help clients evaluate whether they are tolerating distress
that is required to reach a goal, or whether they are tolerating unwarranted distress. Clients
can ask themselves, “Is it really necessary to tolerate distress to reach this goal?”
Clients who are unclear about the answer to this question might ask a friend for their
thoughts on the situation. An alternative strategy is to use displacement. A client can imagine that someone they care about is tolerating a distressing situation to reach a valued goal.
Do they see an alternative way for their friend to reach the goal? Do they think their friend
has to stay in the situation to reach the goal?
For example, one client wanted to become an architect. Part of the training involved
an extensive apprenticeship with someone in the field. This particular client was elated
when she got a placement with a very prominent architect. Quickly after starting the work,
however, it became apparent that the architect was very abusive. The situation only became
worse over time. Initially, the client thought she had to tolerate the distressing situation to
reach her goal of becoming an architect. After discussing her situation in therapy, though,
the client realized that she might be tolerating unnecessary suffering. She decided to explore
getting another placement with someone who was known to be a good mentor.

[PAGE 246]

14. Emotionally Engaged Living 229


identify Advantages and Disadvantages

The therapist can write out the identified goal at the top of a clean sheet of paper and divide
the sheet into two columns, headed “Pros” and “Cons.” In reviewing the Pros and Cons, the
client determines first the level of distress they expect to experience, and then the strategies
they have for managing or reducing the distress. Afterward, the client determines whether
the remaining distress is worthwhile. In addition to providing a specific example of how to
use skills, this exercise is a productive way to prepare and enlist the client in facing challenges inherent in the treatment.
If the client has difficulty with generating Pros and Cons for an identified goal, the
therapist can review a specific goal of the treatment—for example, reducing PTSD symptoms. Therapists can prompt clients to ask themselves questions such as: “Why am I putting
myself through this?”, “What is my ultimate goal here?”, and “Will I get enough positive
results out of this situation that tolerating these distressing feelings will be worth it?” The
associated Pros might be better daily functioning, improvement in relationships, and better
sleep, while the Cons might be reliving painful memories.


CASE EXAMPLE:
IDENTIFYING GOALS AND GENERATING PROS AND CONS


Beth was a 40-year-old woman with a history of sexual abuse and violations in the context of
intimate relationships. In childhood, her uncle, a central caregiver, had repeatedly molested
her. She described a “special” relationship with him and noted that prior to the abuse, she
had trusted and loved him very much. In college, she was raped by a boyfriend—again, a
person with whom she had previously felt closeness and trust. Beth felt that these experiences influenced her choice at age 26 to marry a man whom she did not find sexually attractive and who did not express much interest or initiative in a sexual relationship with her. She
divorced him several years later, and since that time had not been involved in any romantic
relationships. Although she had felt unfulfilled in many ways over the past 10 years, she also
described feeling safe and well protected by the “wall” that she had built to keep others
(regardless of gender) from getting too close.
At the beginning of treatment, Beth shared that Doug, a friend she had known for a
few years, had recently told her he was romantically interested in her. She expressed tremendous ambivalence and anxiety about this situation. Beth was aware that getting closer
to Doug would create anxiety and upheaval in her life. She also stated that she liked and
felt comfortable with Doug and feared that if she didnt try to get closer to him, she would
regret it and might not get another chance. As part of treatment, her therapist suggested
that Beth assess the Pros and Cons to help her decide whether it would be worthwhile and
manageable for her to tolerate the distress and anxiety that would arise if she accepted his
request for a date.
Beth initially identified that her most ambitious goal would be to develop a wonderful
relationship with Doug and maybe get married. The therapist suggested that they shift the

[PAGE 247]

230 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Beth’s Pros and Cons List

Goals: Developing a more intimate relationship with Doug, learning to open up,
becoming close to someone in a healthy way


Pros Cons

Having companionship Making myself vulnerable

Developing an important connection Risking getting hurt

Having somebody to depend on Feeling foolish and anxious

Learning to enjoy sex Having to deal with sexual problems

Being with someone who is supportive Having to confront the abuse

Developing a deeper relationship Risking a good friendship


focus away from this overwhelming, uncontrollable, and distant goal to a more realistic and
manageable set of smaller subgoals. These subgoals included going on a first date, developing more intimacy with Doug, learning to be more open, and becoming close to another
person in a healthy way. Breaking down the larger goal into more realistic, immediate subgoals was an intervention in itself, as it helped reduce Beth’s anxiety. She was then able
to generate a useful list of Pros and Cons about committing herself to these smaller goals
(presented in Box 14.3).
Beth’s Pros and Cons list helped her to identify how her history of abuse was getting in
the way of potentially having a rewarding relationship with Doug. She decided it was worth
tolerating some distress for the possibility of developing a closer relationship with him. For
the next week, she chose the first step as asking him to go see a movie he had mentioned
wanting to see together.


MATCH DISTRESS REDUCTION STRATEGIES TO GOALS


A key task in this session is to identify and consolidate skills from each of the three channels of emotion that are working well for the client, and to highlight ways in which these
skills can be integrated to help managea single situation. The selection of a valued goal provides an opportunity for the client and therapist to consolidate skills strength and integrate
their use. Each of the previous sessions has introduced new skills. This session provides an
opportunity to take a “step back” and review what skills have been working well for the
client, and then consciously and purpose review their potential value in reaching a valued
goal. Handout 14.2, Using the Three Channels of Emotion Skills to Reach Goals, provides a
checklist of skills for the therapist and client to use together to tailor strategies to the client's
needs and goals.

[PAGE 248]

14. Emotionally Engaged Living 231


The case below describes a way in which a client and therapist organized skills to meet
a valued goal. In addition, David's case demonstrates a situation where the client was not
clear about what his goals could or should be. In such a circumstance, a default goal can
always be completing the therapy. This goal is inherently worthwhile and concrete, and
identifying skills in the three channels to support this goal can reinforce the client's sense
of mastery, focus, and commitment.


CASE EXAMPLE: CONSOLIDATING SKILLS
TO SUPPORT THE GOAL OF COMPLETING THERAPY


David was a young U.S. Army veteran who had served in Iraq. One of his close friends
who served with him in combat was killed in an explosion, and David witnessed his death.
David had also experienced childhood physical abuse at the hands of his father, who would
punish him for any displays of vulnerability. As a child, he quickly learned to put on a brave
face no matter what he was feeling inside. Adopting such a brave face was exactly what he
did when he lost one of his best friends and had to continue performing in the line of duty
despite his grief.
David had a previous history of dropping out of psychotherapy, and he had been ambivalent so far in this treatment as well, sometimes canceling sessions and rarely doing the
between-session skills practice. As he and the therapist began to work through the topic
of distress tolerance, David was able to articulate some of his concerns about completing
STAIR Narrative Therapy, and he agreed to analyze the Pros and Cons of staying in treatment and completing the program.


THERAPIST: I'm really glad were talking about this. It is absolutely true that engaging
in therapy can be extremely challenging, and it is important that we acknowledge
those challenges as well as the potential benefits, so that you can feel empowered
about continuing in therapy or not. Let's begin by writing down the Pros and Cons
of completing STAIR Narrative Therapy.

Davip: Well, my wife is the one who pushed me to come here, so one Pro is that she
will be happy.

THERAPIST: That’s good, but what impact would that have on you?

DAVID: Well, she is always telling me that I keep everything inside and it drives her
crazy. I really do care about her, and I would like to be able to share things with
her.

THERAPIST: Great. Let's put that down as a Pro. What other Pros and Cons come to
mind?

DAvID: Honestly, a Con is that I feel nervous about completing the practice outside of
our sessions. When I stare at the blank sheet of paper, I feel overwhelmed. It is
really scary to share my feelings, even on a piece of paper. In my life, expressing
my feelings hasn't been such a good thing to do.

[PAGE 249]

232 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


THERAPIST: Yes, that has been your experience at times in the past, so it makes sense
that you would feel that way now. I think you have actually named two cons—
feeling overwhelmed about doing the skills practice of completing the Feelings
Monitoring Form, and fear related to identifying feelings.

DAVID: It has been very weird to talk so much about feelings. But I've already learned
that a lot of times when I'm feeling angry, it's really something else underneath,
like sadness or fear, or especially guilt.

THERAPIST: Excellent. So this is another Pro—increasing your emotional awareness.
And why might increasing your emotional awareness be a good thing?

DAVID: Because anger just covers everything up. I wish there was an easier way, but I
know the first step to healing is allowing myself to feel sadness and other emotions
that are so hard to feel. And I know you said emotions are messengers, so I guess
Im missing out on some things that might be important for me to know.

THERAPIST: Very good point, David. What other Pros and Cons come to mind?

DAVID: I need to get my PTSD under control. I've just been spinning my wheels since
I got back from Iraq. I want to be a good husband. I want to get a job I like. I used
to enjoy doing fun things, and I would love to get back to that.

THERAPIST: These are all terrific Pros. Now that you have a complete list, take a look.
Compare the Pros and Cons. Based upon what you have outlined, is the goal of
completing this treatment worth pursuing?

Davip: Absolutely, when I look at it this way! I have to say I’ve never really acknowl-
edged all the challenges of addressing my PTSD. It's just something I know Im
supposed to do. But being very open with the Cons of doing it, and knowing that I
have some tools to manage those Cons and the distress that comes with them—this
all makes me feel more confident.

THERAPIST: Terrific, David. Now let's talk about some of the coping skills from each of
the three channels you can use to tolerate the distress that might come up.

DAVID: I really like the Focused Breathing. Even though I haven't been practicing it as
much as I should, it’s already helping.

THERAPIST: Very good. What other body-based skills could you use?

DAVID: I really love petting my dog. In fact, I'm thinking about getting her certified as
a service animal.

THERAPIST: Sounds like petting your dog is a good example of Soothing the Senses.
Let's move on to thought channel coping skills.

DAvID: When I get overwhelmed with the feelings monitoring, I can use a positive
self-statement and encourage myself to keep going. I can also list all the reasons
that doing the worksheets and coming to appointments too are so important. This
includes a better relationship with my wife, feeling better about myself, and so on.
I can also look at the evidence and see that I've been through much, much harder
and worse things, and I survived after all of that.

[PAGE 250]

14. Emotionally Engaged Living 233


THERAPIST: Excellent ideas, David. And let’s add “feeling better about myself” as a Pro
for completing the treatment. Let's finish up with behavior channel tools.

DAvID: The first one that comes to mind is that I can take a Time Out if I am doing a
Feelings Monitoring Form and get overwhelmed. Probably the hardest one is that
I can try to reach out for help or support. I know that I can reach out to you, and I
knowI can get help from my wife, too.


David and his therapist went on to generate strategies that he could employ to help
him complete his between-session assignments, as well as ways the therapist can help him
accomplish that. The Pros and Cons for completing STAIR Narrative Therapy that David
and his therapist identified are listed in Box 14.4. The therapist helped clarify that the Cons
David identified in regard to completing treatment had mostly to do with fearing being
overwhelmed by the feelings that came up, particularly during skills practice. David was
able to identify several skills he could use to manage his fear of being overwhelmed by his
feelings (see Box 14.5).


Flexible Application of Skills

Clients can also become aware that they prefer certain emotion regulation strategies for
specific situations and may not choose these skills in others. For example, if a client is
anxious before a meeting with their boss, they might use Focused Breathing several times
during the preceding days to reach and maintain a calmer state. They might also keep their
anxiety in check by engaging in anxiety-reducing activities consistent with their goals, such
as taking a relaxing bath, preparing/writing out what they plan to say, and doing laundry or
otherwise making sure they have clean and appropriate clothes for the meeting. Talking late


David’s Pros and Cons List

Goal: Completing STAIR Narrative Therapy


Pros Cons

Make wy wife happy Feel overwhelmed by doing feelings

Shave things with wy wife monitoring
Increase emotional awareness Fear of identifying feelings
(and what | will find)
Get my PTSD under control so that | can:
Be a good husband
Get a job | like
Enjoy doing fun things again

Feel better about myself

[PAGE 251]

s,pineg payajdwog MOopuey Zvi

SS2J}SIG |32UB.J9]0

YOOUD YOIUM JO asauj Sj INS NOA ued
SSN 0} 9}eJ9]0} *SSAI SIP JOQUAUI Y 0]
Apog
asn Sj INS USym BuneJa]o] ssa.J1sip 7 pasn904 Buiyyesig
sdıay ınoA Y] seg 9J/e9-4/9S
A Bulyjoos ay] sesuas 324) (Gop
e ypeay unoK *sjeoB
e SAT INOÁ "sanjen
Y] aarssalbold ajosnyy uonexejay
e anoldwj ınoA sdiysuoneja4
jnoyyM) Buisneo anpun wey LI JOUJO peseg-s oujnjpul|
0} "(inoA sasio1ax3 JO} au] Apog


234


Joineyag
sjybnoyL
El uojowsz Buying [A oye] & Pesjg | su no
[A] |SOUSPIAZF anbiuy9a 24,1) u22q
JO MOIS UMOQ
\ A

ybnoAy4 yonw as om puo (jparnınans I JusWaDR|dey sJOo/Neyag
I }yßnoy| Bumyıys I aysoddo uonoy
I anılsod Aısßewj [A] SW JO} 1998/d|9H oddns
E] sewelJay/siapulvuay w04}) zsidvsayz puo (ajim
[A] SANISOG SJUSWSIEIS-J9S I] UBld a1qeInseald SOIPANOY

SIYL) S! yMoM (jbulop

[PAGE 252]

14. Emotionally Engaged Living 235


into the night on the phone with friends might reduce the clients distress but might not be
consistent with their goal, which includes being alert and attentive at the meeting. Handout
14.2 provides a checklist of skills for a therapist and client to use together to tailor strategies
to the client's needs and goals.


INTRODUCE PRACTICE OF DISTRESS TOLERANCE
DURING LIFE’S “RANDOM MOMENTS”

Describe Rationale for Acceptance of Negative Feelings

Up to this point, the emphasis of this session has been on tolerating distress associated
with the clients active pursuit of specific, identifiable goals. However, the therapist can
note that feelings of distress also frequently emerge during more or less “random moments”
in peoples lives. They may experience episodic anxiety, sadness, and frustration during
everyday unexpected hassles, during difficult interactions with others, or simply as a result
of dysregulated biological rhythms (e.g., disrupted sleep-wake cycles). Also, despite efforts
at proactive management of symptoms, there will be inevitable occasions where symptoms
occur unexpectedly and are not controllable. For example, a clients reliving and hyperarousal symptoms may be triggered automatically by environmental stimuli that unconsciously remind them of their traumatic experiences.
In these and other similar circumstances, the therapist can note that it is not always
possible to change or decrease negative emotions. Indeed, there are occasions where it may
be preferable not to work toward changing the negative feelings. Rather, some negative
emotional states can be accepted as common, typical, and necessary parts of human life.
Indeed, exercising acceptance of negative emotions during difficult events often paradoxically culminates in clients’ feeling less distress. If it seems helpful in this session, the therapist can refer back to previous work on acknowledging the important messages that each
emotion can tell us about our experience.


Provide Examples of Accepting Negative Feelings in Everyday Life

The therapist can identify situations where acceptance may work well for the client. For
example, it is easy to feel anger or anxiety while having to wait in a long line of customers at
a grocery store or bank. In this situation, through simply being mindful of feelings of anger
and anxiety, the client can learn to tolerate increasing levels of this type of everyday life distress. The therapist can suggest that the client explore this option ofpracticing mindfulness.
The client can perceive or simply be aware that “this experience is what anger (or anxiety)
feels like,” but can do so without directly responding to, acting on, or overidentifying with
the feeling state. Acceptance is an experience of being aware of feelings without trying to
change, reject, or suppress them. It may also be important to note that acceptance does not
mean having to welcome the feelings or trying not to be bothered by them. In fact, sometimes stating to themselves matter-of-factly, “I dont like it when I feel this way,” or “It's hard
to feel this way,’ can be helpful as well. When the client is not putting energy into pushing

[PAGE 253]

236 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


away feelings, it will be easier for them to work on trying to be kinder and less self-critical
to themselves while dealing with unavoidable, difficult feelings.
Clients may find that if they simply observe their emotional symptoms with a sense of
nonjudgmental awareness, their symptoms will often be more short-lived than if they try
to avoid their feelings altogether or engage in self-destructive behaviors in an attempt to
make their feelings go away. In fact, by observing and accepting a certain degree of negative
affect, clients will typically find that negative emotions will abate on their own.


Provide Examples of Accepting Intense Feelings and Moods

The therapist can also note that survivors of trauma often experience intense feelings and
then engage in behaviors to minimize or rid themselves of such feelings—behaviors that
result in perpetuating the negative feelings or putting them into worse circumstances. For
example, a client may wake up in an intensely sad state, and in response to it may stay in bed
all day, missing work and other responsibilities. This client may then feel guilty and berate
themselves for missing work. They may also be in trouble with their boss. As a result, they
may start feeling depressed. The client’s response to their initial feelings may thus make
them feel worse instead of better.
An alternative approach is for the client to accept their feeling state. If the client can
tolerate their sadness and go to work, they will not experience the cascade of guilt and
depression that may follow the decision to stay in bed. The therapist can remind the client
that intense feelings are often temporary; no matter what mood they experience at any given
time, their mood will eventually change. As explored in the Emotion Surfing skill, primary,
basic emotions are sometimes akin to waves that crest and then eventually fall. This image
may be helpful to the client, because what they are feeling at any one moment may seem
unbearable—but the feeling will not last forever.


Identify Long-Term Benefits of Healthy Distress Tolerance:
increased Well-Being

Lastly, the therapist can note that the more clients feels able to tolerate negative emotions
during random moments of their everyday lives, the more confident they are likely to be
in their ability to tolerate distress while actively pursuing their newly set positive goals.
In keeping with this session’s theme of working toward goals, exercising distress tolerance
during random moments is itself consistent with a major therapeutic goal: that of increasing
overall psychological health and well-being.


DISCUSS ROLE OF POSITIVE FEELINGS IN PURSUING GOALS


Although negative emotions can sometimes disrupt the pursuit of important goals, positive
emotions can enhance motivation in moving toward goals. Therapists can discuss this point
as an extension of the work from previous sessions, in which they have invited clients to

[PAGE 254]

14. Emotionally Engaged Living 237


engage in pleasurable activities and to explore, accept, and modulate (as necessary) positive
feelings. Increasing exposure to novel and positive experiences can improve functioning,
akin to more general behavioral activation strategies. This viewpoint may be somewhat
foreign to survivors of interpersonal trauma, especially childhood abuse. The tendency
to engage in “approach behaviors —even toward things, situations, or people that appear
interesting, elicit curiosity, or generate warmth—may have been undermined by repeated
negative/hostile feedback in the past and by an inadequate attachment system that discouraged healthy exploration of the world. However, positive feelings can guide a person toward
discovering more of their interests, likes, and sometimes even hidden talents. By recognizing and following feelings of pleasure and excitement, clients can discover activities they
truly enjoy and even previously dormant talents and abilities. In addition, acknowledging
the satisfaction that results from making steps toward a goal can reinforce and sustain a
persons commitment and discipline during more difficult times.
The therapist can ask the client what skills or activities attract them or spontaneously
engage them. If they do not know, the therapist can encourage continued exploration and
reassure the client that some initial confusion is understandable, given that they are thinking in a new way and have less experience in paying attention to their own preferences. The
goal is for them to try things out and practice paying attention to their reactions, whatever
they are; their responses can then inform what they might want to try next. Eliciting excitement and interest about an idea, problem, activity, or circumstance can help confirm a goal
as important and motivate the client to persist in the face of setbacks. Positive emotions
have another function as well: They provide the client with feedback about what they like
or value about themselves. This growing insight supports the clients movement toward
becoming a more integrated, substantial, and specific person in their own eyes—even one
who deserves to love and be loved. Selecting a goal in which the client has a positive interest
is also likely to lead to greater skills practice and mastery. Such goals can be any number
of things: learning to dance, fix a bike, play music, or write poetry. Moreover, if the client
experiences some success, a more profound benefit emerges—the experience of feeling
engaged in living.


PREPARE CLIENT FOR WORK ON INTERPERSONAL PROBLEMS


The next several sessions will focus on the client's interpersonal relationships. At first glance,
it may seem challenging to help the client develop their emotion regulation and distress tolerance skills while at the same time helping them work on their relationships. However, as
becomes obvious from examining Box 14.2, almost all clients’ goals involve some interpersonal aspects, even if their goals are not specifically focused on a relationship. For example,
a clients goal of receiving a raise does not seem on the surface to be an interpersonal goal.
However, actually talking to their boss about a raise requires that the client manage their
feelings toward their boss, tolerate their anxiety about asking for the raise, and practice
their communication skills so that they can ask their boss for a raise in an appropriate and
effective way.

[PAGE 255]

238 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


The therapist can help consolidate the information shared in this session by briefly reviewing the overall theme of using distress tolerance to meet personal goals and determining
how it fits within the larger treatment framework. Does the idea make sense? Does it sound
doable? Is the Pros and Cons skill useful? The therapist can determine whether any concepts or examples need clarification, and ask the client if they think they will be able to
assess the Pros and Cons of tolerating distress, as relevant, in their daily lives. If the client
seems hesitant, the therapist can help them come up with examples of possible situations
to use. Some of the situations can be relatively mundane (e.g., asking a friend for a ride to
the airport) or simple (e.g., waiting in line for ordering lunch), as the important thing is to
practice the skill.
The therapist can review which skills seem to be a good match to the client’s abilities,
valued goals, and day-to-day needs. With continued practice, the client can learn that they
have a choice when it comes to feeling distress, and that they can manage distress when
they deem it necessary and worthwhile to meet their personal goals and live their values.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


The client will continue to use the Feelings Monitoring Form to chart progress on the goal
they have selected in this session, as well as any other activities that occur during the week
(either positive or negative). For each entry, they will also examine which coping skills
they used and how effective the skills were in helping them reach their goal. The therapist
can remind the client to pay attention to using skills from all three emotion channels and
seeing how well they work together. The client may select at least three skills to practice
daily, especially in relation to distress tolerance. The client can continue practicing Focused
Breathing twice daily and can schedule at least one pleasurable activity during the week.
The therapist may spend some time planning how the client might practice using Pros
and Cons, encouraging them to be specific about when they will do the designated “steps”
to reaching a goal, and helping them decide which coping strategies they will practice. In
addition, therapists can suggest that clients allow themselves to be simply aware and accepting of feelings as they plan their goals. To the extent that a client experiences anxiety at
“random moments” or in situations they have no power to change right now, they can simply
be interested in the feeling and note when it happens and why.

[PAGE 256]

What Is Distress Tolerance and Why Should | Do It?
Distress tolerance is...


The ability to endure pain or hardship without resorting to unhelpful actions that are damaging to
yourself or others.

Distress tolerance is a necessary life skill that most of us practice daily.

It requires us to weigh the Pros and Cons of tolerating stress when it’s necessary to reach our
goals.

Examples:

o Effectively controlling your anger when you feel a friend or family member has wronged you.

o Managing anxiety when you are receiving a performance review from your work supervisor.

o What are other examples?


Why tolerate unpleasant emotions? Because doing so...


Allows us to act in a crisis, instead of giving up or freezing.

Frees up energy we use for avoidance. Avoiding stress saps energy.

Enables us to make positive changes. If you don’t allow yourself to be in touch with distress,
there'll be no motivation to make important changes. Distress can tell you that something is
wrong, as well as which areas in your life you need to pay attention to and change.

Allows us to experience positive emotions. Avoiding feelings means that most or many feelings
are cut off, not just negative ones. Tolerating more difficult feelings has an important benefit: It
allows us to be more open to having positive feelings as well.

Allows us to achieve goals. It allows us to do difficult but worthwhile things (Such as interviewing
for a job). Preparing to make any major life change involves some anxiety and discomfort. By
tolerating distress, we allow ourselves to achieve goals important to us.


Use your new skills to tolerate what you need to and live the life you want to live!


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


239

[PAGE 257]

Using Three Channels of Emotion Skills to Reach Goals

Distress Tolerance
Check which of these skills you can
use to tolerate distress. Remember to
Body
use skills when tolerating distress
O Focused Breathing
helps you:
O Basic Self-Care
e Reach your goals.
O Soothing the Senses
e Live your values.
e Improve your relationships
Ol Progressive Muscle Relaxation
(without causing undue harm O Other Mindfulness-Based
to you!). Exercises for the Body


Ove


Thoughts Behavior

O Emotion Surfing O Take a Break/Time Out
L] Evidence Technique or Slow Down
A Vv

O Thought Shifting O Replacement Behaviors
O Positive Imagery Ol Opposite Action
U Reminders/Reframes LX Ask for Help/Seek Support
O Positive Self-Statements O Plan Pleasurable Activities


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and
Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page
for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 258]

The Resource of Connection
Understanding Relationship Patterns


Through our relationship with the [caregiving person]... , we develop
a working model of ourselves and our parents . . . that gives a model
for how we treat each other and ourselves. This model determines
what information is attended to, which memories are evoked, what
behaviors are employable. It is the basis for our sense of self and other.
—SANDRA L. BLOOM AND MICHAEL REICHERT (1998, p. 135)


I nteractions with other people shape how we see ourselves in the world and what we come
to expect from our environments. From infancy through adulthood, our relationships and
our beliefs about these relationships are constantly influencing our thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors, even when we are not aware of their impact. Based on our early experiences, we
develop models of relationships and test these over time, continually elaborating and adapting them to fit our current realities. Among survivors of trauma, the process of using past
experience to guide current expectations can often lead to negative outcomes. The primary
focus of Session 6 is on helping a client understand how models of relationships developed in
their early life, continue to influence their feelings and interactions with others as an adult.
The first component of this session involves introducing the idea of relationship models
and describing how they become relationship patterns over time, in ways that are understandable and relevant to the client. The second component of this session entails introducing and working with a specific tool (Handout 15.3, Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1)
to help the client draw out from their life experiences the core relationship models that
effectively describe their beliefs in interpersonal situations. Given that many survivors of
trauma have difficulty remembering or keeping hold of insights from one week to the next,
this tool creates a record of distilled insights that can be referred to in later sessions. Box
15.1 outlines the theme and curriculum for Session 6 of treatment.
The therapist will want to be familiar with the basic principles of attachment theory,
which are elucidated in Chapter 2. It may be useful to review this chapter before this session.


241

[PAGE 259]

242 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Theme and Curriculum for Session 6
The Resource of Connection: Understanding Relationship Patterns


Relationship models are templates for how we expect relationships to work. Originally
described by John Bowlby, the father of attachment theory, relationship models arise from
actual experiences with caregivers and other important persons in our lives. They represent
ideas about who we are, what we expect of others, how relationships work, and what outcomes
we expect. Relationship models that arise in the context of childhood interpersonal trauma
are typically adaptive in the traumatic context, but once the trauma is over or life conditions
have changed, they may no longer be effective for happy and healthy living. The goal of this
session is to help clients identify trauma-generated relationship models by reviewing current
relationship problems and having the client consider whether they may have “outgrown” their
old models. The next session will invite the client to consider developing and testing new rela-
tionship models.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Review interpersonal situations described in past Feelings Monitoring Forms as a guide to for-
mulating potential relationship models that can be shared and discussed with the client. Bring
several copies of Handout 15.3, and a copy of each of the other handouts listed below. The work
in the session is estimated to take about 60 minutes; a flexible application is assumed (i.e., not
every client will need all interventions).


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Introduce concept of relationship models and patterns.
Explore and identify client's relationship patterns.
Review common relationship beliefs among survivors of trauma.
Introduce Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1.
Practice using Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1.
Summarize the goals of the session.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 260]

15. The Resource of Connection 243


Plan skills practice:
Complete a copy of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1 once daily.
Include emotion regulation skills as relevant to the situation, and keep practicing Focused
Breathing.
Engage in one pleasurable activity.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 15.1. Relationship Models: Instruction Manuals for Relationships

Handout 15.2. Common Relationship Beliefs among Survivors of Trauma

Handout 15.3. Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1 (several copies)

Handout 15.4. How to Complete Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1


Repetition of Relationship Patterns

Clients will often present for treatment with tremendous distress and confusion about
repeated negative relationship patterns with friends, coworkers, and partners. Though they
may be well aware of the cyclical nature of their relationships, they often describe being
bewildered about why similar situations recur with different people and feeling helpless
about how they can break this cycle, which has come to feel inevitable.
People's expectations about relationships, and about the responses they are likely to
receive from others, lead them to behave in ways to prepare for the imagined outcomes.
Consequently, relationship models are often self-fulfilling, even when the relationship
result is one that a person does not want. For example, a young woman from an abusive
family who has developed the understanding that interpersonal relatedness is contingent on
sexual behavior may be likely to engage in or initiate sexual activity as a way of emotionally
connecting to others, whether she is interested in sex or not and whether or not her partner
is actually expecting sex.
Individuals often erroneously use relationship outcomes as confirmatory evidence that
their original expectations were well founded and accurate. In this way, they form and
perpetuate relationship models and patterns with little awareness of how the expectations
themselves, which may or may not be based in current reality, are influencing interpersonal
sequences. One useful and common example a therapist can share to illustrate this point
with a client involves expectations of rejection, which often lead to perceived and even
actual rejection. If a client typically expects to be rejected in relationships, they are less
willing to engage with others and generally behave in a self-protective manner by maintaining distance and avoiding intimacy. Others interacting with them will be unaware of this
basic assumption and are likely to interpret their behavior as lack of interest or of openness
to interpersonal contact. As a result, most people will not initiate or pursue involvement
with them. They in turn will see this as confirming evidence of rejection in relationships,
and will remain unaware of their own role in perpetuating this negative cycle.

[PAGE 261]

244 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Limited and Rigid Interpersonal Repertoires

Not only do individuals with histories of interpersonal trauma, especially childhood abuse
and neglect, tend to have negative expectations in relationships; they also often have a limited and rigid repertoire of relationship models from which to select. They may say something like this: “T cant move out of this pattern, because I dont know where to go next.”
When individuals are not exposed to varying interactions, there is a higher degree of redundancy in their interpersonal relationships, and maladaptive relationship models are especially difficult to disconfirm (Carson, 1969). Thus having a constricted range of models, and
engaging in these regardless of the actual situation, further perpetuate the self-confirming
cycle and limit possible responses from others.
One common maladaptive model is the victim—perpetrator relationship, which can be
reflected in domestic violence situations and even in the therapy relationship. Sometimes
the client takes on the victim role, experiencing mistreatment at the hands of a partner,
boss, friend, or therapist. At other times, the client can take on the role of the aggressor with
significant others. Many clients fear falling into the trap of taking on either role, but the
problem is that they have very few alternative ways of thinking about themselves and others.
In sum, attachment theory and research indicate that the tendency to generalize the
application of predominant relationship models to new experiences should be viewed as a
general principle of interpersonal functioning, rather than as a pathological process associated with survivors of trauma.


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


The therapist will review the Feelings Monitoring Form and any patterns or notable situations that came up over the past week with the client. The therapist will also follow up
on whether the client completed the practice exercises. Did they use any of the distress
tolerance skills that were discussed during the previous session? Did they try to increase
positive emotional experiences over the past week? If they did experiment with some of the
emotion channel skills, what did they notice, what worked, and what did not work? If they
did not experiment with any skills, what obstacles did they encounter?


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


Whereas previous sessions have had an intrapersonal focus, in this session the treatment
moves into the interpersonal domain. The therapist lets the client know that now that the
client has learned (and, ideally, practiced) some useful emotion regulation skills, they will
be able to use them to benefit their relationships. In this session, the focus shifts onto the
client’s relationships and relationship patterns. The therapist will be helping the client to
understand how their models for relationships have developed and how these patterns continue to influence their interactions. The therapist will also help the client to identify how

[PAGE 262]

15. The Resource of Connection 245


traumatic experiences have influenced their beliefs about themselves and their expectations of others. Along with changing the emotions that they bring to a situation, the client
can also learn to change their expectations about an interaction or a relationship.


INTRODUCE CONCEPT OF RELATIONSHIP MODELS AND PATTERNS


In introducing the client to the concept of relationship models and patterns, the therapist
can emphasize and elaborate on the points in Handout 15.1, Relationship Models: Instruction Manuals for Relationships. As a way of facilitating meaningful dialogue and to get the
client thinking about how these concepts relate to their life, the therapist can ask the client
the following questions: “What are your expectations about relationships now? Which do
you view as healthy, and which do you view as not so healthy?” The therapist highlights for
the client the role of feelings in their present-day interpersonal problems, and describes
how intense emotions related to relationship models that were developed in the context
of early relationships can at times interfere with current interpersonal goals. In a current
interaction, strong feeling states from the past may be triggered and then drive a client's
behavior, regardless of important ways in which the present situation may be different or
may call for a different response.
Individuals with abuse histories in particular often experience such derailments in
situations that elicit power and control—especially when there is a power differential or
imbalance, as these are central dynamics of abuse.


EXPLORE AND IDENTIFY CLIENT’S RELATIONSHIP PATTERNS


If possible, the therapist will use an example from the client's life to illustrate the points
made above. If none are forthcoming, however, the following example may be useful: A
client may feel overworked at their job and taken advantage of by their boss, who has not
given the client the raise they deserve. This scenario may remind the client of their childhood exploitation and may quickly give rise to intense feelings of anger and grief. This is a
situation in which the client is vulnerable to acting on strong feelings that belong to the past,
instead of responding to demands and aims of the current interpersonal situation. Clearly,
the feeling of anger at their boss is legitimate and understandable, but the client’s level of
feeling and the way in which they handle these feelings are what will dictate the outcome.
If the client's behavior is driven by their feelings and relationship models related to the past,
it is unlikely that they will be able to meet their interpersonal goals in the current situation.
In response to the boss's perceived exploitation and abuse, the client may withdraw and
become passive, or may alternatively counterattack by expressing anger inappropriately to
their boss in an effort at self-defense. Neither of these approaches is likely to result in meeting the clients goal of getting a raise and improving their status at work.
The therapist communicates to the client that a primary goal of this treatment is to help
them identify the relationship models that are coming into play in their current relationships

[PAGE 263]

246 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


and causing problems in their interpersonal functioning. The client will first learn how to
recognize when they are being influenced by expectations and strong feelings from the
past, and then how to catch and manage these feelings before they interfere with present
relationships. Becoming aware of these issues will ultimately give the client more control
and choice in terms of how they respond and will make it more likely that their interpersonal goals will be met.
When addressing distinctions between strong feelings from the past and current interpersonal goals, the therapist needs to emphasize that choosing not to act on these strong
emotions does not invalidate them or imply that they are inappropriate. Many individuals
with histories of maltreatment are quick to feel ashamed, discounted, or invalidated. The
goal is not to increase a client's sense of distrust in their own perceptions, but rather to help
them become aware of ways in which feelings that belong to the past are being activated
and are not working in their favor now. Although the client will still be vulnerable to having
these feelings triggered in various interpersonal situations, ideally they will feel more aware
and in control of them, and can make choices about the extent to which these reactions
dictate current behavior.


REVIEW COMMON RELATIONSHIP BELIEFS AMONG SURVIVORS
OF TRAUMA


Handout 15.2, Common Relationship Beliefs among Survivors of Trauma, specifies some
common expectations that shape relationship patterns among survivors. The therapist
directs the client to examine them, to see which expectations they recognize as ones they
hold. After the client has checked off these beliefs on the list, the therapist asks the client
some questions such as the following, to allow them to reflect on the answers:


“Do your responses surprise you? How do these thoughts help or hinder your relation-
ships? In what situations are these beliefs helpful or not helpful? How do the beliefs
you checked influence your behavior with friends, family members, romantic partners,
and acquaintances?”


INTRODUCE RELATIONSHIP PATTERNS WORKSHEET-1


Handout 15.3, Relationship Patterns Worksheet—l, is designed to help clients identify and
understand their relationship patterns and the ways old relationship models (which represent assumptions about the self-other dyad) may come to bear on current interactions.
This analysis is framed within a cognitive perspective, which includes two parts: beliefs
about the self, and beliefs about others’ perceptions of the self. With this intervention, the
concepts described earlier can be concretized and personalized for each client. The initial
goal is to help the client get in touch with experiencing themselves as a “self” with expectations, beliefs, and feelings. Next, the client needs to become aware that they bring a set of

[PAGE 264]

15. The Resource of Connection 247


expectations, beliefs, and feelings about others into relationships. Given that this is likely to
be the first time many clients have tried to articulate these complex concepts, it is critical
for the therapist to describe this worksheet and its rationale thoroughly.


PRACTICE USING RELATIONSHIP PATTERNS WORKSHEET-1


The therapist uses time in the session to fill out a copy of Handout 15.3 with the client, and
to answer any questions about how the client will proceed in using the form on their own.
The purpose of this handout is to help the client articulate their key relationship models and
to identify ways these models are negatively affecting current relationships. The therapist
can begin by eliciting an example from the client of a recent challenging interpersonal situation. Preferably this situation will have taken place over the past week, so that the details
and emotional relevance will be fresher in the client’s mind. If the client cannot think of a
recent example, the therapist can provide one, based on information discussed in previous
sessions. The therapist prompts the client to respond to queries raised in each column of the
form as follows, and records their answers:


“What happened in this situation? Who was involved? What did you feel and believe
about yourself in this situation? What did you feel and believe the other person thought
of you in this situation? How did you expect the other person would respond to you?
What action did you take, and what was the result?”


In Session 7, an expanded version of this handout (Handout 16.1, Relationship Patterns
Worksheet—2) is presented. It may be helpful to inform the client now that the goal of the
next session will be to begin creating and testing alternative models—that is, alternative
ways of thinking, feeling, and behaving in relationships, which will create new patterns
of relating. However, it is not necessary (or even of much value) to move directly into the
generation of alternative models. Initially, it is enough for the client to identify relationship models that are represented in specific interactions. As time goes by, the articulation
of a model will become more refined and will become linked to a list of other relationship
models.


CASE EXAMPLE: IDENTIFYING A RELATIONSHIP MODEL


Below, we provide a dialogue that took place between a client and therapist as they worked
through completing Handout 15.3 (see Box 15.2 for the client's completed copy). The client, Maria, was in her late 20s, with a history of childhood sexual abuse by her stepfather
and of military sexual trauma during her time in the Army. In her family there were many
“secrets, and the clear message was that these should be kept quiet. Family members rarely
discussed their feelings or problems openly, as this was seen as a sign of weakness or selfindulgent complaining. Marias parents frequently responded to her with statements such as

[PAGE 265]

pauopuvgo 2q )]iMm |Ua} ‘ sbuljaaj hw 24045 ]jf, :¡9pou diysuonejey
¿NY YFIM
124209 |op hym "p2959193M1
‘sbuly} qnoqu buiwaas 248
"POIVAISNAZ ‘dn passaw qnogv palssom
007 w1295 9.MPpIp ay 3042
Joap 61g v buiyow ‘Quoyyy
wv |295 uve ajdoad ¿MPppmovs |paploap vay?
AOM YalM
:qno wily
ang “uvlAg Y2IM 2) Gulavys
NO passos ‘vam wv | 'qno passos
amys YJashwm 09 21 2da> qnogv aybnoy2 |199515
1 qnogv wily }}23 Aupıa| buojo a6 7,uvo ays ‘pahouuy |‘}ou0lz0wa 007 wo | ‘gasdn hw yim 34614 o poy |
¿OP |PIP JEUM siy6noy, 119y1 | sbuljaoy 119y1 sıyßnoyr A s6u9a) AW ¿pauaddey eum
Joiaeyeq Bun¡nsal Aj guosied 19y]o éseSsAw uonenys ¡euos.1ad13]u]
Sy} moqe suoljej9adxa AW 919M JEU ynoge y4u1y] pue [99] |PIP JEUM
|-19 49410M SUs9}}eq diysuonejay pajajdwo4y see

[PAGE 266]

15. The Resource of Connection 249


“Snap out of it,” “Pull yourself together,” or “A lot of people have it worse than you; there's
nothing to complain about.” These messages that she should not burden others with her
problems were reinforced during her time in the military. When Maria reported her military sexual trauma, she was punished for doing so and sent away to a different unit.
In treatment, Maria shared that she was beginning a new relationship. Her past romantic relationships had been short-lived and disappointing. Previous boyfriends had told Maria
that she was “hard to get close to.” Despite Maria’s wish to become more open and emotionally close, she found herself repeating the old pattern in this new relationship and came into
the session upset about a specific situation. The therapist used this situation to demonstrate
the use of Handout 15.3, Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1.


THERAPIST: In this session, we have been talking about relationship patterns—how
they develop and are maintained in your current relationships. The situation you
mentioned earlier with your boyfriend seems like a familiar one for you, and it
caused you some distress. Let's use it as an example to break down the pattern, so
we can understand more clearly what happens and how your relationship models
may come into play. This is also a good way for us to practice using Relationship
Patterns Worksheet—1, so I am going to record the information on a copy of this
worksheet. Can you tell me a little more about what happened in this recent situ-
ation?

MARIA: Well, I was very upset about the fight I had just had with my sister. I was still
really stressed out about it and in a bad mood by the time Brian came to pick me
up, but I was trying not to show it. I guess he could tell something was bothering
me, even though I was trying to act like it wasn't. He asked me what was wrong.

THERAPIST: How did you respond?

MARIA: I said that nothing was the matter, that I was just tired, and so he left me alone.
But then that made me feel even worse, like he just asked to be polite. I figured
since he didnt bring it up again that he didnt want to deal with any negativity.

THERAPIST: OK, so Im going to write down in the “Interpersonal situation” column
that you were upset and stressed out about your fight with your sister. Brian asked
you what was going on, and you didnt tell him because you thought that he was not
that interested. Is that right?

MARIA: Yeah, that’s what happened. I considered telling him so I did not have to feel
so alone, but then I started worrying that he would get annoyed and think I was
being overly dramatic, especially compared to the stress that he is having at his job.

THERAPIST: OK, so let’s work it through with the form. Identify the specific sequence.
Now that we know what happened, lets think about the next column: What feel-
ings and beliefs did you have about yourself in this situation?

MARIA: I felt like I was too emotional—that I shouldn't be so upset about the thing
with my sister. I should be strong enough to handle it on my own and not burden
anyone else with it.

[PAGE 267]

250 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


THERAPIST: What did you think Brian thought or felt about you in this situation?

MARIA: I dont know. He probably thought I was being negative.

THERAPIST: How did you expect him to respond?

MARIA: Well, if he really wanted to know, he could have asked me more about it.

THERAPIST: What did you expect he would have done if you had told him what was the
matter?

MARIA: I figured he would probably be nice about it—but he’d wonder what my prob-
lem is, why I cant get along with people, and why I have to make such a big deal
out of things.

THERAPIST: So you had an expectation that he would feel annoyed or frustrated with
you if you had actually told him.

MARIA: Yeah—that he would have found it a pain to have to deal with a girlfriend who
was so emotional. He would see that I am messed up, cant handle things.

THERAPIST: So what did you do in the situation? How did you act?

MARIA: Like I said, I didn't tell him what was wrong, so we drove in silence the whole
way to his house.

THERAPIST: And what was the result? How did you end up feeling, and what happened
between the two of you?

MARIA: I ending up feeling even worse that there was awkwardness between us, and
worried that he would decide he doesn't want to bother with me.

THERAPIST: Good job filling in the details. How did it feel going through this exercise?

MARIA: It was fine, but I don’t always remember things in such detail.

THERAPIST: That's OK. Just do your best, and also the sooner you fill out the form after
you havea situation like this or some other relationship situation, the easier it will
be to remember details. Did you learn anything from what we just did?

MARIA: Basically, just that I tried to act in a way that I thought would be better for the
relationship, and it ended up that I still felt bad, and then he felt bad.

THERAPIST: Right. Well, I think it is a good example that gives us useful informa-
tion. We can start to really see how your feelings about yourself—that you are too
emotional, and your belief that others will also see you this way and find you a
burden—really dictate how you choose to act. Even in a situation where someone
cares about you and wants to know what is going on, you keep them at a distance
and maybe miss an opportunity to feel better and also closer.


After completing this exercise with a client, it is helpful for the therapist to ask how it
felt and what was learned. The therapist can share their own observations about how the
identified feelings, expectations, and beliefs of self and other may have contributed to the
situations outcome.

[PAGE 268]

15. The Resource of Connection 251


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


The purpose of this session is to help the client describe interpersonal difficulties and identify potential trauma-generated relationship models that might be underlying these difficulties. Validation of relationship models based in actual experience is important, as is the
awareness that trauma-generated relationship patterns were originally developed by the
client during childhood as an adaptation to their toxic environment. The therapeutic goal is
for the client to achieve better understanding or insight into why they behave and feel the
way they do in their current relationships. The articulation of relevant relationship models
is the first step in creating change in relationship patterns. Once the client has a clearer
grasp of why they behave the way they do, then they are free to decide to do something
differently. It may take a while for the therapist and client to identify the core relationship
models. It is a process of identifying a possible model and assessing whether it “feels” right
and whether the model helps explain behaviors in other relationships as well. The use of
Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1 is intended to facilitate discovery of the models at work
in the client's various interactions. At the end of the session, the therapist provides the client
with the copy of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1 that was completed during the session,
along with blank copies of this handout to complete during the week. Handout 15.4, How to
Complete Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1, provides support for the client in filling out
this worksheet independently.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


The therapist asks the client if they think they can try applying Relationship Patterns
Worksheet-1 to specific interpersonal situations that may arise over the week. Ideally, they
should try to complete a copy of this worksheet once daily. The therapist can remind the
client again of the rationale and say something like this:


“In addition to helping you with PTSD symptoms, another central way this treatment
can be useful is by helping you improve the quality of your relationships. In order to do
so, we need to begin with specifics as to what is actually happening in your day-to-day
interactions with others.”


The therapist will also want to discuss any potential problems or concerns that the client might encounter in trying to do this work between sessions. For example, the therapist
will want to make sure that the client doesnt feel pressure to complete the form “correctly.”
Instead, the client is encouraged to view it as an experiment and to see how it feels to use on
their own. In addition, the therapist will remind the client to continue to practice Focused
Breathing, to identify and engage in at least one pleasurable activity, and to keep trying out
other emotion regulation skills that feel applicable to situations that arise over the week.

[PAGE 269]

Relationship Models: Instruction Manuals for Relationships

WHAT DOES YOUR RELATIONSHIP INSTRUCTION MANUAL
LOOK LIKE?

e What are relationship models? These are models we develop of relationships that act as
“blueprints” or “instruction manuals.” They reflect our beliefs about ourselves, about others,
and about how relationships work. They guide our expectations, feelings, and behaviors in
relationships.

e How are they created? They are initially formed in our early environments, in the context of our
relationships to caregivers and our experiences in our families. We learn to think, do, and feel what
allowed us to be successful or kept us safe in those situations:
o We do what rewarded us then. For example, being a nurturer led to love, or being distrustful/
keeping people at a distance led to safety.
o We don't do what led to punishment/negative consequences then. For example, trusting others
or relaxing your guard led to abuse, or asserting your needs led to aggression, criticism, or
danger.

e How are they influenced by trauma? Abusive or neglectful environments, or other traumatic
experiences, affect how these models are developed and often result in negative beliefs about
ourselves and expectations that others will view and treat us poorly.
o Example: “I can’t trust others; other people will hurt me.”

e How do they affect us now? The relationship models we developed earlier in life continue to play
a central role in shaping thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in ways that we may not be aware of or
notice. We bring them into adulthood and apply them to current situations.
o Example: * I still can’t trust others, even now.”

e How do they become relationship patterns? Relationship models can act as self-fulfilling
prophecies, because they lead us to behave in ways that prepare us for what we expect will
happen in relationships. Over time the relationship models we rely on become more generalized
and ingrained, and form our relationship patterns. We don’t give ourselves opportunities for new
experiences or look for evidence that might contradict our beliefs. Instead, we may continue to
behave in ways we learned in early relationships, which may not be effective or helpful in current
relationship situations.
o Example: Shelby has a belief that no one will love him because he is unlovable. So he keeps
others at a distance and isolates himself. Therefore, he misses opportunities for others to get
to know him. He then uses the fact that he does not have close friends or a romantic partner as
evidence that he must be unlovable.

e The good news: Relationship patterns can be modified! You can write a new instruction
manual for yourself. This treatment will help you explore, identify, and change patterns to be more
flexible and effective in your current and future relationships.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


252

[PAGE 270]

Common Relationship Beliefs among Survivors of Trauma
The first step to changing your relationship patterns is identifying them. Check the beliefs that
you recognize in your life.


SAFETY

O If| let someone close to me, | may get hurt.

O The only way to stay safe is to keep others at a distance

O If | am alone, | can’t take care of or protect myself.


TRUST/INTIMACY

O | can’t trust my own judgment to stay safe, or | have bad judgment.

O No one can be trusted. | can’t trust that others will keep me safe or have my best interests in
mind.

O | can’t trust anyone enough to share what happened to me.

O Others cannot handle hearing my experiences.

O They will judge/hate/disrespect me if they find out what has happened to me.


POWER/CONTROL

O | cannot control anything in my life. I am powerless to solve problems in my life.

O | cannot trust others to be in control.

O People who have power abuse it.

O Who has power is an either-or situation. Only one person can have power (either another person
has it or | have it, but both of us cannot have power).


SELF-ESTEEM/NEEDS

O If! share my problems or disclose my feelings, | will not be respected or will be seen as weak.

O If | don’t sacrifice my goals/needs in relationships, others will not love me.

O Others’ needs are more important than my own.

O Asserting my needs will cause problems in my relationships.

DI Only one person’s needs can be met at a time.

O If! am not in a romantic relationship, something is wrong with me.

O I am broken/crazy/unlovable.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


253

[PAGE 271]

Relationship Patterns Worksheet—1
What were my expectations about the
Interpersonal situation What did I feel and think about myself? | other person? My resulting behavior
What happened? My feelings My thoughts Their feelings Their thoughts What did | do?


vasc


Relationship model: “If , then o

From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma,toSecond Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and
Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page
material
for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 272]

How to Complete Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1

e Take note when your interactions with others feel uncomfortable, confusing, or
stressful, or lead to misunderstandings or conflicts.

e Notice your thoughts and emotions in these challenging interactions.

e Notice what your expectations of others are in these situations. Notice what
you believe is going on for them (their thoughts, emotions, and behaviors) and
your evidence for your expectations (is it “hard evidence,” or could you be
“mind reading”?).

e You will summarize this by using two new tools called the Relationship
Patterns Worksheets. Today we will introduce the first of these sheets,
Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1.

e You will note that Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1 is just like the Feelings
Monitoring Form, in that you will focus on situations, thoughts, and feelings.
The only difference is that now it involves two people, and you will also focus
on your beliefs about the other person’s feelings and thoughts about the
situations.

e After you have completed describing the problematic situation, try to identify
what relationship model or “blueprint” you may have been using in this
situation.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


255

[PAGE 273]

Changing Relationship Patterns
Focus on Assertiveness


In emotional life as in much of history, we are only doomed to repeat
what has not been remembered, reflected upon and worked through.
— ROBERT KAREN (1998, p. 408)


Session 6 has focused on educating the client about interpersonal patterns and working
to identify them. The next step, which is the focus of Sessions 7-9, involves helping the client develop alternative, more flexible interpersonal patterns—ones that allow for positive
expectations of others, and for the possibility of effectively and adaptively negotiating interpersonal needs and difficulties. These three sessions will involve attention to various types
of interpersonal problems.
We begin in Session 7 with assertiveness, because exhibiting appropriate levels of
assertiveness is a common problem among individuals who have experienced interpersonal
trauma. Interpersonal trauma, especially chronic interpersonal violence, is a situation in
which an individual has lost the capacity for autonomy and effective assertiveness. As a
result, problems in being underassertive (passive), overassertive (aggressive), or both can
emerge. To reach an effective and comfortable middle ground between submissive and
controlling or aggressive behaviors, STAIR encourages the client to identify their assumptions about assertiveness, to learn about the potential benefits of behaving more assertively
or less aggressively, and to create opportunities to learn and practice specific skills accordingly. During the session, the therapist and client will conduct role plays to try out different
ways of relating, followed by feedback from the therapist. Second, the therapist and client
will identify the alternative interpersonal expectations that support these new behaviors.
The alternative beliefs, feelings, and actions will be registered on Relationship Patterns
Worksheet-2, an expanded version of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1, which the client
can use as a tool to extend their range of possible responses in interpersonal situations. The
therapist will want to predict for the client that making these changes can be quite challenging, because old interpersonal patterns are pervasive and powerful, but that change is
possible. Box 16.1 outlines the content for this session.


256

[PAGE 274]

16. Changing Relationship Patterns: Assertiveness 257


Theme and Curriculum for Session 7
Changing Relationship Patterns: Focus on Assertiveness


Once the client's key relationship models have been identified, the next step is to begin generating alternative, more flexible ones. Though this is not an easy process, therapist and client
develop aspirational relational models and then experiment with new ways of interacting with
others that align with the models. These include making new assumptions, trying out alternative behaviors, and exploring different feelings. Role playing and covert modeling are useful
ways to develop and practice new interpersonal skills. This session focuses on identifying and
revising problematic patterns related to assertiveness.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Using material from past sessions, consider what type of assertiveness problems the client may
have. Bring handouts for this session, including several copies of Handout 16.4 (see list below).
The work in the session is estimated to take about 60 minutes; a flexible application is assumed
(i.e., not every client will need all interventions).


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Provide psychoeducation about assertiveness and basic personal rights.
Clarify basis of client’s assumptions about assertiveness (as relevant).
Review and practice an “I Message’ (the first role play).
Complete Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2.
Introduce additional assertiveness skills to practice.
Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
Complete two copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2, with a focus on assertiveness.
Use skills from all channels as applicable to interpersonal events described in the copies
of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2.
Do something pleasurable.
Continue to practice Focused Breathing twice daily.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 275]

258 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 16.1. Understanding Assertiveness

Handout 16.2. Basic Personal Rights

Handout 16.3. “I Messages”

Handout 16.4. Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (several copies)

Handout 16.5. Additional Assertiveness Skills

Handout 16.6. Practicing Assertiveness to Improve Relationship Patterns


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


Before the therapist begins this session’s work on assertiveness, the therapist spends some
time reviewing the Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1 entries brought in by the client. The
therapist quickly confirms that the client has correctly completed the entries, particularly
the expectations they have about the thoughts and feelings of others, since assessing these
expectations is a new task. As the therapist reads through the entries, they can highlight
emerging interpersonal themes that fall into the categories to be discussed in the next few
weeks: assertiveness, power, and closeness/intimacy. The therapist can explicitly note that
these themes will be discussed in future sessions, as long as the client can remain focused
on the present discussion. It is possible that at least one issue relates at least indirectly to
assertiveness, which will allow the therapist to segue to today’s topic.


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


The therapist begins the session by noting its focus on using newly discovered insights on
the client's relationship patterns (from the previous session) to begin to make improvements
aligned with the client’s personal goals and values. This session starts the process of applying insights by exploring relationships and/or social situations that involve opportunities to
practice effective assertiveness.


PROVIDE PSYCHOEDUCATION ABOUT ASSERTIVENESS
AND BASIC PERSONAL RIGHTS

Discuss Concept of Assertiveness

Therapists should not assume that clients all have the same ideas about the meaning of the
word “assertiveness.” Instead, a therapist begins by asking a client what the client thinks
being assertive means. This question will provide a jumping-off point for the session and
will give the therapist information about the client's assertiveness beliefs, as well as any
assumptions about assertiveness that may need to be challenged. There are numerous

[PAGE 276]

16. Changing Relationship Patterns: Assertiveness 259


misconceptions about assertiveness: for example, “Being assertive means being impolite,
demanding, or selfish,” “To be assertive, I must be prepared for fights or confrontations, or
“If I assert myself, Pl be disliked or punished.” These misconceptions are especially true of
individuals who have experienced chronic interpersonal violence—who have been actively
discouraged from asserting their rights and needs, whose personal boundaries have been
violated, and who may have been penalized for trying to stand up for themselves.
After the brief introductory conversation, the therapist gives the client Handout 16.1,
Understanding Assertiveness, so the client can follow along during the review of the information summarized below. The therapist can begin this review by emphasizing that assertiveness entails standing up for ones rights and presenting ones needs or wants in a way that
is respectful of both oneself and others. “Assertive” behavior must be distinguished from
“nonassertive” and “aggressive” behavior, and brief general examples of each can clarify
these distinctions. It may be helpful to ask the client to provide some brief examples of their
own or of others’ nonassertive, aggressive, and assertive behavior, to make these concepts
more personally meaningful.
In nonassertive behavior, an individual disregards or does not directly express their
own rights, needs, and desires. They often act passively or submissively and permit others
to violate their rights. Nonassertive behavior may lead to feeling hurt, resentful, angry, frustrated, anxious, ignored, and/or disappointed in oneself.
In aggressive behavior, an individual acts upon their rights at the expense of others
through intimidation and bullying. They may behave in ways that are manipulative, openly
hostile, and/or demanding; at the extreme end, these behaviors can lead to threatening,
inappropriate outbursts or even physical violence. Aggressive behavior may lead to feeling
angry, out of control, frightened, and/or guilty.
The therapist explains that the same person may at different times display both nonassertive and aggressive behavior, and that these shifts often occur cyclically. For example,
a person who typically has difficulty being direct and setting limits with others is likely to
become more and more resentful and frustrated over time. This type of emotional buildup
that comes with being consistently overcompliant makes the person more vulnerable to
losing control at some point and reacting angrily or aggressively in a situation that does not
necessarily merit such a strong response. This type of reaction in turn may elicit defensiveness and anger from others—the very things that the nonassertive individual was so desperately trying to avoid.
In assertive behavior, on the other hand, an individual consistently stands up for their
rights in a way that neither infringes upon the rights of others nor evokes interpersonal hostility. Assertive behavior may lead to feeling more confident and powerful, is likely to open
the door to more choices, and can also result in increased intimacy and honesty in relationships. These potential benefits provide the rationale for the focus of the exercises in this
session—identifying specific problems and interpersonal patterns related to assertiveness,
and developing appropriate assertiveness skills.
After defining assertiveness and differentiating it from other behaviors, the therapist
discusses basic personal rights, before going on to identify more specifically the client's
typical beliefs and interpersonal patterns with regard to assertiveness.

[PAGE 277]

260 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Discuss Basic Personal Rights

For a client to initiate assertive behavior in which they advocate for their own welfare, they
must understand that they are entitled to basic personal rights. Unfortunately, survivors of
interpersonal trauma are often taught the opposite—that they do not have personal rights.
Thus it is important for the therapist to introduce this concept by exploring the list in Handout 16.2, Basic Personal Rights. The therapist reviews these rights briefly with the client,
elicits the client's reactions, and then asks where they may expect any difficulties. The
therapist keeps in mind that although these personal rights may seem straightforward and
self-explanatory, many clients with a history of interpersonal trauma may see these rights
as new ideas, and reviewing them can be a powerful and meaningful experience. After the
session, the client will review and reflect on Handouts 16.1 and 16.2 more carefully at home.


CLARIFY BASIS FOR CLIENT’S ASSUMPTIONS
ABOUT ASSERTIVENESS (AS RELEVANT)


If time permits and the topic is relevant to the client, the therapist can encourage the client
to give examples of how needs and wants were communicated and responded to in their
family of origin. The goal of this discussion is for the therapist and client to have a concrete
understanding and clear examples of the client’s typical thoughts, feelings, and behaviors
centering around assertiveness and control. These examples also provide elaboration of the
more subtle aspects of how the client's interpersonal patterns work; as such, they can help
clarify to the client their own personal history, and can also provide detail for use in the role
plays later in the session. Linking assertiveness difficulties to these experiences will help
reduce any sense of blame that the client may feel about what are now maladaptive ways of
acting and thinking.
The following questions can be helpful in generating specific links between the client's
current difficulties with assertiveness and experiences they had with their family of origin:


“How did people in your family model assertive, nonassertive, and aggressive behav-
iors?”
“How did you generally communicate your needs and wants, and how did family mem-
bers respond to these requests?”
“How did family members respond to your attempts to be assertive?”


Frequently, survivors of childhood maltreatment come from families in which assertive
behaviors were not a viable option for communicating needs and wants. In these families,
needs were often met through violent and aggressive means (e.g., by an abusive parent) or
were denied and downplayed (e.g., by a passive parent). For example, a child not only may
be the target of a parents aggressive style of getting their “needs” met, but also may witness
the abusive parent behaving aggressively toward other family members. In such an abusive
environment, a child may see the mother, for example, responding passively to the abusive

[PAGE 278]

16. Changing Relationship Patterns: Assertiveness 261


father; or the mother may tell the child, “Don't bother your father with that, or he'll get
angry.” In addition, survivors have often experienced negative consequences of attempts
at assertiveness. A child who does gather the courage to protest against any maltreatment
often experiences additional maltreatment in response. Often only models of aggressive and
nonassertive behavior are available in these families. There is typically neither any model
of appropriate assertiveness nor any opportunity to learn that negotiation of needs is possible. Instead, children who grow up in this kind of family environment come to believe that
getting needs met is an all-or-nothing process: One person gets what they want at another's
expense.


REVIEW AND PRACTICE AN “I MESSAGE” (THE FIRST ROLE PLAY)


Now that the importance of being assertive and the specific difficulties in this area have
been reviewed, the therapist can provide the client with information on how to develop
more effective assertiveness skills. One of the most popular and universally helpful skills
taught in STAIR is learning to communicate with “I Messages,” as outlined in Handout
16.3, “I Messages.”


Describe “I Messages”

“I Messages” are important assertiveness tools, because they promote communication with
another person about the effects of the other's behavior. For the client, the purpose of "I
Messages’ is to focus on the negative impact of the other person’s troubling behavior on the
client, instead of blaming the other person's character or personality. As a result, the other
person is less likely to feel attacked and to respond with defensiveness. An “I Message” has
three parts: “behavior,” “feeling,” and “consequence.” The following formula can be helpful:


Behavior: “WhenI [state observed behavior]. . .”
Feeling: “T feel [state the feeling]. . .”
Consequence: “because I [state the consequence for the client].”


An example of an “I Message” is “When I wasn't picked up in time, I felt frustrated,
because I missed my appointment.” Another is “When I was yelled at, I felt hurt and upset,
and it makes me not want to talk to you.” The therapist models for the client how they might
use an “I Message’ in a recent interpersonal interaction, and then has the client practice
using the skill.


Provide Rationale for Role Playing

Before conducting the first role play, the therapist communicates the rationale and potential
benefits of role-playing exercises. Role playing provides an experiential basis for identifying the client’s skills and comfort level with the new behaviors they are learning, and offers

[PAGE 279]

262 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


opportunities to demonstrate developing mastery. It also provides insight about what feelings and beliefs come up when the client tries to change their routinized behaviors and
responses. A role play is not a test or evaluation, but instead an opportunity to practice and
experiment with different ways of interacting in relationships. In this way, the therapy can
serve as an interpersonal laboratory’ in which the client can practice difficult interactions
“live” with the therapist and receive immediate feedback on the process in a safe environment. Role playing also gives the therapist and client a shared sense of what a particular
situation is actually like—not just some theorized version of it. As a result, the therapist and
client can talk more effectively about aspects of the client’s approach that may hinder or
derail them from reaching their interpersonal goals. The therapist can also highlight aspects
that are particularly effective for getting a specific message across.


Role Play with an “I Message”

The first role play will be a practice of an “I Message.” This basic skill is fairly well scripted
and likely to be relatively comfortable for the client. The therapist asks the client to identify a situation in which they would like to share an uncomfortable feeling or message to
someone. The therapist and client can refer to situations described in the client's filled-out
copies of the Feelings Monitoring Form. The use of an “I Message” as a first role play is beneficial, because it provides a microcosm of many communication difficulties and problematic dynamics that are present in assertiveness situations more generally. An “I Message”
includes the fundamental ingredients and building blocks for other forms of assertiveness,
which may take the client more time to master.
The therapist can begin the role play by providing some general tips about communication, especially about how to express feelings without putting the other person on the
defensive or getting caught up in side issues. For example, the therapist can explain that it
is usually more effective to use an “I Message” and focus on one’s own feelings than to focus
on the others behavior or potential motives. Emphasizing how any persons feelings cannot
be “wrong” or “invalid” is also key, as is observing ways in which the client may undermine
their own communication attempts. For instance, many clients will be overly apologetic or
use disclaimers before even beginning, such as “I know this may seem like I'm making a
big deal of this, but...” or “I dont mean to be picky, but...” Describing to such a client
how this type of introduction is a “set-up” for them to be minimized can help them make
important shifts. Alternatively, some clients will communicate with a more aggressive style.
The therapist will want to make such a client aware that this type of approach could be offputting and obscure their message.


Guidelines for Conducting Effective Role Plays

In our experience, role plays can be powerful tools in therapy, but they also require the
therapist to have a deeper understanding of the process and alternative approaches. Box
16.2 outlines the general process and format. Below, we describe some key components of

[PAGE 280]

16. Changing Relationship Patterns: Assertiveness 263


Basic Steps of Role-Playing Exercises

The therapist provides the rationale for role playing.
It is a method for “trying on” and fine-tuning different ways of interacting in interper-
sonal situations.
It provides an opportunity to get immediate feedback from the therapist.

The client and therapist identify a relevant interpersonal situation.
If possible, they use an example client has recorded on Relationship Patterns Work-
sheet-1 between sessions.
Otherwise, the therapist asks the client to describe a recent relevant interpersonal
situation.
Therapist and client choose a situation with a moderate distress level.

First role-play sequence: The client plays themselves, and the therapist plays the other per-
son.


After initial sequence, the therapist obtains any needed clarification on the client's goals
in the interaction, shares observations about the role play, provides feedback, and makes
suggestions for improving the communication.

Second role-play sequence (with therapist modeling): The therapist role-plays behavior,
language, and tone of voice that would align with the clients goals. The client imagines
what the other person might feel and think on receiving the message as presented by the
therapist.
Afterward, the therapist asks client for feedback on the approach. Does the client have
any suggestions or observations? Can the client see themselves using this alternative
approach?

Third role-play sequence: The client plays themselves, and the therapist plays the other
person.

Afterward, the therapist asks the client to describe how the role play felt this time, as
compared to when the client did it in the initial role play of the situation.
The therapist and client discuss how the client can continue to practice.


the exercise and one alternative for clients who are not ready for direct role plays with a
therapist.


Setting the stage and sequencing the role play

To set the stage, the therapist and client must agree upon basic background information
before beginning the exercise (e.g., the context for each specific interaction, the nature of
the clients relationship with the other person involved, the clients main goal for the interaction). This clarification also allows the therapist to respond in a realistic and helpful way
during the role play itself. Once the therapist has identified the interpersonal situation and

[PAGE 281]

264 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


has ensured that the client understands the rationale for the exercise, the role playing can
begin.
In the first role play, the client acts as themselves and the therapist as the other person
in the interaction. This initial role play will give the therapist an opportunity to see how
the client has addressed (or plans to address) this situation, rather than relying solely on
the client's description. After the first role play has been completed, the therapist can ask
questions, share observations, provide feedback, and make suggestions for improving the
communication (see the next subsection for tips for providing feedback).
In the second role play, the therapist can model how to implement the feedback in the
same situation, with the therapist now playing the role of the client and the client taking
the role of the other person. After this run-through, it is crucial to ask the client how it
sounded to them and whether they could realistically picture themselves using the modeled approach. The goal is to help the client come up with a style of communication that
remains genuine and fits their personality, rather than having the client adopt the therapist's
particular wording of a response in a memorized, rote way. In this role play, the therapist's
approach should be presented as just one alternative, rather than as “the right way.” This
attitude also demonstrates the key theme of flexibility, which is woven into STAIR’s philosophy of emotional and relational well-being throughout the treatment protocol. In this spirit,
the client should be encouraged to discuss what may or may not work about the way the
therapist managed the situation in the role play. It is also helpful for the therapist to validate
how challenging it can be to respond in certain situations, especially when emotions are
strong and conflict is present. The therapist will be in a good position to comment on this
complexity after having had the experience of playing the role of the client (e.g., “I can really
see now how having your mother say those things would feel pretty intimidating’).
In the third and usually final role play, the therapist and client reverse roles again, giving the client the opportunity to play themselves a second time. In this role play, the client is
encouraged to try out the therapist's feedback and experiment with an alternative approach.
Afterward, the therapist asks the client to describe how the role play felt this time, as compared to the first time they did it. Ideally, the client will notice some differences after
incorporating the feedback. The client can practice the situation both within and outside
the session until they feel a sense of mastery.


Giving feedback on interpersonal style

Giving feedback to any client on their interpersonal style can be a challenging task. Many
individuals who have experienced sexual, physical, or emotional abuse have an enhanced
sensitivity to perceived disapproval. If such clients feel they are being criticized, they may
become defensive, shut down, and/or feel ashamed—none of which are conducive to practicing new interpersonal skills. Feedback is most effective if it follows a sequence in which
the therapist provides positive feedback (what went well), followed by constructive feedback
(what could be even better), and then ending with encouragement or reiteration of the positive feedback. To minimize the risk of a clients feeling judged or misunderstood, the therapist keeps the following guidelines in mind when providing feedback:

[PAGE 282]

16. Changing Relationship Patterns: Assertiveness 265


I
Reiterate that interpersonal skills are learned—we are not born with them—and
that learning any new skills takes practice. It is likely that the client did not have role
models for effective communication or opportunities to practice these skills in their
childhood environment. These factors probably make managing current interper-
sonal situations more challenging.
I
Put the emphasis on generating alternatives, as opposed to rejecting the client's cur-
rent approach. Communicate explicitly that there is no “right” or “wrong” way to
express oneself, but rather a range of options the client can choose from, depending
on the interpersonal message they would like to convey in a given interaction.
» Provide information about both strengths and weaknesses in discussing the client's
style of communication, and be as specific as possible.
+ When addressing problems or sticking points, provide the potential experience of
the other person in the interaction, rather than directly using your own perceptions,
as the latter might be overwhelming or confusing to the client. An example of such a
comment is “A person in this situation might feel rejected by what you said about not
really caring about their point of view.”
» Ask the client how it felt for them to receive feedback, and whether there were things
with which they agreed or disagreed.


Using covert modeling as an alternative

For some clients or in some situations, a technique called “covert modeling” may be more
appropriate than explicit role playing. This approach is the same as role playing, except
that the client is asked to imagine the situation and then describe and discuss it in detail
with the therapist, rather than acting it out. The therapist can prompt the client by asking
questions such as “What could you say to this person?”, “How do you think you can best
communicate your feelings to meet your goal in this situation?”, or “How do you think you
would handle it if they got angry?” The therapist can suggest that the client “try on for size”
various approaches until they find one that fits their style.
This method is particularly useful for clients who are too self-conscious to engage in
role playing, or for situations that do not lend themselves to effective role plays (e.g., sexual
intimacy). If a therapist observes that a particular client is struggling with the role playing, or that it does not appear helpful for the client, covert modeling may be the preferred
method of generating alternative scenarios. In fact, the therapist can bypass role playing
altogether and start here instead if it appears that a role-play approach would not be maximally effective.
Another strength ofcovert modeling is that clients can use this method to work through
future distressing or difficult situations without the therapist’s presence. Between sessions,
clients can practice talking themselves through situations by asking themselves, “What
could I say in this situation?” or “How would it sound if I said it this way?” This exercise
can be particularly effective ifa client has the capacity to use it in combination with “positive visualization’—that is, actually imagining themselves in the situation and managing it
successfully.

[PAGE 283]

266 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


COMPLETE RELATIONSHIP PATTERNS WORKSHEET-2


The next step in the session is to introduce and complete Handout 16.4, Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2. This worksheet is new to the treatment, in that it includes space not
only for a description of the old relationship pattern (as in Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1), but also for the formulation of a healthier alternative. The role-play experience of
using an “I Message” can be used to help illuminate old beliefs, feelings, and behaviors, as
well as the clients comfort level with the articulation of an alternative.


CASE EXAMPLE: AN “I MESSAGE” ROLE PLAY


Caroline, a client with a history of multiple sexual traumas, came to Session 7 acknowledging her need to practice assertiveness. When asked to give a recent example in which she
had had difficulty with assertiveness, she shared her experience with Paul, a new man she
had met during the course of the treatment. Caroline described being interested in Paul,
but not ready to begin serious sexual involvement. Caroline felt that she had communicated
this to Paul on their first two dates through her avoidance of situations in which they would
be alone in private. On the third date, Caroline agreed to let Paul drive her home. When
he asked to come in, she consented, even though she did not think it was a good idea. She
became very uncomfortable when he told her that he was attracted to her and felt confused
when he began to kiss her. She let it go on for several minutes and then told Paul that she
did not feel well; she apologized and said she thought she should get some rest. After Caroline had shared the specifics of the situation, she and the therapist used a role play of an “I
Message” to communicate her wishes. After they practiced, they discussed what underlying beliefs had made it so difficult for her to say what she meant, and explored alternative
beliefs that could support new and healthier behaviors. These were worked through, using a
copy of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (see Box 16.3 for Caroline's completed example).
The discussion began as follows:


THERAPIST: How did you feel about yourself in this situation?

CAROLINE: I felt silly —like “Why should this be such a big deal? I am a grown
woman and should be able to handle a man kissing me.” But the reality is that I
was nervous and confused and just wanted him to go, so 1 could get my thoughts
together.

THERAPIST: How did you expect him to respond to you asking him to leave?

CAROLINE: I didnt know how he would react—maybe get angry that I led him on by
having him come up and then making him leave, or maybe just think I was nuts
and never call me again.

THERAPIST: Neither of which were appealing outcomes. So what did you do?

CAROLINE: I was searching my mind for what to say without offending him or having

[PAGE 284]

UM |PIP 99) pue yuıy} ynoge


¡euos1ad.3]u] uonenys ésesAw 19yjo guosied Aj Bun¡nsal Jolaeyogq

1eym ¿pausddey AW sBul991 A sıyßnoyr 1
119y sbuljeos 119y1| siybnoy] 1UYM PIP |¿OP


2,02] UIYM ay 1095 p39 |9,MOP MOUY FOYM pa} Wily ‘U0 asojag puv 21 SI 002 apom| dn uv asnoxa Ao}
bulss!> ‘am 990) hym ay pjnoys ‘06
9H 24biw |yuıya | wo 997 “panal|aA Ing 05)o

sznu puv AvAavi }}09
‘ulobo

dıysuoreloy |JI, :|ePOW 07 FUOM Y 2AOY dıysu0130]24 ‘ |US) pjnoys 70uU aAvy suoluldo 40 v 240m
ssnj
267


¡euos.13d.13]u] sjeoß 103 3Y] 13ULO :UOSISd Jey
mM 3S|3 p]¡NoO9 | SUOIDE
32,118U191|y
}99dxa ay] 19yjo uosied * * *
** ¡99] ynoqge
** 0] ¿1991 ** 0} ¿MUIy1 Jeym asja pinoo |¿OP

guonenys 2H 2q 2q4biw 10
és}asAw
210ys Am sbuijaay qnogv 40) fiyzvdwa pu Jjeym asje Iyßıu Aoy} ¿op
2 SI MO 02 ulbag v YIM "SIY2
divsv0/70)2. anoyaım vuolssedwog
jou bulguom 09 2q “passıy | avy ayz qb x~as JO vada qnoyzM uaym ay SISSIA ‘am |Jaaj
2H MEM
|2043 991) pasvoys hm
‘aw
‘snoAsau 25N092q |wiv
02 ssasdxa hw ‘Bulssi>
| o avy aybia
‘saavasajasd puv 07 UVM 295 WI
‘umop 09 ssasdxa sIY2 "uıvbo
‘gouasajasd
y ula aAJe dıysuoieje4 |JI, :|ePOW 07 ZUM V AAVY JODA) (ansZ AIMSUOIFOJ2A YZIM QUOIWIOS

SI 7) UBU} 2U02A0dwmI! AO} 07 aw asvys hm ‘saauasajasd ‘sjaljaq puv sbuljaas (h)puly)

[PAGE 285]

268 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


to get into a whole thing about it. I waited until I couldn't handle it any more, and
then I made up an excuse for why he needed to go.

THERAPIST: OK. What was the result of that action?

CAROLINE: Well, he did leave, so I felt relieved, but I also felt bad and guilty.

THERAPIST: What did you feel badly about?

CAROLINE: Everything—I didn't handle it right. He hasn't called me, and I feel like I
blew a chance with someone I liked.


Caroline and the therapist spent time talking about how Caroline could have responded
in this particular situation. While neither of them could say how the situation would have
sorted itself out, Caroline could have been more assertive about her wishes and preferences
to Paul, which could have led to clearer communication and plans for the future.


THERAPIST: It is clear that you were feeling overwhelmed and were having trouble
putting your thoughts together. Why dont we try to formulate an “I Message” that
identifies what you were feeling and why? That might make it easier for you to
propose an action plan in this scenario if it comes up again, and for him to have a
chance to know what you want and why.

CAROLINE: OK, here goes... When you kiss me, I feel nervous, because I am not ready
for this (said very softly and apologetically, with eyes downcast and an air of guilt).

THERAPIST: You were really able to put the words together. So congratulations to you
for stringing together all the words together and saying what you meant. But the
tone of voice sounds like you have something to apologize for. This is your point of
view, and you can say it more firmly, but also with kindness and compassion to him
and for yourself. I am going to say your words, but in a different tone of voice. (Does
this, looking straight at Caroline, and using a soft but clear voice.)

CAROLINE: That sounded so much more like a communication than an apology!

THERAPIST: Why don't you try it again? Say the same sentence, but with a sense that
you are sharing something about yourself, and that you believe he will hear it and
understand you.

CAROLINE: (Completes role play with more energy and direct eye contact. Also adds at
the end of the sentence:) Ud like to end the night now. See you again another time.

THERAPIST: How did that feel?

CAROLINE: Very, very scary. But good. Once I said that I was nervous about kissing, the
action plan to meet another time just tumbled out naturally.

THERAPIST: That is awesome. Not everyone would be able to make the transition from
stating a feeling to making a plan, but you did it!

CAROLINE: Yes, I would really like to see him again. But I can see how much better I
feel if I can share my feelings and thoughts with him first.

[PAGE 286]

16. Changing Relationship Patterns: Assertiveness 269


Caroline and the therapist spent some time talking about how, in this particular situation, Caroline’s beliefs about herself and Paul were related to some of her core beliefs about
assertiveness. Caroline was aware of her long-standing difficulties in being able to assert her
needs, especially in the face of others’ competing needs. In thinking about how assertiveness was typically managed in her family, Caroline noted that she and her siblings were “not
allowed” to say if there was something they didnt like: “If my mother even thought she saw
a sour look, she would threaten to smack it off our faces.”
Caroline seemed to have coped with this environment by learning to distance herself
from her feelings and needs. As she put it, “we just learned not to have opinions,” which
made going along with her parents’ demands easier. What she also learned was that her
needs were really not important and that it was best for her not to show them. Thus she
did not have much experience with tuning in to her needs, let alone trying to express them
effectively to other people. The sense that it was better to go along than to fight for what
she wanted was further confirmed by the times she did try to assert herself: “People either
dont listen—they act like they didnt even hear me—or I have been told that I am making
things complicated.”
The therapist then shifted to working with Caroline on the potential for other scenarios, despite the fact that it was hard for her to imagine any.


THERAPIST: Let's just experiment with the possibility of other options, starting with
identifying what your goals were in this situation with Paul. What did you want in
terms of the relationship in this interaction?

CAROLINE: I wanted him to like me, and I wanted him to ask me out again.

THERAPIST: All right, we've identified that you wanted to continue the relationship.
That’s important, because if you did not want continued contact, that would change
your approach. What else, including what you did not want in this particular situ-
ation?

CAROLINE: What I did not want is exactly what happened. I didnt want to get in a situ-
ation where sex was a possibility. I wouldn't have minded a quick kiss, but I knew
I wasn't ready for anything more.

THERAPIST: OK, so you wanted to maintain the connection, but didnt want it to get
sexual.

CAROLINE: Yes—but I'm not sure if that’s even possible with a man, if he would put up
with that.

THERAPIST: Right. Well, it seems like that assumption is part of what made it hard to
be direct. What else could you have felt or believed about yourself in this situation?

CAROLINE: That I wasn't crazy or ridiculous?

THERAPIST: Yes—that your wish to continue the relationship without getting sexual
at this point was valid instead of shameful. What about your expectations of Paul?
You feared he would get angry or reject you if you said something. What else could
you have expected from him?

[PAGE 287]

270 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


CAROLINE: I guess to not get mad or reject me, but I dont know if that would have
worked.

THERAPIST: But you did a good job of saying what you wanted. And in the end, you
seemed to feel better about yourself. We really don’t know what Paul would have
liked or not liked. You did signal that you wanted to maintain a connection with
him. Just try to stretch your mind to let yourself think of other possibilities.

CAROLINE: OK, I could have expected him to be nice and understand—that’s what I
would have wanted.

THERAPIST: Now if you had these alternative beliefs and expectations that your feelings
were valid and that Paul might understand them, what other belief might you be
proposing?

CAROLINE: That I could share my feelings and still maintain a connection with him. Or
that I could share my feelings and he might see them as legitimate.

THERAPIST: Right. At least if you believed that there was a possibility of him being
understanding, you could have taken the risk and be more direct about what was
really going on. Also, you might have been able to tell him right off the bat that you
didnt want him to come up to your apartment, without being apologetic or guilty.

CAROLINE: Maybe, but even then I dont know if I could say it in the right way.

THERAPIST: Right. Well, that might take some practice, since these are new skills you
are learning. That’s why we are going to do more role playing.


The therapist and Caroline then completed a copy of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2, as shown in Box 16.3. It included a summary of what actually happened, as well as
a formulation of an alternative scenario in which Caroline's beliefs, feelings, and actions differed, based on a change in a core interpersonal pattern. As indicated in Box 16.3, therapist
and client jotted down what actually happened during the interaction in the top portion of
the worksheet. They then spent some time discussing what belief was driving this interaction. As indicated above, Caroline was raised with a core interpersonal belief that “If I want
to have a relationship, then I should not have opinions or make a fuss.” This core belief had
helped her get along in an abusive home environment, but this belief and the attendant feelings and behaviors were, at a minimum, leading to confused communications.
The alternative core belief that the therapist proposed during the session was “I can
be connected and share my feelings and preferences,” or “If I want to have a (real, true)
relationship with someone, then it is important for me to share my preferences, beliefs, and
feelings (kindly).” The therapist proposed the second wording of this alternative explicitly
to the client. Then, assuming the alternative core belief, the therapist and client completed
the concrete details of this particular scenario. Here the therapist and client articulated that
Caroline's interpersonal goals in this situation were to share her feelings about not wanting
to kiss and to continue seeing Paul. With this goal, the therapist and Caroline completed
alternative feelings and beliefs that Caroline could have about herself. These included that
she could feel confident about having the right to express her feelings and slow things down,

[PAGE 288]

16. Changing Relationship Patterns: Assertiveness 271


that it was OK to begin a relationship without sex or kissing, and that she had a right to state
her preferences. Regarding her expectations of Paul, she included the alternative beliefs
that he could feel compassion for her, that he would be OK with her statements, and that he
might even feel good about her sharing her preferences.
This case example illustrates the process by which survivors of trauma can begin developing new ways of expressing themselves and interacting with others. As the example shows,
survivors may initially err by being too passive in expressing their needs. Caroline's difficulty in looking out for her own interests came up repeatedly during subsequent sessions,
as Caroline continued to work on developing ways of feeling more confident and powerful.
Typically, role plays will have to be practiced many times and with a variety of situations
until the client feels natural, comfortable, and effective in enacting appropriate assertive
behavior in a real-life situation.


INTRODUCE ADDITIONAL ASSERTIVENESS SKILLS TO PRACTICE


It is important to strike a balance in the session between teaching new skills and exploring/
clarifying the underlying beliefs and patterns that are driving behaviors. Teaching “I Messages is useful because it is a fairly simple skill, but learning it can be a powerful experience
for the client. Below, we identify other skills that may be equally appropriate depending on
a specific clients needs. These skills are Making Requests and Saying No. The therapist can
introduce these skills as relevant to the client either in this session or in later sessions. A
summary of these skills is found in Handout 16.5, Additional Assertiveness Skills.


Making Requests

Asking for something that a client needs or wants is an important assertiveness skill to
master. Asking for something assertively does not guarantee that the client will get it, but
it is highly unlikely that they will get what they want without asking. To make a request
assertively, the therapist instructs the client to do the following:


» Make the request specific, and state it clearly and simply (e.g., “I would like you to
come to the doctor's appointment with me”).
gy Couch the request as an “I Message” (“I would like...” vs. “You need to...”).
State the positive consequences of the others compliance with the request (e.g., “If
you take care of that errand for me, I will have more time to spend with you this
evening”) and/or the negative consequences of the others noncompliance (e.g., “If
you dont do that errand for me, I wont make it on time for our dinner date tonight’).
+ Avoid making excuses, downplaying or apologizing for the request, or blaming the
other person (e.g., “I would like you to help me with my move’ vs. “It’s a shame that
I'm going to have to move all alone,” “IT know you probably don't have time, but if you
have nothing better to do, would you maybe be able to help me move?”, or “You are
so inconsiderate. You never do anything for me”).

[PAGE 289]

272 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Another important assertiveness tool is to leave or temporarily put off the situation if
the other person responds aggressively (e.g., “I can see that youre angry right now. Let's talk
about this after lunch”).


Saying No

For many individuals raised in abusive environments, it can be difficult to say no assertively.
In cases when a client is dealing with a person with whom they do not want to foster or
maintain a relationship, it is often sufficient to say, “No, thank you,” in a firm and respectful tone. If the other person persists, the client should repeat herself while maintaining eye
contact and slightly raising the tone of their voice.
A useful technique for dealing with someone who will not take no for an answer is
the Broken Record. In this technique, the client simply repeats a concise sentence over
and over, without backing down or getting sidetracked by other issues. For example, if a
salesperson keeps badgering the client to buy something they do not want, they can keep
repeating, “I understand what you are saying, but I'm not interested.”
In situations involving a person with whom the client does want to maintain a relationship, it can be useful to begin by acknowledging the request by reflecting it back to
the other person. Without apologizing, the client should give a brief explanation of the
reason for turning them down and then say no. If possible, the client can end by suggesting an alternative plan in which both the client's and the other persons needs will be met.
For example, in response to a friend’s request to help with a move, the client could say, “T
understand that you need help with your move. Unfortunately, I have other plans for that
day, so I wont be able to help you. If it would be helpful to you, Id be happy to help you
pack boxes the day before.” If Saying No is an especially difficult skill for a client, it can be
useful to build in time before responding to a request. This can help counter the tendency
to agree automatically to others’ requests before the client has considered whether they are
in their own best interests (e.g., “I need to check my availability and so will let you know
tomorrow). A final point for the therapist to make is that the client can practice low-level
acts of assertiveness in a kind but firm way. Being assertive does not mean being hostile or
rude. Additional ideas are found in Handout 16.5.
It is also important for the therapist to point out that behaving assertively does not
guarantee that people will respond positively to a request or statement. Sometimes people
will respond negatively, no matter how assertive or respectful the client is. The therapist
explains to the client that they may still receive some negative or unhelpful responses to
their assertive behaviors, but that they will be more generally successful in their interactions.


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


This session has a lot of substance to it. It is the first session that explicitly articulates and
discusses potential alternative relationship models for the client. It also introduces role plays

[PAGE 290]

16. Changing Relationship Patterns: Assertiveness 273


as a way of realizing what acting in accord with an alternative relationship model might feel
like and how hard or easy doing this might be for a particular client. The session introduces
the topic of assertiveness because it is something that, in one form or another, is a challenge
for individuals who have experienced intimidation and violation by persons in authority or
with power over them. The use of “I Messages” is a simple and relatively flexible skill that
can be applied in a variety of situations that support alternative relationship models where
the client experiences themselves as being appropriate active agents in the expression of
their beliefs, feelings, and preferences.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


After the therapist and client have completed Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 and
reviewed assertiveness skills relevant to the client, the therapist asks the client how doing
these exercises felt and whether they learned anything. The therapist then asks the client if they think they can try out using the new worksheet and skills over the week, as a
way to build on the work they did outside of session last week and in session this week.
The therapist provides the client with several blank copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet—2 (Handout 16.4) in order to detail interpersonal situations that arise during the week.
Guidelines for how to complete this worksheet are provided in the first section of Handout
16.6, Practicing Assertiveness to Improve Relationship Patterns. The therapist can recommend that the client complete this sheet twice during the week. If necessary, the therapist
reminds the client again of the rationale for skills practice and discusses any possible things
that could interfere with the clients being able to utilize the worksheet. The therapist also
reminds the client to continue using emotion management skills from the three channels as
they apply to the client's meeting their interpersonal goals, as well as to continue the twicedaily practice of Focused Breathing. Finally, the therapist and client should maintain the
clients commitment to engage in at least one pleasurable activity per week.

[PAGE 291]

Understanding Assertiveness

e “Assertive behavior” means standing up for your legitimate rights and
presenting your needs/wants in a way that is respectful of both yourself and
others. Assertive behavior may lead you to feel confident, self-respecting, and
good about yourself.


e “Nonassertive behavior” means ignoring or not expressing your own rights,
needs, and desires. Nonassertive behavior may lead you to feel hurt,
resentful, anxious, disappointed, and/or angry.


e “Aggressive behavior” means expressing your own rights at the expense of
others through inappropriate outbursts or hostility. Aggressive behavior may
lead you to feel angry, indignant, out of control, and/or guilty.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


274

[PAGE 292]

Basic Personal Rights

1. | have the right to ask for what | want.

2. | have the right to say no.

3. | have the right to feel and express my feelings, both positive and negative.

4. | have the right to make mistakes.

5. | have the right to have my own opinions, convictions, and values.

6. | have the right to be treated with dignity and respect.

7. | have the right to change my mind or decide on a different course of action.

8. | have the right to protest unfair treatment or criticism.

9. | have the right to expect honesty from others.

10. | have the right to be angry at someone| love.

11. | have the right to say, “I don't know.”

12. | have the right to negotiate for change.

13. | have the right to be in a nonabusive environment.

14. | have the right to ask for help or emotional support.

15. | have the right to my own needs for personal space and time, even if others
would prefer my company.

16. | have the right not to have to justify myself to others.

17. | have the right not to take responsibility for someone else's behavior,
feelings, or problems.

18. | have the right not to have to anticipate others' needs and wishes.

19. | have the right not to have to worry all the time about the goodwill of others.

20. | have the right to choose not to respond to a situation.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


275

[PAGE 293]

“| Messages”
Goal: To express hurt feelings or distress, or to give feedback about another’s behavior.

o The key is to focus on the consequences you experience due to the other person’s troubling
behavior, rather than focusing on the person themselves. Focusing on the consequences their
behavior causes you makes it less likely that the person will feel attacked or criticized.

Format: Situation (or Behavior) > Feeling > Consequence.

The following formula can be helpful: “When I [state observed behavior], | feel [state the feeling],
because [state the consequence for you].” Example:

o “When had to wait longer to be picked up today, I was upset, because | did not have time to
get all my errands done.”

Success in this exercise means stating your concerns clearly and respectfully, not necessarily
having the other person agree with you.


An “I Message” has three parts: a situation, a feeling, and a result.


1. Situation: What is happening around you? What is the other person doing?


2. Feeling: How does the person’s behavior make you feel?


3. Consequence: What happens as a result?


Use this structure for your sentence:


“When | [situation],

| feel [feeling],

because [result].”


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


276

[PAGE 294]

Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2

What were my expectations about the
Interpersonal situation What did I feel and think about myself? other person? My resulting behavior

What happened? My feelings My thoughts Their feelings Their thoughts What did | do?


Relationship model: “If , then


¿Lc Alternative beliefs and feelings about
Interpersonal goals for Alternative beliefs and feelings about the other person: What else could |
situation myself: What else could |... expect the other person... Alternative actions

What are my goals in this ... feel about ... think about ...to feel? ...to think? What else could | do?
situation? myself? myself?
What else might they do?
N


Alternative relationship model: “If

then


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and
Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page
for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 295]

Additional Assertiveness Skills

1. Making Requests. Be specific about what you want, and state it clearly and simply.
e Couch your request as a sentence beginning with “I,” such as “I would like...”
e State the positive consequences of the other’s following through with your request, and/or the
negative consequences of the other’s lack of follow-through (an “I Message” may be helpful in
this case).
e Avoid making excuses, downplaying your request, or blaming the other person.
e Delay the situation if the other person responds angrily or aggressively. Use a coping skill, if
useful, to help you calm down before deciding your next step.


2. Saying No. The approach you choose depends on the kind of relationship and your interest in
maintaining the relationship.
e If you do want to maintain the relationship:
= Acknowledge the other person’s request by repeating it (do this also to make sure you
understand it).
= Without apologizing, give a brief explanation of your reason for declining.
= lí appropriate, suggest an alternative plan in which both your needs and the other person’s
will be met.
= If Saying No is especially difficult, give yourself some time before responding to a request.
You can try coping skills you’ve learned to ease your distress!
e If you do not want to maintain the relationship:
= Say, “No, thank you,” in a respectful but firm tone. You may still explain why if it will benefit
you or ease the situation.
= Ifthe other person persists, repeat yourself while maintaining eye contact and slightly raising
the tone of your voice.
= Or use the Broken Record approach: Repeat a concise sentence over and over, without
getting sidetracked by other issues.


Remember: Behaving assertively doesn’t guarantee that people will respond positively. Though
you may sometimes receive negative or unhelpful responses to your assertive behaviors, you will
generally, in the long run, be more successful in your interactions with other people.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


278

[PAGE 296]

Practicing Assertiveness to Improve Relationship Patterns
GUIDELINES FOR COMPLETING BOTTOM HALF
OF RELATIONSHIP PATTERNS WORKSHEET-2

1. Identify a positive goal for the relationship.
2. Identify a belief and feeling that supports the relationship goal. Ask your therapist or a friend for
suggestions if you get stuck.
3. Imagine a response from the person that supports your goal. What could they be feeling and
thinking? Ask for help if you get stuck.
4. Imagine actions that you can take to support the goal or maintain that goal if you reach it.
5. Try out the action you came up with, see if it works, and adjust your approach as needed.


OTHER ASSERTIVENESS PRACTICE SITUATIONS

e Ask a salesperson to help you find something.
e Call or text a friend you haven't seen in a while to schedule a time to catch up.
e Ask your therapist to explain a concept or skill again if you’re having trouble understanding or
remembering the details.
e Ask your therapist for additional copies of handouts if you need more or if you misplaced old
ones.

e Ask the pharmacist for information on an over-the-counter drug.
e Ask for a substitution on the menu when ordering a meal.
e Ask coworkers or classmates to do a favor for you (for example, ask for them to get you a cup of
coffee while they get their own).
e Disagree with someone's opinion politely but with confidence.
e Ask a friend for help in fixing something.
e Ask your landlord to fix a problem in your apartment.
e Aska person to stop doing something that bothers you—a great opportunity to use an ‘I
Message”!

Note. The majority of the other assertiveness practice situations are adapted from DBT Skills Training Manual, Second
Edition (p. 255), by Marsha M. Linehan. Copyright © 2015 Marsha M. Linehan. Additional ideas come from authors of
this book.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

279

[PAGE 297]

Changing Relationship Patterns
Managing Power


I’ve learned that people will forget what you said,
people will forget what you did, but people will
never forget how you made them feel.
—ATTRIBUTED TO SEVERAL AUTHORS


I. Session 8 of STAIR, the work of identifying maladaptive interpersonal schemas and
developing alternative ways of approaching and processing relationships continues. The
focus, however, is narrowed to the specific difficulties individuals who have experienced
interpersonal trauma have with managing power balances in relationships. Often people
who have experienced such trauma equate power with abuse. The goals of this session
are to help clients separate power dynamics from risk for abuse and other maltreatment.
The session reviews different kinds of power balances—including circumstances when the
client has the same amount of, less, or more power than the person with whom they are
interacting. It describes ways in which trauma can adversely affect managing relationships
with each of these dynamics. The psychoeducation component in this session presents the
idea that regardless of the nature of the power balance, respect for oneself and for others is
a constant in all relationships and is the solution for managing conflict and other difficulties.
In this session, the therapist and client select the power balance with which the client has
most difficulty. They then explore the interpersonal schemas associated with the dynamic,
identify an alternative way to view the dynamic, and try out a skill called Respect Bookends
to facilitate the development of respect for oneself and others. Copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4), introduced in Session 7, are used to organize and summarize the particular relationship problems that are being explored and for which solutions
are being evaluated. Box 17.1 outlines the theme and curriculum for Session 8.


280

[PAGE 298]

17. Changing Relationship Patterns: Managing Power 281


Theme and Curriculum for Session 8
Changing Relationship Patterns: Managing Power


This session addresses the effective negotiation of power dynamics in relationships. Individuals
who have experienced violence or exploitation often feel uneasy in situations where they feel
the pull of power in the interactions. The session introduces the inevitability of power dynamics in relationships—whether the client is in a situation where the power balance is equal, or
whether the client feels they have more or less power than the other person. The therapist proposes that the solution to discomfort around power is to experience respect for oneself and for
others in every interaction, regardless of the type of power balance. Respect for self and others
is critical for good communication, effective partnerships, and social functioning. The session
provides skills training in acknowledging and signaling respect for others with an attitude of
respect for oneself. Copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 are used to organize and
distill problematic relationship power dynamics, and to provide alternative models of relating
that support skills practice in the expression of respect for oneself and others.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Consider what kinds of problems in power management the client has been experiencing to
organize your discussion in the session. Bring the handouts for Session 8 (listed below), as well
as multiple copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-—2. The work in the session is estimated
to take about 60 minutes; a flexible application is assumed (i.e., not every client will need all
interventions).


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Review and discuss three types of power balances.
Discuss respect and power: Respect is the constant.
Introduce the Respect Bookends skill.
Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
Complete two copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2, with a focus on power
dynamics.
Practice Respect Bookends.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 299]

282 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Use emotion management skills from three channels to support interpersonal work.
Do something pleasurable.
Continue Focused Breathing twice daily.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 17.1. Power Balances in Relationships

Handout 17.2. Impact of Trauma on Managing Power Balances

Handout 17.3. Managing Power Balances with Respect

Additional copies of Handout 16.4. Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


Before the therapist begins the session work on managing power, the therapist spends some
time reviewing the Relationship Patterns Worksheet—2 entries brought in by the client. The
therapist briefly confirms that the client has correctly completed the entries, particularly
their expectations about others’ thoughts and feelings regarding the client's own efforts in
behaving more assertively. The therapist also briefly discusses whether the client has completed any assertiveness exercises, particularly any “I Messages’ that were role-played in
the previous session, and praises any efforts made. If there were difficulties, the therapist
elicits information about them. Often difficulties with effective assertiveness are associated
with difficulties in managing the underlying power balance—the topic of this session. The
therapist can plan with the client to return to these issues in the current session. Similarly,
if there were any difficulties executing an “I Message’ or if the client was unable to practice
this skill during the week, the therapist can tell the client that today’s session will include a
new skill (focusing on expressing respect for self and others) that incorporates the “I Message, so that there will be time to practice the skill again and adapt it to the client's needs
and situation. The topic of power flows fairly directly from that of assertiveness, so the relationships that are of concern to the client can remain the focus of discussion in this session
as well.


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


The therapist begins the session by noting its focus on managing power dynamics in relationships. The therapist can mention any difficulties the client has identified that may be
the result of problematic power dynamics. The therapist elicits from the client examples of
difficulties the client is experiencing, to set the focus of the session on the types of problems
the client is interested in discussing and resolving.

[PAGE 300]

17. Changing Relationship Patterns: Managing Power 283


REVIEW AND DISCUSS THREE TYPES OF POWER BALANCES


The therapist and client first review the information presented in Handout 17.1, Power
Balances in Relationships. They walk through the three central kinds of power balances
in relationships and identify people that the client has a relationship with that fit into each
type of power balance. These are the three types of power balances presented:


Y
Type I. The client has the same amount of power as the other person in the interac-
tion. Typical examples of people in this power balance are colleagues, friends, and
siblings.
» Type II. The client has less power than the other person, as is typically the case when
the person is an employee, student, or trainee.
Y
Type III. The client has more power than the other person, as is the case when the
client is an employer, teacher, coach, or parent.


Discuss Trauma-Generated Barriers in Managing Each Type
of Power Balance

Following the information in Handout 17.2, Impact of Trauma on Managing Power Balances, the therapist and client can explore the client’s views on each type of power balance
and identify which is the most difficult. Below are descriptions of ways in which trauma can
affect each type of balance, along with some case examples.


e Type I. Although the power balance is equal in these relationships, individuals who
have experienced childhood maltreatment or been in other situations of sustained exploitation (e.g., domestic violence) may be highly sensitive to the power dynamics of a situation
and may see themselves as having more or less power than the other person. For example,
they may relate to work colleagues as abusive parents and have difficulty seeing that their
colleagues do not hold that kind of power over them. On the other hand, a survivor may
act as if they hold more power in a relationship, for fear of being “victimized” or taken
advantage of by the other person. The case examples below illustrate both of these types of
problems in Type I relationships.


At the beginning of treatment, Angie, a 20-year-old student, described tremendous
anxiety in interactions with most of her friends. She constantly feared letting her friends
down or making them angry with her. When there was any issue or conflict, she would
become uncomfortable and distressed, which would lead her to call and smooth things
over regardless of the situation. Despite the reality that Angie was (or should have
been) on an equal footing with her friends, she certainly did not feel or act this way,
which continued to fuel her anxiety and obsequious behavior.


In contrast, Joanne came into treatment because she feared losing her boyfriend of sev-
eral years. He had threatened to break up with her because of her “bossiness,” saying
that he could no longer stand her efforts to control him. When Joanne and her therapist

[PAGE 301]

284 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


examined these relationship interactions, it became apparent that Joanne often treated
her boyfriend as though he was a child. She would often tell him what to eat, pick out
his clothing, and even make plans for him. Rather than being a girlfriend, Joanne had
taken on the role of an intrusive mother. Although initially her boyfriend had felt taken
care of, over time he began to feel resentful.


« Type II. Type IT relationships can be especially difficult for survivors of childhood
abuse, because people in positions of power are often equated with abusive caregivers (or
Can behave in ways that are abusive and have special impact upon the survivors). This
can leave survivors feeling angry, helpless, scared, and anxious in interactions with these
people. The primary challenge of a relationship in which the client has less power is to try
to achieve a balance between meeting the other persons demands or requests, while getting
the clients rights recognized and needs met. The following case examples illustrate such
problems in Type II relationships.


Beth had recently seen a doctor who had diagnosed her with a thyroid condition and
had prescribed medication without giving much explanation or information. Shortly
after she began taking the medication, she reported to her therapist that she felt
fatigued and dizzy. Her therapist recommended she call the doctor to ask about pos-
sible side effects rather than waiting for her next appointment, which was scheduled for
next month. Despite her discomfort, Beth felt hesitant to call the doctor, since it was not
an emergency situation. She did not want to annoy or question the doctor, as she feared
this might affect the quality of care he was willing to provide. Beth's therapist used this
example to discuss ways Beth interacted with those she viewed as being in authority.
She did not feel entitled to ask questions even when her own needs were being com-
promised. The therapist tried to provide a “reality check” and discussed with Beth that
part of her doctors job was to provide follow-up care and information.


Dawn worked as an assistant to a prestigious editor. Though she knew that her job
would include long hours and little pay, she had taken it because she knew the experi-
ence could further her career. However, when Dawn's boss asked if she could come in
on a weekend in order to meet a pressing deadline, Dawn felt that she was being taken
advantage of and needed to stand up for herself. She told her boss in no uncertain terms
that she would not be treated like a slave and walked out of the office. In treatment,
Dawn identified that one of her major relationship models involved the assumption that
those in positions of power would inevitably exploit her. In response to this expectation,
she was always on the lookout for this possibility and likely to interpret others’ behavior
as fitting with this model, which at times caused her to take actions she later regret-
ted. The therapist acknowledged the importance of Dawn’ self-protective instincts,
but also noted the need to develop other relationship models in which exploitation was
not a given. The therapist also worked with Dawn on building skills (e.g., identifying
relationship goals and considering pros and cons of continuing the relationship) that
could help her assess current situations with authority figures more objectively before
taking actions.

[PAGE 302]

17. Changing Relationship Patterns: Managing Power 285


+ Type III. Because of experiences in past relationships, survivors of childhood abuse
or other maltreatment may not understand that they have more power in these types of relationships, or they may deny that they do for fear of what it means to be powerful (e.g., power
may be equated with aggression). In contrast, some survivors find themselves taking on the
perpetrator role in this power situation, becoming literally or figuratively abusive. Behaving abusively in these interactions can lead a survivor to feel frightened, anxious, guilty, and
disgusted with herself. The case examples below illustrate both of these types of problems
in Type III relationships.


Jen, a high school teacher, was distressed by the fact that her students did not seem
to respect her. She felt ineffective and embarrassed by her reputation as a “pushover.”
When her therapist asked her more about what was going on in her classroom, Jen
described an atmosphere in which she gave her students tremendous freedom and
imposed minimal limits. She was surprised and hurt when students disregarded assign-
ments, but she had difficulty giving consequences. Though Jen appeared to be a skilled
teacher, her discomfort in taking on the role of an authority figure was having a nega-
tive impact on her professional life and self-esteem.


At the opposite end of the Type III spectrum, Becca, the eldest of three children, was
named executor of her mother's will; this included overseeing the sale of her mother’s
properties and ensuring that each of the three children received an equal percentage
of the profits. Rather than implementing her mother’s plan and involving her siblings
in the process, Becca became very secretive and manipulative. She delayed putting
the properties on the market; she also made important decisions without talking to her
sisters and refused to provide them with updates, saying that since she was the one cho-
sen to handle things, she should not have to run things by her sisters for their approval.
Becca acknowledged that she felt entitled to more than her two sisters because she was
taking on more responsibility, noting that this had always been the case. In this way
Becca was using this opportunity to fulfill her own agenda by unilaterally assuming
power, instead of taking the lead while also acting collaboratively with her siblings, as
her mother had intended.


DISCUSS RESPECT AND POWER: RESPECT IS THE CONSTANT

Those who have experienced interpersonal trauma, often at the hands of people who have
more authority and power, may equate power with the risk of more trauma. Similarly, being
the object of someone else's maltreatment is likely to be associated with a feeling of powerlessness. Victims are often treated like objects and told (explicitly or implicitly) that they
“deserve what they get”, some victims, particularly children assaulted by caregivers, may
internalize these messages and believe themselves to be worthless, deserving of abuse, or
“failures” because they could not defend themselves. Maltreatment is indeed an act of disregard for a person's value and worth, but the blame for these behaviors falls squarely on the
shoulders of the perpetrators of these acts.

[PAGE 303]

286 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Recovery from being a victim of interpersonal trauma includes recovery of self-worth.
This session focuses on the client's inherent right to self-respect and their inherent obligation to treat others with respect. The rehabilitation of sense of respect for self and other
can occur in a variety of ways. In this treatment, the therapist simply reminds the client of
their inherent worth as a human being and points out ways that they have treated themselves in a respectful and appreciative manner. Discussing the impact of trauma on sense
of self-respect is an important initial and eye-opening step. The client may be able to see
that they were not born defective or a “loser,” but that certain unfortunate experiences have
led them to this belief. Current relationship patterns that appear to replay traumatizing
power dynamics are explored to identify underlying relationship models that hold that one
or the other person in the relationship is worthless. These beliefs are challenged, and alternative models of relating are proposed. Experiential exercises in the form of a skill called
Respect Bookends are introduced in this session, so that the client can practice behaviors
that express respect for others as well as the self and are intended to contribute to a revised
and more positive respectful view of oneself and others.


INTRODUCE THE RESPECT BOOKENDS SKILL


Handout 17.3, Managing Power Balances with Respect, describes the skill of Respect Bookends. This skill adds to the “I Message” communication by bookending one’s own opinions, concerns, and distress with recognition of the other person's perspective at both the
beginning and ending of a statement. On a superficial level, the process of recognizing the
preferences and opinions of another person is intended to help engage that person in conversation and facilitate resolution of conflicts or differences. On a deeper level, this type
of interaction recognizes the presence of another person and awareness of that person as a
human being in their particularity and with respect for their position, whatever it may be.
The statement is intended to express the shared humanity of the two people, and respect for
the other person's rights to their opinions as well as one's own.
As with the skills training for “I Messages,” the therapist and client start by sketching
out the current problematic situation in the top portion of Relationship Patterns Worksheet—2 and formulating a preferred alternative scenario in the bottom portion, along with a
hypothesized alternative relationship model. The client and therapist formulate a three-part
communication, which begins with a statement that recognizes the concerns and positive
aspects or behaviors of the other person; is followed by a statement of the client’s request,
concern, decision, or point of view; and ends with a statement that again recognizes the
other person’s concerns and positive aspects or behaviors. The therapist and client then
engage in a role play of the planned communication. As described in Chapter 16/Session
7, the role playing can serve to highlight more details about what is problematic about the
current situation, and to refine the alternative relationship model and interpersonal goals
associated with the situation. More details on this role playing are provided in the case
example below.

[PAGE 304]

17. Changing Relationship Patterns: Managing Power 287


CASE EXAMPLE: WORKING THROUGH A POWER PROBLEM

Using Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2

Julie identified a chronic problem with her boyfriend—that he did not listen to her opinions.
Even though she viewed the relationship as having an equal power balance, she often ended
up feeling as if she had less; as she expressed it, she felt that her opinions and preferences
“don’t count.” The therapist asked Julie to describe recent experiences in her relationship;
together, they then used the top portion of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 to describe a
recent situation and identify what might be the underlying relationship model contributing
to the dynamics and outcome of the situation (see the top portion of Box 17.2).

THERAPIST: You have described similar situations with your boyfriend. There are some
real similarities in this and past examples. What do you notice?
JULIE: Well, I always end up feeling bad and feeling that everything I do is wrong.
THERAPIST: Yes, that does seem to be a theme. In this and previous situations, you seem
to expect the worst from the other person. You anticipated that your boyfriend
would not listen to you. Do you think these expectations affected your behavior in
any way?

JULIE: Well, yeah. That's why I didnt try to talk to him about it.

THERAPIST: Which makes sense—if you expect no one will listen, then you are not
likely to put yourself out there. Where do you think these expectations that you
will not be heard come from?

JULIE: They come from people not listening to me.

THERAPIST: You have shared with me that this certainly was the case with your par-
ents—that they would accuse you of something and not give you the chance to
defend yourself.

JULIE: If I tried to explain, they would get mad and say I was being disrespectful. Usu-
ally I would get punished or even hit.

THERAPIST: In this context with your parents, it sounds like avoiding further discussion
and leaving the situation before it escalated was an adaptive response and allowed
you to avoid some negative consequences. However, in your current life, always
expecting that you will be shut down and punished for trying to speak up has some
potential negative consequences. Can you think of any?
JULIE: Well, yeah. I let people go on thinking whatever they want to think about me,
even if it is wrong—but I would rather do that than try to convince them of some-
thing else.

THERAPIST: Yes, you are not inclined to try to clarify a misunderstanding or further
discuss a situation, which leaves you unable to further discuss your intentions or
understand the other person’s perception of your behavior. Again, when you are
dealing with someone who is toxic, this may be for the best; you avoid getting into

[PAGE 305]

s.aine payajdwo4y dıysuonejay Su1ayed 2—19 4S410M

UM |PIP 99) pue yuıy} ynoge


¡euos1ad.3]u] uonenys ésesAw 19yjo guosied Aj Bun¡nsal Jolaeyogq

1eym ¿pausddey AW sBul991 A sıyßnoyr 1
119y sbuljeos 119y1| s}y6noy} JEUM PIP |¿OP
hy pualsjhog paddous "pidnas Aym mv |shomjo "paboaug SJUIMYL |WO quam OUI 247 12490 WOOA
20 aw asnv2aq |950] 949 pamousy |
Guiso} uvo
¿sbum3 AaAaui Y 296
PaAlL Jo m ssajyz40Mm puv v9 ||gun| ay 442] 40} '340M SOM
109 ‘shay aH pa]jo9 aw 396 bulyzhuy ‘quop asdn 150m Jo ayz ‘vp
habuy 30 yJashm
‘a)qisuodsan! 1oy30b07 Saysım 199990 ay poy v
"pual1}41b
ON bururojdxa
ul qulod
mM 2H 35nÍ 396 aJow
‘aw


habuv puv msu! 3 ‘aw
' |uy] 2q Jim “paysıund “pazioigi49 puy paznsul 113

Cdiysuonejay :¡9poul y], |haz 03 ulojdxa JJashw 49340 uv I59UOy 2095/w SOY 1229 apvm
288


¡euos.13d.13]u] sjeoß 103 3Y] 13ULO :UOSISd Jey
mM 3S|3 p]¡NoO9 | SUOIDE
32,118U191|y
}99dxa ay] 19yjo uosied * * *
** jae)" moqe
* * * 0] «1994 ** 0} éUIY} 1UYM 3S[9 PINO9 |¿OP

guonenys ¿J 9sÁuv “PIFOFAA] fw Abojode noyaım Jeym asia ıyBıu Aay} ¿op
07 )0L mIM 21 3nogv
WI 20M |‘volqzvalunw o 2
‘pas vs oqwma ‘sbuiy2 ang |wo jou
pJnom a>!) wily "U0120S12AU09
hw ‘sbuljaay 07 q2adsa4
|puv Zuop | 07 hba20135
v dojanap
]25hwa 350 UVI djay 02 wily Mav 2042 91 quny
a>!) Busag paddous 30 ay myadoy Im ay ‘sbuljaay 02 zum
hw 3vybiw 3091
ua3sl] 09 ‘QW
aAjos-wma)gosd puno4v


anıyeulayy dıysuoneja4 |y], :¡9poul 03 HAZ ulojdxa ¿04m pavaddoy 49340 uv I59UOY aYVISImM SOY 1999 apow

|UB} 2q ]]IM vaNıb 399d524 107 hw Jo quiod mala puv 09 papvodsas 3noOvY21M Juamysıund aqhow) vara (voIssodw109

[PAGE 306]

17. Changing Relationship Patterns: Managing Power 289


a nonproductive interaction. But what about situations in which you are wrong in
assuming the other person will respond negatively?

JULIE: Well, how do I know if this is going to be the case?

THERAPIST: True, you dont always know, so it involves some risk—but in certain cases
it may be worth it. For example, there are likely to be situations in which others
will not belittle or ignore your efforts to explain yourself. In these cases, you dont
let the person know what's on your mind, and you miss out on the opportunity to
have an important conversation that may improve things in the relationship. This
is the main limitation of applying expectations across the board in your relation-
ship. Although it is more nuanced and complicated, ultimately it is more adaptive
to take each relationship on a case-by-case basis. This will help you to consider
what approach you might want to take. In this example, you felt unheard by your
boyfriend—but since this relationship is different from the one with your parents,
you may want to approach him in a different way.


Using Julie’s example, the therapist worked with her to identify interpersonal goals she
had with her boyfriend and to construct an alternative relationship model she might apply
to her interactions—a different model from the one generated by her traumatic past with
her parents (see the bottom portion of Box 17.2). Julie’s old relationship model based on her
childhood was “Tf I try to explain myself after an honest mistake has been made, then I will
be punished, criticized, and insulted.”
With the help of her therapist, Julie was able to articulate an alternative relationship
model: “If I try to explain what happened after an honest mistake has been made, then I
will be given respect for my point of view and responded to without punishment (maybe
even compassion). She identified that a relationship goal with her boyfriend was to have
him understand her feelings and to improve communication in the relationship. In addition, the therapist noted that Julie might want to work on being more assertive: Although
she shared power in the relationship with her boyfriend, she often behaved submissively,
as though he was more of a parent figure. If Julie believed that her boyfriend might not
become more adversarial and would care about how she was feeling about their interaction,
she might feel more confident about herself and be willing to share her feelings and ways
she would like the relationship to improve.


Role Play Using Respect Bookends

After identifying the relationship model and specific interpersonal goals, Julie and the
therapist walked through what she might say, using the Respect Bookends approach. They
focused on an interaction with her boyfriend following her accidentally losing the car keys.
In her typical fashion, Julie avoided her boyfriend and did not explain what happened for
fear of his criticism and rejection. Her boyfriend misinterpreted her silence as lack of concern, which only made him angry, and then he snapped at her. The therapist pointed out
that using Respect Bookends to explain what happened would be an effective way for Julie

[PAGE 307]

290 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


to express her feelings, while simultaneously validating her boyfriend's frustration and perspective.

This role play has three steps. In the first step, a client practices the planned communication, beginning and ending with the Respect Bookends. In the second step, the therapist shares observations and provides suggestions for improving the client’s communication
and clarifying the goals for the interaction. As always, it is important for the therapist to
acknowledge both the client’s strengths and weaknesses. When addressing problems, the
therapist provides the potential experience of the other person in the interaction, rather
than directly using their own perceptions. The therapist also role-plays what the client
might say, incorporating any relevant modifications and improvements. While the therapist
is speaking, the client imagines being the other person and evaluates how it might feel from
their perspective. In the third step, the client practices aloud again, making any desired
adjustments. Here is how Julie and her therapist role-played Respect Bookends:


THERAPIST: Let's do a role play where you can try out the Respect Bookends approach.
This role play will be a little different from the one we did last session, because
when I repeat what you say, I would like you to really imagine what it might feel
like to be your boyfriend. You can begin the conversation with your boyfriend by
acknowledging his feelings and maybe even the impact losing the car keys has on
him. Then tell him what happened and how you are feeling, and include your apol-
ogy. Then end by recognizing what he may be feeling, and say something positive
about him or the relationship.

JULIE: Tim, I know you probably hate me and want to break up with me because I did
something stupid again. Im so sorry I lost the car keys! I was on my way into Safe-
way to buy groceries when I noticed this older lady trying to lift her heavy grocery
bags and put them in her trunk. She looked so miserable, so I stopped to help her.
You should have seen the smile on her face when I put the groceries in the car for
her! It made my day. And then, after I finished shopping and I came out, I realized
the keys must have fallen out of my pocket! I searched all over that parking lot,
but couldn't find them. I think that maybe they fell out in the lady's trunk. Even
though it was an accident, I am sorry that this happened. My relationship with you
is very important, and I want you to know how much I appreciate everything you
do for me.

THERAPIST: That was great, Julie. That was very nice of you to help that lady; I am sure
she really appreciated it. And I am glad you got a chance to tell what happened.
One thing I am wondering about is in the beginning. You are very self-deprecating,
and I am not sure about your assumptions that your boyfriend hates you and wants
to break up with you. It is possible to validate and respect another person’s beliefs
and feelings without putting yourself down. I will repeat what you said, but I will
try to be respectful of Tim without saying negative things about myself. And I
would like you to imagine what it might be like to be Tim in this situation.

JULIE: OK.

[PAGE 308]

17. Changing Relationship Patterns: Managing Power 291


THERAPIST: (As Julie) It really means a lot to me that you helped me whenI lost the car
keys. I know how frustrating it is for you when things get lost. You were so sweet
and kind to come bail me out. I would like to tell you what happened, so that you
understand. I was on going into the store to buy groceries, when I noticed a lady
who appeared to be very old and frail. She was trying to lift her heavy grocery bags
and put them in her trunk. I stopped to help her. She was very appreciative. When
I finished shopping and I came out, I realized the keys must have fallen out of my
pocket! I searched all over that parking lot, but couldn't find them. I think that
maybe they fell out in the lady's trunk. Even though it was an accident, I am sorry
that this happened and that it distressed you. Our relationship is very important,
and I appreciate everything you do for me.

THERAPIST: What do you think about what I said?

JULIE: I really liked how you said nice things to him and acknowledged his perspective,
but never put yourself down. And when I heard the story as though I was listen-
ing to it for the first time, I thought it was a really nice thing to do. Im pretty sure
my boyfriend might think so too. Rather than being mad at me, he might even say,
“Come here so I can give you a hug!”

THERAPIST: Terrific. Then let's do this one last time. Practice telling your boyfriend
what happened, and use the Respect Bookends without putting yourself down.

JULIE: It really means a lot to me that you helped me whenI lost the car keys. You were
so sweet and kind to come bail me out, as I know how frustrating it is for you when
things get lost. Let me tell you what happened so that you understand. I was on
my way into Safeway to buy groceries, when I noticed this older lady trying to lift
her heavy grocery bags and put them in her trunk. She looked so miserable, so I
stopped to help her. You should have seen the smile on her face when I put the
groceries in the car for her! It made my day. And then, after I finished shopping
and I came out, I realized the keys must have fallen out of my pocket! I searched all
over that parking lot, but couldn't find them. I think that maybe they fell out in the
lady's trunk. I am embarrassed and sorry about all this, especially how frustrating
it is for you, even though it was an accident. I appreciate all the things you do for
me, and you really mean a lot to me.


Julie told the therapist how much better this way felt to her. She realized that telling
her boyfriend what happened might lead to problem-solving the situation together, and thus
that expressing her feelings could actually make them feel closer to each other. Julie was
excited by this revelation and eager to try it out.


Use of Other Skills

Contextual information and awareness will also help clients determine the appropriate level
of intimacy and assertiveness (e.g., avoiding the traps of not being sufficiently assertive and
being overly assertive) in interactions. One way to do this is to help clients draw on the skills

[PAGE 309]

292 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


learned in the previous sessions and apply them to the various types of power relationships.
For example, a therapist can tell a client:


“Remember to listen carefully.”
“Slow down, and clarify what is being expected of you.”
“Practice distress tolerance. Sit with your feelings, and realize that there will be oppor-
tunities to come back to the issue.”
“Identify your goals and examine your Pros and Cons. What are you trying to accom-
plish? Is it worth it?”
“Get multiple perspectives before reacting.”
“When you are confused, get more data. Ask for feedback about power dynamics. Make
sure that this is the kind of person you can safely talk to.”
“Remind yourself, “This is part of my history. Using this type of self-talk may help
you contain your emotions and understand why you are reacting strongly in the
moment.”


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


In this session, the therapist and client have practiced a new skill, Respect Bookends. The
exercise prompts the client to think about another person's perspective, but in that process
to develop an attitude of respect toward the self. The therapist and client also have identified
how trauma can lead to an internalization of other people's negative attitudes, and accordingly to feelings of worthlessness and self-loathing. The client is encouraged to let go of
these trauma-generated negative beliefs about themselves, as they tend to be self-fulfilling
and lead to a vicious cycle of self-loathing. The client and therapist construct alternative,
more positive relationship models that focus on respect for oneself and others. Practicing
Respect Bookends provides corrective emotional experiences that provide evidence for the
alternative relationship models.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


The client’s most important task for the week is to practice Respect Bookends with at least
two people (ideally, in different types of power relationships) with whom they will interact
during the week. The client can also complete two copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4) to track how these efforts at new interactions go. The sheets can also
be used to record relevant emotion regulation skills used in response to each situation (e.g.,
Thought Shifting, Positive Self-Statements). The client should be encouraged to engage in
one positive activity (preferably with someone they discuss in a copy of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2) and continue to do Focused Breathing twice daily.

[PAGE 310]

Power Balances in Relationships

There are three types of power balances in relationships:


Type I: You have equal power with a person (examples: someone who is your friend, sibling,
coworker, partner, or team member).

Type Il: You have less power than the other person (examples: someone who is your employer,
supervisor, parent, teacher, or coach).

Type Ill: You have more power than the other person (examples: someone who is your child,
employee, supervisee, student, or trainee).


Name people you interact with where each type of power balance exists:


| have equal power:


| have less power:


| have more power:


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


293

[PAGE 311]

Impact of Trauma on Managing Power Balances
Type I: You have equal power (examples: friend, sibling, coworker, partner, team member).


Barriers: Although you are equal in power, there are problems. You may see yourself as having more
or less power than you do.
Related thoughts:


Your work colleagues, peers/friends, or family members are threats or enemies.
They will be aggressive, will be competitive with you, or will exploit you.
You need to be vigilant and aggressive.
You need to act like you have more power and authority than you actually have to protect
yourself.
You need to keep a safe distance from them, not trust them.


Type Il: You have less power (examples: employee, supervisee, child, student, trainee).


Barriers: You have less power than someone else, and you expect them to take advantage of you.
Related thoughts:


e The authority figure or boss is a threat or enemy.
e You feel anxious and worried that something bad will happen to you if they are displeased with
you or they are in a bad mood.
e You may be too eager to please, may find it difficult to say no, or may not ask for the authority
or resources you need or want, because you are afraid they will punish/hurt you.
e You become angry and accuse them of being exploitative when that might not be true, but you
were too afraid to ask about things you were seeing going on and made your own interpreta-
tion.


Type Ill: You have more power (examples: parent, employer, supervisor, teacher, coach).


Barriers: You have more power than others, and this makes you very uncomfortable.
Related thoughts:


You cannot execute your authority, so you do a bad job (as a boss, parent, or leader).
You are afraid that you will be abusive when you use your power, so you don't exert it at all.
You feel taken advantage of by those under your authority.
Sometimes you do exert your power, but the results are unsatisfactory.
You feel mean/abusive, so you are apologetic and sometimes take back what you say
You actually act mean/abusive, and then you feel bad.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


294

[PAGE 312]

Managing Power Balances with Respect

MANAGING DIFFERENT POWER BALANCES:
RESPECT IS A CONSTANT

While differences in power balances are a fact of life, respect for oneself and others should be a constant, no matter what a specific power balance is like. When you have less power, remember that
you have a right to act in ways that respect yourself and your values (for example, politely express
your point of view, but also remember also to express respect for those with more power, rather than
mistrust or fear of abuse). When you interact with others with whom you have more power, remember
to show respect for their personhood and express your power in a positive way, with confidence and
warmth.


A SKILL FOR MANAGING POWER BALANCES:
BEGIN AND END WITH RESPECT

Skill: Select the power balance that causes you the greatest difficulty. Select a situation that you can
also describe in the top portion of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2. Formulate the point of view you
want to express in a way that is open, direct, and clear (for example, use an “I Message”). But now
begin and end what you want to say in a manner that acknowledges positive aspects of the person or
relationship. This skill is called Respect Bookends.


e Begin with a statement that recognizes positive aspects or behaviors of the person.
e State your request, concern, decision, or point of view.
e End with a statement that again recognizes the person’s positive aspects or behaviors.


Example: Mother to child (mother has more power than child):


“I so enjoyed seeing you talk with your grandmom. She just lights up with you. | noticed she was
in that hard-backed chair. What do you think of giving her the cushioned chair you usually sit on
when she visits, as her back hurts and it’s the only one that is comfortable for her? [Discuss.]
She'll be coming by next week, and | am sure she will be much more comfortable with the cushy
chair. Thanks so much for doing this. | know you want her to be happy by the way I see you pop
up and get her the tea. This will definitely make her comfortable and happy as well.”


Try out this practice:


Say what you plan to say aloud, remembering to use Respect Bookends.
Your coach/therapist repeats what you plan to say. Now imagine yourself as the other person.
How does it feel? What are your thoughts and reactions?
Practice again, to maximize the chances that you will get a good response. Make adjustments
as desired.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


295

[PAGE 313]

Changing Relationship Patterns
Increasing Closeness


Loneliness does not come from having no people about one,
but from being unable to communicate the things that seem
important to oneself...
—CARL JUNG (1963/1989, p. 356)


Atthough issues with intimacy and closeness are introduced toward the end of STAIR,
they are fundamental to the experience of clients who have survived interpersonal trauma,
particularly childhood abuse. Their problems with intimacy range from efforts to isolate
and protect themselves from further betrayals, to efforts to keep loved ones so close that
the survivors lose contact with the parts of themselves that are separate and distinct from
the other persons. These problems can occur at either end of the spectrum of isolation to
enmeshment, but some people can experience issues with both extremes. For example, an
individual may have an unhealthy boundary with their romantic partner that reflects being
too dependent on the loved one, while their boundaries with friends reflect the opposite
problem— great distance and lack of any real kind of intimacy.
No matter what the specific problems in this domain may be, this session reviews the
importance of healthy boundaries that allow real intimacy and closeness, but that also avoid
the loss of the identity and healthy independence that mark mature, functioning adult relationships.
Several interpersonal skills and approaches can aid the client and therapist in exploring more optimal levels of intimacy with others. For some clients, the focus of the session
can be on repairing existing relationships and conflicts that arise. This work follows from
that in the two previous sessions in a stepwise fashion: First, the client has learned how to
make their own feelings, beliefs, and thoughts clear (through using “I Messages”). Then the
client has become more skilled in recognizing other people’s feelings, beliefs, and thoughts
(through using Respect Bookends). These skills often help resolve differences and bring
people closer. However, sometimes conflict does erupt and results in increased distance


296

[PAGE 314]

18. Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness 297


in a relationship. Individuals who have experienced interpersonal trauma often feel fearful about and avoid dealing with conflict or relationship ruptures. They can be fearful of
being overwhelmed by the other persons, bullied into doing something they do not want to
do. Alternatively, they can be fearful of becoming too angry themselves. For these clients,
the goal of this session is to provide additional skills in conflict resolution and repair while
maintaining or moving toward healthy boundaries.
For other clients who are highly avoidant of relationships, the focus of the session may
be starting new relationships and mindfully developing appropriate levels of intimacy over
time. These alternative skills include the basics of how to say hello to strangers or acquaintances and how to deepen relationships over time. Although these interpersonal goals are
long-term ones, the therapist can offer hope and encourage these clients to start making
small steps to decrease their isolation and put themselves on a path toward healthy social
engagement.


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


The therapist begins, as usual, with a brief check-in on the client's emotional state and then
about the clients skills practice since the last session, as well as entries on copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2. The therapist can note any entries or relationships the client
has discussed that may be of importance in today’s session. The therapist can also reinforce
any movement toward the client's interpersonal goals related to assertiveness and/or managing difficult power balances. Some of the client's practiced emotion regulation and communication skills may be relevant to today’s session on intimacy. When reviewing Relationship Patterns Worksheet—2 entries, the therapist can focus on (1) reinforcing any skills the
client has used (from the three channels of emotion or from previous relationship-oriented
sessions), and (2) acknowledging any insights or discoveries the client has made about their
interpersonal beliefs and behavioral patterns. Even if a client has reported not successfully
navigating an interpersonal situation, the therapist can emphasize that gaining insight is the
first essential step in making healthy changes.
For clients who have had difficulties with completing any exercise, the therapist can
problem-solve any practical barriers, while also ensuring that they have time to focus on
this sessions content, which will include applying familiar skills and further Relationship
Patterns Worksheet—2 entries to the theme of intimacy and closeness. If the client has had
ongoing difficulty with exploring and changing their relationship patterns (including completing worksheets and practice), the therapist can say something such as:


“Working on relationships can be really hard. It can be hard for everyone, even people
who haven't had traumatic experiences. But improving relationships requires skills, just
like any other area of your life. We
ll keep chipping away at the things that get in your
way, and as long as you can keep making small steps, things will slowly but surely get
better.”

[PAGE 315]

298 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


This session continues the previous sessions focus on adopting healthier relationship patterns by introducing and exploring ways to manage intimacy and closeness. This final major
theme of the interpersonal sessions of STAIR is often incredibly relevant to the lives of
survivors who have experienced interpersonal trauma particularly during the developmental years. The session introduces the concepts of relationship boundaries and emotional
intimacy, and describes how to use these concepts to move toward the client's goals for their
relationships. Some clients may learn how to set better boundaries with their loved ones,
friends, family, and coworkers while others may focus on beginning and deepening new
relationships with others. Box 18.1 outlines the session contents and major tasks.


PRESENT CONCEPTS OF BOUNDARIES AND EMOTIONAL DISTANCE


Many clients will have heard of the concept of boundaries. This session fleshes out the
concept by introducing the client to three different types of boundaries, categorized by the
amount of emotional distance. For the purposes of STAIR, the term “boundaries” broadly
refers to the intrinsic and rightful ownership of a persons own body, thoughts, and feelings, and respectful recognition of this ownership by others. We use the phrase “healthy
boundaries” to describe an individual's sense of comfort and safety in relationships resulting
from respect for the needs, rights, and values of each person in the relationship or interaction. Handout 18.1, Healthy Relationships = Healthy Boundaries (to be filled out in session
with the therapist), provides information about three common types of boundaries and the
advantages and disadvantages of each type. The emphasis here is on the degrees of emotional distance resulting from these configurations.


IDENTIFY CLIENT’S RELATIONSHIP PATTERNS RELATED
TO CLOSENESS


Together in this session, the therapist and client discuss each type of boundary (and review
its pros and cons), while also exploring which ones typically fit the client’s relationships.
Sometimes clients report that they engage in both “too close” and “not close enough” relationships, and there may even be a relationship pattern (of feelings, thoughts, and behaviors)
associated with each of them. Going through each style can help a client see that there is
no clear right or wrong; different boundaries may be more or less helpful, depending on the
specific relationship or situation. The therapist may wish to refer back to the client's trauma
history to identify ways in which their preferred style was protective to them. In fact, in
the case of childhood trauma, negotiating some level of emotional distance with others was
often quite protective and even necessary to remain as safe as possible in interactions with
past perpetrators.

[PAGE 316]

18. Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness 299


Theme and Curriculum for Session 9
Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness


This session continues the work on interpersonal relationship skills by focusing on optimizing closeness in relationships. Survivors of trauma often have impairment in this domain, due
to the effects of avoidance and emotional numbing and/or reactivity. Previous sessions have
introduced a range of interpersonal skills, but this session serves to apply such skills directly
to the goal of either repairing intimacy problems in current relationships or establishing new
relationships that can grow over time. Clients with childhood trauma that adversely affected
their development in relational capacities may have more severe impairments in this domain,
so the therapist can focus on more foundational skills with such a client as relevant.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Review concept of emotional intimacy/closeness. Bring extra copies of the Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4), plus a copy of each handout for this session. Prepare several
examples of ways the client may address struggles with intimacy and boundaries. The work
in the session is estimated to take about 60 minutes; a flexible application is assumed (i.e., not
every client will need all interventions).


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Present concepts of boundaries and emotional distance.
Explore client's relationship patterns related to closeness.
Review and select steps for developing new relationships or deepening existing ones
Complete Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2.
Complete one role play on chosen skill.
Explore additional skill domains (optional).
Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
Complete Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 twice a week before next session (to record
practice interacting in a situation with opportunity to increase closeness).
Use coping skills from all three channels to support interpersonal goals.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 317]

300 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Schedule at least one pleasurable activity for the week.
Continue practice of Focused Breathing twice a day.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 18.1. Healthy Relationships = Healthy Boundaries

Handout 18.2. What Creates Emotional Distance and Ruptures in Relationships?

Handout 18.3. Relationship Guidelines to Enhance Intimacy and Closeness

Additional copies of Handout 16.4. Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2


To help bolster the client's understanding, the therapist can use Handout 18.2, What
Creates Emotional Distance and Ruptures in Relationships? This handout may be helpful for all clients, because emotional avoidance and numbing are key phenomena of posttraumatic reactions and are often expressed and observed in relationships. This handout
encourages the client to share their personal viewpoint about why distance can grow in
relationships, and to specify behaviors that they have noticed lead to greater distance. The
therapist can help the client if they are at a loss by providing some examples:

“Ive noticed that some people push others away by getting angry and yelling. Other
persons create distance by not sending texts or not calling their friends or loved ones.
How do you handle situations where you want to avoid being physically or emotionally
close to someone?”


Regardless of the client's specific avoidance patterns or the origins of these patterns,
the therapist introduces the idea of optimal, healthy boundaries that maximize benefits
while mitigating risk. If the client is unfamiliar with such boundaries, it may be useful and
reassuring to identify the Cons of moving toward these healthier, balanced boundaries. For
example, the client may report Cons such as these:


“Tll need to learn new things.”
“Getting closer (or moving farther away) will increase my anxiety.”
“It
ll create change in my current relationship, and I won't know what to expect.”
“My partner might not like this.”


The therapist may acknowledge the client’s fears and concerns as relevant, and note
that the client can take their time in changing relationship patterns. Relationship changes
take practice, communication, and patience—both with the other person and with oneself.
To help manage any anxiety, the client can choose a specific relationship on which they
would like to focus. The most important or difficult relationship might not necessarily be
the best place to start. It is key for the client to experience and feel a sense of success as they
work toward optimizing their boundaries and sense of intimacy with others.

[PAGE 318]

18. Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness 301


REVIEW AND SELECT STEPS FOR DEVELOPING NEW
RELATIONSHIPS OR DEEPENING EXISTING ONES


The therapist can then guide the conversation to identifying the interpersonal patterns
associated with distancing or relationship avoidance, and determining which skills might
help change the pattern. Different clients will benefit from different acquisition and practice of different skills. By this point in therapy, the therapist will have a reasonable sense
of whether the client would benefit most from focusing on managing conflict and repairing
current relationships, or from developing skills to enter into new relationships or greater
socializing. Of course, these goals are not mutually exclusive; skills related to both of these
goals are necessary throughout life. Nevertheless, choosing a focus for the session will support the clients ability to take smaller, mindful steps toward making important improvements in their life. The clients growing skills in distress tolerance and emotion regulation
will likely be crucial to integrate into this discussion, and the therapist can remind the
client as necessary that they can make more conscious choices in how to develop their
relationships. Handout 18.3, Relationship Guidelines to Enhance Intimacy and Closeness,
outlines the skills related to different goals and tasks for the remainder of the session.


Developing New Relationships

Some clients have avoided relationships and emotional intimacy for years. The resulting
isolation is painful and dangerous to their well-being, but they often feel as if they have no
choice and must continue being alone, even if deep down they want to connect with others.
For these clients, the first two sections of Handout 18.3 can provide concrete ideas for starting the process of tackling their isolation through (1) increasing their general social engagement and (2) developing new relationships. The therapist and client may want to review
both sections instead of choosing only one. The key factor in how to proceed is increasing
the clients sense of hope and willingness, while minimizing the risk of overwhelming the
client. Throughout the discussion, the therapist can check in with the client on how they
are feeling (reinforcing the client's growing emotional awareness), and can encourage them
to communicate what they may need if they experience distress in talking about developing new relationships (reinforcing appropriate assertiveness, distress tolerance, and active
coping).
As an example, if the therapist notices that the client is not making eye contact when
discussing the topic, the therapist may acknowledge this and say, “I see you looking down
as we talk about the idea of developing new relationships. Whats going on for you in the
moment? How are you feeling?” This statement gives permission for a shy or anxious client
to express their genuine reaction and collaborate with the therapist. Not only will this communication increase client engagement; it will also provide in vivo modeling (by the therapist) and direct experience of practicing new skills of emotional awareness (see Chapter 11/
Session 2), as well as even newer skills of healthy communication and assertiveness (see
Chapter 16/Session 7). The therapist and client can then engage in active problem solving as
appropriate, and can connect agreed-upon solutions to the clients personal goals.

[PAGE 319]

302 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


After introducing the topic of developing new relationships and ensuring the client's
engagement, the therapist can delve into the specific skills listed in Handout 18.3. The first
set of behaviors is geared toward increasing basic social engagement, while the second set
focuses on starting new relationships. As mentioned earlier, the therapist and a socially
isolated client can choose either or both of these options. Some clients may be significantly
socially isolated and report that they have no one with whom to practice any of these skills.
For such clients, it is necessary to highlight how the most basic of behaviors can start them
on a path toward social engagement. No step is too small to matter. By slowly chipping
away at their social distance, even with strangers, anyone can begin forming new relationships over time—whether that entails garnering new friends, activity partners, or potential
romantic partners. The therapist can review each item on the list.


Deepening Existing Relationships

For clients who already have close relationships when they come to therapy, focusing on
these relationships may be most sensible. Clients with trauma often have difficulties with
intimacy, which may be manifested within existing long-term romantic relationships and/or
relationships with family members or friends. Attachment theory provides one framework
for understanding how individuals negotiate emotional distance in their close relationships.
For example, even people in committed, long-term marriages can have well-developed patterns of emotional distance. One member of the relationship may prefer more independence and fewer verbal and nonverbal displays of affection (akin to a more dismissing style
of attachment), while the other prefers greater closeness and emotional expressiveness (akin
to either a secure attachment or a preoccupied one, depending on other factors). Though
neither partner may be fully comfortable and satisfied, the marriage may “work,” in that
both members have found ways to compromise and accept the way things are.
In the case of childhood trauma, a survivor's pattern of emotional avoidance may be
pronounced, but tolerated by a more securely attached partner. This situation is an ideal one
for a client in STAIR, as the survivor can learn to open up more with the partner and then
experience emotionally corrective responses that reinforce a sense of safety and intimacy.
For other clients, romantic partners or family members may themselves be uncomfortable
with growing intimacy and may require patience and time to adjust to it. Whatever the
particular situation, the therapist normalizes any challenges and emphasizes that the client
is only responsible for their own behavior, not for the reactions of others. With commitment
and practice, new ways of relating can emerge.
The third and fourth sections of Handout 18.3 outline two general options for deepening current relationships: (3) increasing intimacy and reducing distance, and (4) repairing
relationships after a fight or conflict. The therapist briefly introduces both options and lets
the client choose one to focus on.
The third set of skills (increasing intimacy) may seem on the surface to be a “feelgood, all-positive one. However, increasing levels of intimacy can provoke a great deal of
anxiety for some survivors of trauma. This reaction is especially likely for clients who experienced severe interpersonal trauma from a caregiver and/or close loved one (as in the case

[PAGE 320]

18. Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness 303


of intimate partner violence). In these examples, an attachment relationship was the vehicle
through which the trauma and betrayal occurred. Thus learning to emotionally open oneself up again to trust another person can take ongoing effort.
The other (and, of course, complementary) option for deepening relationships is actually the most broadly applicable, and thus is often the “go-to” intervention for clients who
can tolerate it—repairing relationship conflict. Navigating conflicts in relationships is a
universal skill, regardless of trauma exposure or symptom presentation. Even the healthiest relationships involve occasional conflict. Acknowledging this shared human experience
may help normalize some clients’ concerns, reduce their sense of shame or feeling “broken,”
and put their minds at more ease. After the therapist and client go through each step of
conflict resolution in Handout 18.3, the therapist tells the client that using these skills does
not always have an immediate impact the first time around. The client may need to use
emotion regulation skills to tolerate the process of conflict resolution. Sometimes the other
individual needs time to absorb a message, and the client will need some level of patience.
The therapist can highlight again that conflicts and their resolution are part of all relationships, so learning this skill is important and can be adapted for use in a variety of relationships and contexts.


COMPLETE RELATIONSHIP PATTERNS WORKSHEET-2


Before the therapist and client conduct the role play, the client can complete a copy of
Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2, focusing on the scenario chosen for the exercise. The
client can write down their initial concerns and feelings, as well as alternative, healthier
thoughts, behaviors, and/or other skills identified and practiced to increase the likelihood of
a positive experience. They will then do the same for the thoughts, feelings, and behaviors
they expect from the other person. After the role play is completed, the therapist and client
may wish to go back to the worksheet and refine the clients interpersonal goals or clarify
what a new relationship model might be. The worksheet serves to document the approach
the client takes in the role play, so that they may reference it when they get ready to do the
real work outside of session.


COMPLETE ONE ROLE PLAY ON CHOSEN SKILL


The therapist and clients collaborative discussion in session will have set the foundation for
practicing a role play with a chosen skill. Ideally, this role play can be a standard one, with
the client playing themselves and the therapist taking on the role of the relevant communication partner (e.g., parent, romantic partner, or even child). Alternatively, the role play
can be completed via covert modeling, where the client and therapist explore what would
happen in such an interaction, as outlined in Chapter 16/Session 7. This approach may be
most appropriate for more complex, lengthy scenarios. In general, the interaction is likely
to look like the following;

[PAGE 321]

304 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


1. The client tries out the message they want to communicate (where the client plays
themselves and the therapist plays the other person).
2. The therapist then gives feedback—first identifying what went well, and then, in a
supportive and positive manner, identifies what might help improve the chances of
a positive outcome even more. The therapist checks in with the client, and the two
come to a collaborative conclusion about how the client can revise the communica-
tion approach (verbally and nonverbally).
3. The therapist provides modeling by playing the client.
4. The client then completes the message for the second time, incorporating the sug-
gestions presented by the therapist (with the client playing themselves and the ther-
apist playing the other).


The therapist can adapt these steps as needed to tailor the interaction to the client and the
chosen focus. What follow are examples and suggestions for completing these role plays by
domain.


Role-Playing How to Develop New Relationships

Clients with a history of trauma vary greatly in their social isolation, but a subset may
be so isolated that they rarely even leave their own homes. For these clients (or similarly
isolated ones), the role play may be most effective if it focuses on very basic rules of social
engagement and pleasantries. Although such rules may seem simple on the surface, highly
traumatized individuals may be so preoccupied with their efforts to manage their symptoms
and avoid triggers that they have little energy or attention left for acknowledging others.
The first two sections of Handout 18.3 provide suggestions for such clients to begin opening the door, so to speak, to other people for social engagement. A therapist can encourage
a client to list upcoming plans to leave their home and go to some public venue, even if the
visit is routine and brief. This information may provide opportunities to highlight specific,
real-world scenarios for a role play. For some clients, just saying hello to their local grocery
store clerk is a big step. Others may be ready to share a simple, appropriate compliment
with an acquaintance they see in passing. Regardless of the specifics, the therapist helps
underscore the nonverbal elements of social interaction—especially making eye contact
and using appropriate body posture and interpersonal distance—to make the situation as
comfortable as possible for all people involved.
A more advanced option for the goal of developing new relationships is role-playing
how to broaden a conversation from a smile or saying hello to practicing small talk or sharing an introductory conversation. Starting a relationship of any kind requires first that the
involved people make a choice to interact. Then the two can make further choices to spend
time together and deepen their new relationship over time. The therapist can acknowledge
that sometimes, for example, an individual may want to start a friendship with another
person, but for whatever reason, the other person may not follow through. It does not have
to be a personal or explicit rejection, but instead may perhaps be due to the other person’s
limited time or priorities. This point may be important for some clients who are particularly

[PAGE 322]

18. Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness 305


sensitive to rejection. Thought channel skills from Session 4 (see Chapter 13) may be helpful to review before doing this kind of role play or planning for similar practice between
sessions.
We find that practicing small talk can be an especially useful topic for a role play. The
label “small talk” is a misnomer for a social interaction that can perplex many clients with a
history of social isolation (or may even be challenging for therapists, who are used to having
deep conversations as part of their job!). The therapist keeps a positive attitude and even
encourages having fun in finding ways to practice small talk. The therapist tells the client
that the content of small talk is not important (that's why it is called “small talk”). Rather,
the goal is finding a way to engage in a process where people are simply acknowledging
each others presence or possibly “warming up” to become more comfortable in each others presence. The classic example of small talk is discussing the weather. Of course, other
options exist, and the client can benefit from having a range of options to choose from when
the situation arises. Using some humor in this exercise can help ease any sense of anxiety. It
can also model the positive, upbeat quality shared by most forms of small talk.
For either type of role play for establishing new relationships, the therapist can share
any relevant information about local organizations, interest groups, or meetings that an
isolated client might be willing to explore. Completing an online search for events related
to the client’s interests may be an appropriate between-session task in this regard. As mentioned previously, the role play ends with a discussion about the clients reactions to the
exercise and plan.


Role-Playing How to Deepen Existing Relationships

The client who chooses to work on increasing intimacy in relationships may generally feel
connected to select individuals, but still recognize that they (and/or the other individuals)
maintain certain emotional walls. Going through a role play tied to a specific relationship
can be very helpful in providing concrete options for how to move forward. The corresponding list in Handout 18.3 (the third one) offers several options to practice. The therapist and
client can choose from this list one or more approaches to try out together. For example, a
survivor ofinterpersonal trauma may find it challenging to express positive feelings for even
their romantic partner. This hesitancy can develop from several angles, such as the fear that
expressing positive feelings will make others uncomfortable or push them away, or it can
result from general anhedonia or emotional numbness associated with some posttraumatic
reactions. Fortunately, many of the options provided in Handout 18.3 correspond well with
STAIR’s broader focus on increasing positive emotions and enjoyable activities—a focus
already familiar to the client by this point in therapy. The conversations and activities promoting closeness with others vary in depth, so the role play can be tailored to the client's
specific circumstances. They may choose, for example, to role-play asking an old friend to
dinner and a movie to catch up, or talking to their partner about hopes and dreams for the
future.
For clients in ongoing relationships, the last five points in this section of Handout
18.3 may be most relevant. Some clients may still need to start small, so the therapist can

[PAGE 323]

306 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


highlight that even doing very simple things can increase ones sense of closeness, even if
it is just talking about the ordinary events of the day. Socially avoidant clients may not be
aware of the importance or strength of these relatively simple activities, even if they have
maintained ongoing relationships of some kind over the years.


Role-Playing How to Repair After Conflicts

Alternatively, the client and therapist may choose to focus on repairing after conflicts in
relationships. For this exercise, they can use the fourth and last section of Handout 18.3 to
guide their practice. Because the provided guidelines in Handout 18.3 are long and sequential, we suggest in most cases that rather than doing an actual, complete role play, the therapist and client can walk through an imaginal role play and identify places where the client
feels they might get stuck. Combining discussion about the approach in a specific scenario
with some circumscribed role playing of the more difficult moments that may occur can
be highly effective and efficient. As with other interpersonal skills learned throughout this
treatment, the therapist can note that a key part of conflict resolution includes many other
skills already learned (respect for the other person, clarity of one’s own message, managing ones emotional reactions, etc.). Using “I Messages” is especially important to review
and practice for effective conflict resolution. While checking in on the clients reactions
throughout the exercise, the therapist keeps the focus on using the steps outlined in the
fourth section of Handout 18.3.


No matter what the focus of the practice is, the therapist asks the client afterward
about their reactions to the exercise. The client can identify where they feel more comfortable after the practice (which the therapist reinforces) and areas where they acknowledge
needing additional practice. The therapist can encourage the client to take time between
sessions to practice any particularly difficult statements or adjust them to fit the clients own
style and language.


EXPLORE ADDITIONAL SKILL DOMAINS (OPTIONAL)


Although the therapist has referred to and used Handout 18.3 in relation to the client's specific interpersonal scenario and relationship goals, the two may also choose to explore additional components of the handout's relationship guidelines to preview further approaches to
improve relationship communication and intimacy. The therapist only does so if the client is
feeling comfortable, engaged, and ready to explore more options to consider for the future.
If the client displays any signs of hesitancy or anxiety, it is best to keep the focus only on the
agreed-upon skill domain or behaviors already explored.
Because this additional work is optional, it is expressly guided by the clients voiced
wishes and interests. The therapist and client may choose to apply guidelines to a different
relationship from the one already covered in the session (e.g., a relationship with a close
friend or a potential new partner in the early stages of dating). Exploring how to apply these

[PAGE 324]

18. Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness 307


guidelines to different kinds of relationships has the added benefit of reinforcing the concept of healthy flexibility introduced in Session 8 (see Chapter 17).
All clients can continue reading the handout at their own pace outside of their sessions
with the therapist. Later in treatment (or outside of treatment), clients may feel more prepared to deepen their practice and set out to meet more advanced goals after experiencing
initial successes with earlier, smaller ones.


CASE EXAMPLE: MOVING TOWARD HEALTHY LEVELS
OF CLOSENESS


Samantha was a 39-year-old transgender woman who came to therapy a year after successfully undergoing two gender-confirming surgeries. For the first time in her life, she felt
equipped to deal with the impact of her childhood traumas. Samantha had experienced
sexual abuse from the ages of 6 to 9 perpetrated by a female babysitter, as well as severe
emotional abuse from her father. Her mother had died when Samantha was 3 years old, and
her father, often overwhelmed by the burdens of being a single parent, frequently lashed
out and demanded that Samantha “buck up and handle things like a man.” She was berated
and deemed weak if she expressed any feeling other than anger. Samantha learned not to
express emotions or opinions in any of her relationships, and she never shared her turmoil
about her personal gender identity not matching her assigned gender. Sadly, when Samantha finally told her father about her decision to pursue gender transition, he disowned her
and had not spoken to her since. To protect herself from further heartbreak, she decided to
preemptively sever all ties with the few friends she had with whom she had not come out.
Samantha had been working over the past few sessions to learn to express her feelings
and opinions. She had gained some newfound confidence in asserting basic requests, such
as asking for help in a store and asking for a menu substitution in a restaurant. Her therapist
was thrilled that she brought in a copy of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (see Box 18.2)
related to an old friend of hers who wanted to get together. The therapist guided the discussion to the topic of getting closer to people.


THERAPIST: I see from your worksheet that your friend Bob reached out to you.

SAMANTHA: Yes, I was shocked that he did. I didnt return any of his calls or texts last
month. He's always been a really good guy, but it’s just a lot easier to avoid every-
one. I don't know how people are going to react.

THERAPIST: So it's easier just to avoid people altogether?

SAMANTHA: Oh, yeah, way easier!

THERAPIST: And I see on your worksheet that this potential meeting with Bob brings
up one of your key relationship patterns that we ve been discussing—that if people
really get to know you, then they will reject or punish you. This belief makes total
sense in the context of the messages you received while growing up and from
your father after coming out to him, but I wonder if you might be making a lot of

[PAGE 325]

am a>!) ]]125 J4bIm 2uozwos udu}
3195 247 hw y), |aAvys :¡epouu diysuolyejel eaneuJay
"pualA} "mv |OYM 09 ag 107 pazdazov
¿uom |
3snÍ
hm aq 09 zum
ay aghvw J]135 youn) JIM
10} ‘uossad
'SÁIMSUIOIF094 aAvy
¿op Aoy} 1461 asje puo “mv |oym wo | ‘pnodd pu am aq 07 uum |
yeu SNoMN)
guonenyus
07 quem })/195 Rom aH
0} ¿MUIY] ** 01 ¿1994 **
ynoqge 99] **
suo0o!]9e SAIEUIONY * * * |p¡no9 asja yey :J¡asÁuu
|PINOD 3S|3 1eyM :UOSJEd 19U}0 ayl
moqe sHuljaaj pue sja119q aAleusalV
308
paysıund puv 992399121 mv |uau} ‘ 4195 anaz hm asvys |y], :[9pow diysuoyejay
‘Op 09 pasn
‘daaaa siyi
vabuy shom]o am 291] "hL
opsany
YUM Spuala} SOM YUM Spualı} 29 09 4xav youn) Jo} 19UIP 249
ay 2421/9 4,09 2H “AYA| ¿WM ppmom avo ON ‘pawvysy 07 2109 07 9m pagiAul
¿OP |PIP 12UYM siybnoy] Wey, | sbuloa, 119y1 sıyßnoyr A s6u991 AW ¿pausddey 1eym
JOIAeyeq Bun¡nsal Aj ~uosiad 19y]o és;osAw uonenys ¡euos.1ad13]u]
moqt Yuly} pue 199, |PIP JEUMA
2-19 ysYJoM SUJ3yeg diysuolejay pajajdwo4 s.eyjuewes

[PAGE 326]

18. Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness 309


assumptions here about Bob’s possible reaction. You said yourself that you dont
actually know how Bob will react.

SAMANTHA: Well, that's true. It's just so risky and probably painful! I dont want to have
to deal with more rejection. That's what makes relationships so hard. I wish I had
some guarantee that people would accept me for who I am.

THERAPIST: I agree! Wouldnt it be nice if they did? Unfortunately, establishing, build-
ing, and maintaining relationships do require a little bit of vulnerability on your
part. But, the key here, as we discussed earlier in our session today, is to open up
slowly over time, in gradual ways, so that you can evaluate how you feel and how
the other person treats you. If you dont open up at all, then it’s preventing the pos-
sibility that Bob could be understanding and your friendship could even deepen.
Rather than taking a gradual approach to opening up, though, often people who
have experienced trauma behave in ways that are all-or-nothing: putting every-
thing out there when they first meet someone, or cutting people off entirely.

SAMANTHA: Yes, that sounds familiar.

THERAPIST: Looking at your entry, you did a great job filling out the bottom line! You
stated that your goal is to be accepted for who you are.

SAMANTHA: That's right. When I thought a lot about it, I realized that this is the bottom
line. Im not going to pretend any more. And I know from the Basic Personal Rights
handout [Handout 16.2] that I have the right to my feelings, too! Im still scared to
act on it, though.

THERAPIST: Have you called Bob back yet?

SAMANTHA: No. I have no idea what to say. I even attended a few classes on “how to
come out,” but I still just kind of freeze up.

THERAPIST: Well, it seems like the first and simplest thing you want to tell him is that
you would like to have lunch with him. I know you used to do that every week.
And maybe, if it feels appropriate, apologize for being out of touch? Do you want
to tell him over the phone about your becoming Samantha, or do you want to wait
and tell him in person?

SAMANTHA: I definitely want to tell him over the phone. I look so different now. I think
it would be good to tell him first, so he is not so shocked when he sees me. If he
wants to see me.

THERAPIST: Sure, that sounds very reasonable. I think it’s wonderful that youre going
to give him a chance, and not assume everyone falls into the same relationship pat-
tern. How will you tell him?

SAMANTHA: I can call him back and say something like “Tm sorry for not returning
your calls sooner. [ve been going througha lot lately, and I've been nervous to tell
you about it. But ve missed hanging out with you, and I hope we can stay friends.”
Then Id tell him that for my whole life I have struggled with understanding and
expressing my true gender, andI finally built up the courage to do something about

[PAGE 327]

310 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


it. I would tell him I have changed my name to Samantha. Then Pd say I value his
friendship and still want to see him for lunch if he wants to.

THERAPIST: That sounds great. You are very clearly telling him your feelings and
explaining why youve been so out of touch. And you are clearly letting him know
that you would still like to be friends. So can we plan that you will call him before
our next session, and then we can talk about how it goes? If you get anxious think-
ing about what you plan to say, take a look over the Relationship Guidelines hand-
out [Handout 18.3]. The section on repairing relationships will help remind you of
things you might want to say to him.

SAMANTHA: Yes, I can do that.

THERAPIST: Im happy to hear that. Know that, regardless of his response, youre doing
something very healthy for yourself. It may be hard, but Im so pleased that youre
choosing to take what you deem an acceptable risk to protect a relationship you
value. Your doing that is also a great example of choosing to tolerate distress. Know
that FI] be here to support you, no matter how the conversation goes.


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


At the end of the session, the therapist briefly summarizes the goals of the session and
indicates how these fit within the larger framework of improving the client's relationships.
The therapist can check in with the client to see how they are feeling about improving their
levels of intimacy in their relationships (or starting new ones). The therapist praises the client for the work done in this session and beforehand. They also instill some level of hope
that the client can develop their relationships in ways they find most helpful, while also
highlighting the necessity of continuing to practice both new and old skills to make such
changes happen.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


In keeping with the conversation about the importance of continued practice, the therapist
ends the session by discussing with the client which skills to practice before the next session. If these choices have not already been made earlier in the session, the therapist can
spend some time helping the client identify a specific relationship and skill for practicing
efforts to optimize intimacy and closeness. As with all skills practice, the therapist can provide encouragement to the client and suggest that accepting and listening to their feelings,
while keeping in mind their larger goals, can help them navigate changes in their relationships. The therapist reminds the client that creating positive changes in relationships takes
practice, just like the practice needed to learn emotion regulation skills. The therapist may
say something like: “You can use copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 as a personal
diary to jot down important things that happen as your move toward healthier levels of

[PAGE 328]

18. Changing Relationship Patterns: Increasing Closeness 311


closeness with others. We'll use what happens during the week as the basis of our continued
work together.”
Before the next session, the client will complete Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 at
least twice and focus on situations related to increasing intimacy and closeness with others. Entries can include the client’s planned efforts to improve levels of closeness in their
relationships (or other specific relationship goals the client has chosen in this or previous
sessions). Continuing to practice coping skills from the three channels of emotion remains
important as the client focuses more on interpersonal goals. The therapist encourages
continued practice of these skills, including the ongoing twice-daily practice of Focused
Breathing. Finally, the therapist and client confirm the client’s commitment to engage in at
least one pleasurable activity per week.

[PAGE 329]

Healthy Relationships = Healthy Boundaries

COMMON BOUNDARIES IN RELATIONSHIPS


NOT CLOSE ENOUGH
Holding others at a distance


Pros:
e Feel protected and safe

Me You e Less or no conflict
Cons:
e Not connected
Lonely
Lack of support
Too much self-reliance


TOO CLOSE
Being “codependent”


Pros:
e Feel connected and "in sync"
e May feel support sometimes
Me You
Cons:
e Lack of support for your own priorities
Lose sense of unique identity
Not getting your needs and/or goals met
Not enough self-reliance


OPTIMAL
Healthy boundaries


Pros:
e Feel connected
e Feel support
Me | You e Strong sense of individual identity
Support of each other’s goals and needs


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


312

[PAGE 330]

What Creates Emotional Distance and Ruptures
in Relationships?


Me You


What leads people to create emotional distance in relationships?


What specific behaviors create emotional distance?


Remember, no matter where your relationships are now,
you can work to improve them and grow closer to people.
Just take it one step at a time!


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


313

[PAGE 331]

Relationship Guidelines to Enhance Intimacy and Closeness
How to increase social engagement:

1. Smile kindly at stomeone (a grocery clerk, a pharmacist, a neighbor walking down the street,
etc.).
2. Say hello to someone.
3. Compliment someone on doing good work or being kind.
4. Make eye contact during these exchanges or other interactions.


How to start new relationships:

> Initiate contact with small talk.
Get to know the other person, and identify common interests and/or values.
Make a point of acting respectfully and expressing positive emotions.
Initiate spending time together in low-effort ways (for example, coffee).
GPON If things go well, start spending more time together (movies, hikes, etc.).


How to increase intimacy and reduce distance:

= Ask about the other person’s life, values, and interests.
. Be willing to support them in their interests and activities.
. Share your interests and opinions or recent life events.
. Express positive emotions.
. Address unresolved conflicts and issues respectfully.
. Spend time together in enjoyable ways.
Express caring and respect.
. Invite them to weigh in on your decision-making processes.
Be genuine and sincere.
mb SOMNOAUORWN Offer to help and/or ask for help and support when needed.


How to repair relationships after a fight or conflict:

. Ask if the other person is willing to talk about what happened.
. Acknowledge that the last contact did not go well.
. Convey your respect and caring for the other person.
DON . Acknowledge mistakes that you may have made and the hurt/damage that you think you
caused.
gal . Share your feelings and thoughts about your behavior and about the other person's behavior in
a way that is respectful and minimizes the risk of the other person's feeling defensive. In other
words, use “I Messages.”
. Ask how the other person felt about what happened.
NO Ask questions for clarification, and invite the other person to ask such questions.
0 . Ask if you can make amends, or ask the other person to make amends, if appropriate.
o Discuss how you can avoid similar situations in the future.


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


314

[PAGE 332]

Self-Compassion and Summary
of Skills Training

If you want others to be happy, practice compassion.
If you want to be happy, practice compassion.
—THE 14TH DALAI LAMA (quoted in Schaef,
2000, p. 11)


This session marks the ending of one phase of treatment and a transition to another—
either to more independent growth or to more advanced trauma work. For all clients,
though, this session includes a new overarching theme to help shape their continued efforts
at growth and psychological well-being. That theme is compassion. The word “compassion’ may evoke many different feelings from clients and therapists alike. Some people may
immediately latch on to the concept of caring for oneself and others in a deep, open-hearted
way. Others may feel resistant to a word that may be associated with religious, political, or
otherwise personal baggage. What we mean by “compassion, for the sake of this treatment,
is an attitude of open, nonjudgmental kindness and recognition of the challenges one faces.
The capacity for feeling compassion for oneself and others is inherent for most of
humankind. For survivors of trauma, particularly those who have experienced sustained
violence (especially in childhood), there may be many blocks to experiencing compassion.
These blocks can stem from a lack of foundational experiences with caregivers or intimate
partners who themselves were blocked in developing their own sense of compassion. Clients
who have experienced abuse during childhood or sustained violence by a partner have often
internalized both explicit and implicit messages that they “deserved” the abuse/violence
and are not worthy of care or respect. Such messages can lead to sustained self-loathing.
Sometimes clients also feel guilt for acts of omission—for example, not helping others when
they felt they should have—or for acting in ways inconsistent with their beliefs and values,
such as can occur during war (i.e., “moral injury’).
Still other barriers to compassion arise from experiencing interpersonal harm when trying to help other people. For example, one client came to therapy with a history of boundary


315

[PAGE 333]

316 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


violations tied to her efforts to reach out to men who were in financial and emotional need.
After repeated betrayals, including a sexual assault, this client decided to wall herself off
not only from these men, but also from other loved ones. Through therapy, she learned to
soften these edges again so she could live her value of compassion while being mindful of
appropriate boundaries and emotional warning signs.
For all these reasons, survivors of trauma can find it difficult to reconnect with a sense
of compassion. By this time in treatment, at the end of STAIR, they likely have acquired
enough skills to be more open to reawakening their inner capacity for compassion for themselves as well as for others. The timing of the explicit introduction to compassion also corresponds nicely with the other component of this session—transitions. This session marks
a key transition to either ending therapy or moving on to the second, trauma-focused component of treatment (Narrative Therapy). The therapist's modeling of a hopeful and compassionate attitude in the session sets an important tone for this transition. As throughout this
treatment, the therapist holds a compassionate attitude toward the client, which in turn can
allow the client to experience this compassion and internalize it. This session concretizes
this process by explicitly focusing on the role of self-compassion in the client’s continued
efforts to recover from trauma.
The other major task ofthis session is planning for the transition to the client's next step.
Because not all clients will move on to Narrative Therapy, we have structured this chapter
to acknowledge two pathways forward. Although all clients will explore self-compassion and
review the progress they have made thus far in treatment, the paths diverge roughly halfway through the session, when the focus moves to the future. Box 19.1 outlines the content
of the session. It also corresponds to the organization of this chapter by including the two
branching paths, the choice of which will depend on the client's treatment plan.


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


Although Session 10 is the final session of the STAIR module, it begins as the others do—
with the therapist conducting a brief check-in on the client’s current emotional state, followed by a review of the client’s skills practice. The therapist begins by reviewing the clients Relationship Patterns Worksheet—2 entries and then identifying and praising successes
while acknowledging any challenges. Particularly because this session is the last one focused
entirely on skills training, the therapist provides necessary guidance while recognizing that
change takes time, along with continued commitment and practice. For example, the therapist may say something like:


“I see you had some challenges with your efforts to get closer to other people in the last
week. That's hard to experience, but I know with time and practice, you can grow your
relationships as you'd like. Nothing is radically changed in a day or a week. But I think
youre going in the right direction. We
ll talk today about how to keep yourself on this
healthier path.”

[PAGE 334]

19. Self-Compassion and Summary of Skills Training 317


Theme and Curriculum for Session 10
Self-Compassion and Summary of Skills Training


This session marks the ending of one phase of treatment and a transition to another—either
to more independent growth or to more advanced trauma work (such as Narrative Therapy).
For all clients, though, this session includes the new overarching theme of compassion to help
shape continued efforts at growth and psychological well-being. Although the capacity for feeling compassion is inherent for most of humankind, survivors of trauma can find it difficult to
reconnect with a sense of compassion for themselves. Clients who have experienced childhood maltreatment or sustained domestic violence have internalized the explicit and implicit
messages that communicate they “deserved” the abuse/violence and are not worthy of care
or respect. By this time in treatment, clients ideally will have enough skills to develop an
emerging sense of compassion for themselves and what they have been through. The timing of
the explicit introduction of self-compassion also corresponds nicely with the other component
of this session—transitions. Self-compassion is important for a client moving on to Narrative
Therapy, where they will be reviewing and appraising the meaning of past traumas. However,
not all clients will move on to Narrative Therapy; they will pursue life without therapy or
explore other options. Here too, self-compassion is important in recognizing that important
recovery tasks remain, in planning for potential relapses, and in understanding that recovery
in its entirety will take time and that patience is needed. The material for this session is organized so that guidance for a client following either pathway is provided: moving to Narrative
Therapy, or ending this particular treatment.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Review concept of self-compassion (and consider client's potential barriers to living more compassionately). Review changes in symptoms and problems over the course of skills training to
aid reflection on progress. Bring extra copies of forms relevant to client's treatment plans, such
as the Feelings Monitoring Form (Handout 11.3) or Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (Handout 17.4). The work in the session is estimated to take about 60 minutes; a flexible application
is assumed (i.e., not every client will need all interventions).


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.

Identify focus of the session.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 335]

318 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Introduce concept of compassion.

Practice Self-Compassion Meditation.

Summarize accomplishments in skills training.

Prepare client for next step: Select Option 1 or 2.


Option 1: Moving to Narrative Therapy

Prepare client for move to Narrative Therapy.
Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
Complete Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 twice a week before next session, with a
focus on situations related to increasing compassion.
Practice interacting in a situation where there is an opportunity to feel and express com-
passion for oneself and for another person (ideally as related to client's goals).
Use coping skills from all three channels to support treatment goals (including Focused
Breathing twice daily, if preferred).
Practice Self-Compassion Meditation once a day.
Make a list of questions and concerns about the transition to Narrative Therapy.
Schedule at least one pleasurable activity per week.


Option 2: Completing Treatment—The Final Session

Review and summarize the treatment as a whole.
Prepare client for independent skills practice.
Plan for independent skills practice.
Present completion certificate.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 19.1. Compassion: Recovery Is a Journey

Handout 19.2. Summary of Accomplishments (So Far)

Handout 19.3. STAIR Skills for Continued Practice

Additional copies of Handout 16.4. Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2

Additional copies of Handout 11.3. Feelings Monitoring Form (optional)

[PAGE 336]

19. Self-Compassion and Summary of Skills Training 319


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


Because this session is the final session of STAIR, it integrates all previous skills training sessions while introducing an organizing attitude of self-compassion for whichever next
steps the client choses. The main goal of the session is to share and enjoy reviewing the
client's accomplishments so far and to prepare for their continued work—whether that will
be continuing to practice skills independently after ending treatment, or moving on to Narrative Therapy.


INTRODUCE CONCEPT OF COMPASSION

Rationale for Compassion

As noted at the beginning of this chapter, the concept of compassion can be loaded with
personal and cultural meaning. For this reason, we recommend introducing the concept as
in this example:


THERAPIST: As I mentioned earlier, today were going to start by talking about the idea
of compassion, specifically self-compassion. What comes to mind as you hear the
word “compassion

CLIENT: To be honest, I think about people who are too “touchy-feely.” The people who
haven't experienced the dark side of people, like I have.

THERAPIST: That's a good point. Sometimes when people talk about compassion, it can
sound like theyre ignoring the ugly side of the world. What ifI were to say that
feeling compassion actually requires recognizing that bad things happen?

CLIENT: I guess that sounds more honest. How does that work?

THERAPIST: At its core, compassion is simply an attitude of kindness in the face of suf-
fering. Its being open and nonjudgmental to yourself and to others, while recog-
nizing the challenges we all face by just being human while living in an imperfect
world.

CLIENT: OK, I can get on board with that. But how do I do that?

THERAPIST: Good question! Luckily, there are many options. We
ll explore some today,
including a meditation well do together in a few minutes.


After a brief introduction like the preceding example, the therapist can expand on
any especially important aspects of compassion relevant to the particular client. For most
clients, we recommend focusing on self-compassion, as it is foundational for appropriately
feeling compassion for others. It also addresses a common boundary issue for survivors of
early trauma—prioritizing others’ needs over one’s own basic rights (see Chapter 16/Session
7). For other clients, the therapist can discuss how compassion can be expressed both for
oneself and for others.

[PAGE 337]

320 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Compassion for self

Feeling compassion for oneself provides the groundwork for experiences of compassion
directed outside of oneself. Saying that it provides the groundwork, however, does not mean
that it is basic or easy. In fact, for many people, consciously spending time in developing
self-compassion is quite challenging and may even be belittled as self-indulgent! Certainly
some people can “wallow in their own self-pity,’ but in our experience, what may look like
wallowing is actually withdrawal and depression involving high levels of self-judgment and
shame. What is different about self-compassion is that it involves a higher aspect of selfawareness—the observing self. The observing self recognizes, validates, and cares for the
parts of the self that are suffering, all without any level of judgment, prescription, or invalidation.
The good news is that by this point in treatment, the client has already experienced
this part of the self. Any time the client has completed a Feelings Monitoring Form or a
Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2, they have been observing their own behavioral and
emotional patterns. By examining what has and has not worked in their efforts to change
unhelpful patterns, they have had at least fleeting moments of observing without experiencing undue levels of self-judgment and shame. Fully experiencing self-compassion involves
mindfully expanding these nascent moments of self-observation and awareness, while caring for the part of the self that is in pain.


Compassion for others

Developing greater compassion for others can be complicated for a variety of reasons. It
can be difficult for many people to maintain a sense of compassion for others who do not
share their personally held values and/or who are vastly different on various dimensions of
identity. Nevertheless, when people are able to get in touch with a sense of shared humanity
and the resultant compassion for other people, really important changes can and do occur.
At an individual level, fostering greater compassion for others can help transform relationships. Compassion for self and compassion for others are highly complementary. Indeed,
it is nearly impossible to have one without the other. Having compassion for others does not
mean giving up one’s own needs and rights, but it does mean considering the needs, rights,
and perspective of other persons while communicating interpersonally and making decisions. All of these characteristics are consistent with the interpersonal relationship skills
previously introduced in this treatment.


Discuss Barriers to Compassion

If compassion was easy in the modern world, then everyone would be practicing it. Unfortunately, people experience many barriers to compassion, whether or not they have a history
of trauma. Box 19.2 lists some possible barriers clients may face, along with corresponding
responses the therapist can adapt to address these client-specific attitudes. By this time in
treatment, the therapist and client will have established a strong therapeutic alliance; we

[PAGE 338]

Addressing Barriers to Compassion

Possible Barrier and Client Response Potential Therapist Response

Limited time “Even small movements toward compassion can open the door more and more over time. You just need a

“I dont have time to be compassionate to myself few seconds to start down that path. If you take one step at a time, you'll begin to feel some changes, and

or others.” the compassion will become easier to experience.”


Shame or worthlessness “I know we've explored ways, in this treatment, for you to start moving beyond these deep feelings of shame.
“I have too much guilt and shame to care for What's really important to know is that everyone deserves compassion. I can say, too, after getting to know
myself in that way.” you over these several sessions, that you really do deserve compassion—I feel it for you, and that’s not just
because it’s my job! I hope over time you begin to see this and even feel it deep down. I know it'll take
“Tm worthless. How canI feel like I even deserve
practice and time, just like everything else we've done.”
self-compassion?”


Lack of reciprocation “Youre right that youre only in control of your own behavior and attitude. But if you continue to be

“But if Im more compassionate, I still won't compassionate, eventually others can begin trusting that the feeling is genuine and eventually responding
Loe
receive more compassion from other people.” in kind. It’s like when you smile at someone, it’s hard for them not to smile back.”


Not leading to action “Good point! As youve learned in this treatment, though, feelings do matter and do affect how we behave.
“Yeah, I may be able to feel more compassion, but How you live your growing feelings of compassion is up to you, but with time and self-reflection, I'm
that means nothing if I cant do anything with confident you'll see it show in how you act toward yourself and others.”
the feeling.”


Mismatch with persona, identity, or culture “There are a lot of stereotypes about who can and should feel compassion. But if we buy into those, then
“That's too ‘touchy-feely for me.” were all limited in our choices in life! Compassion can seem ‘touchy-feely, but at its core, it’s just knowing
that we and other people experience pain in life. You don’t have to go around hugging everyone or passing
“That sounds like something only women are good
out flowers to show that you know and care. Sometimes a simple smile and nodding of the head can be
at. I don’t want to be a pushover or soft.”
what's helpful.”


Anger/irritability “Yes, life can be frustrating sometimes! Especially from what you've told me, many things were getting
“Tm just too worked up these days. Everyone and under your skin before you started treatment. I think some of the skills you've been using to slow down,
everything annoy me. My anger is too great right breathe, and make choices that help you meet your goals might be especially helpful to continue. As you do
now for me to feel compassion.” so, it will create space for other feelings beyond anger and frustration. I think that compassion for yourself
and other people just might be one of those feelings you can start having again.”

[PAGE 339]

322 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


recommend using this alliance in discussing compassion. There are many ways to do so, and
Box 19.2 gives a few examples. The therapist has been modeling a compassionate attitude
toward the client throughout the treatment, without having to point it out explicitly. Nevertheless, expressing compassion for the client in a more direct way and using it as an example
of how to feel and act compassionately may be especially helpful for clients who communicate reluctance to do so, or a lack of confidence that it is even possible.
Some themes in Box 19.2 are important for us to unpack, as they highlight important
elements of compassion that the therapist may not have covered by this point in treatment.
The first is the concern about lack of reciprocity for expressing compassion. This concern is
most relevant for people who are interested in feeling more compassion for others. A central
expectation for most people is social reciprocity. Regrettably, we cannot ensure that other
people will reciprocate positive feelings and behaviors, including that of compassion. The
therapy directly acknowledges this reality. What the therapist can also do, though, is reassure the client that the act of feeling and being compassionate is in and of itself a positive,
healing experience—no matter what the responses from others may be. In fact, because of
social reciprocity, it is very difficult to resist an honestly expressed attitude of compassion.
The therapist can note that long-term relationships not characterized by mutual expressions
of compassion will take time to change, but that it may be possible with continued effort and
practice. Regardless of how others respond, though, if the client values having a compassionate attitude, then they are living that personal value every time they practice compassion. This alone is inherently meaningful and important.
Another significant barrier is related to cultural expectations of who can and should
feel compassion. Even the word itself may be off-putting to some clients—ones who, for
example, identify as particularly masculine, old-fashioned, or reserved. Still, as experienced
professionals in the Department of Veterans Affairs, we know that even people embedded in a more masculine subculture, such as that of the military, are more than capable of
experiencing and expressing compassion in ways congruent with their personalities and
culture. As an example, one of us saw an African American Army veteran with traditional
military values from a southern state, who was struggling with PTSD after combat exposure in Afghanistan. Through treatment, he began to tackle his symptoms of numbness and
irritability by first expressing his caring for his dog, and then (with work) toward his young
children and his wife. He had to acknowledge his own suffering and that of his family for
experiencing his emotional absence over the years. His political beliefs and fundamental
personality did not need to change for him to open up to increasing levels of compassion for
himself and his family.
For some clients, experiencing compassion is not something they seem even willing or
ready to do. For survivors of trauma, this reluctance can come from several different places.
One common source of reluctance to practice self-compassion can be trauma-informed
themes of inappropriate or excessive guilt and shame. By this time in treatment, the theme
of guilt and shame will be familiar to therapist and client; ideally, it will have already been
explored through use of the Feelings Monitoring Form and, if relevant to the client's current
relationships, the two Relationship Patterns Worksheets. When reviewing possible barriers to self-compassion in this session, the therapist can explicitly make ties to any previous
conversations about the clients pattern of self-blame. For a client continuing to Narrative

[PAGE 340]

19. Self-Compassion and Summary of Skills Training 323


Therapy, the work will help address shame in more depth, so the therapist can preview how
working on this barrier to self-compassion will be an ongoing process as the therapist and
client continue to work together.


PRACTICE SELF-COMPASSION MEDITATION


Now that the therapist has introduced the concept of self-compassion and primed the client
to develop this attitude, the therapist invites the client to participate in an exercise aimed at
increasing self-compassion. The therapist can begin by acknowledging that recovery from
trauma is a journey. At this point, the client has practiced many skills that will continue to
be helpful in reaching their goals. Inevitably, though, there will be challenges and relapses
into old behaviors. In response, the client can choose to refresh skills, begin again, or learn
new skills. With any choice, having compassion for oneself will support the client in this
process and make recovery from missteps easier and more successful. Compassion is a great
emotion regulation intervention! After a brief introduction to the exercise, the therapist can
read aloud to the client the meditation script from Handout 19.1, Compassion: Recovery Is
a Journey, with appropriate pauses to let the client conduct the meditation mindfully and
experience each step of the exercise fully.
Afterward, the therapist elicits and discusses the clients reaction. The therapist then
encourages the client to practice the exercise over time, and to regard the Self-Compassion
Meditation as a skill aimed at fostering a more compassionate attitude. If the client is going
on to Narrative Therapy or some other type of trauma processing, the use of the SelfCompassion Meditation may be especially valuable as the client recalls things that provoke
feelings of shame, guilt, and worthlessness. If the therapist feels that the client is ready to
experience compassion for themselves, they can say something like:


“Your being able to practice the Self-Compassion Meditation today is very encourag-
ing. It’s something that will serve you well as you move forward, especially when you
think about very hard memories from your life. We want you to have compassion for
the child [or person] who went through the traumals] you experienced. Maybe this skill
can help center you. Then, from a more compassionate state of mind, you can make bet-
ter choices about how to respond to a trigger, live your values, and meet your personal
goals.”


After the discussion on compassion ends, the therapist provides the client a copy of Handout 19.1, so that the client can use the Self-Compassion Meditation in their independent
practice.


CASE EXAMPLE: FOSTERING COMPASSION IN A HARSH WORLD


Jazmin and her two sisters grew up with a mother diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia.
From birth, she experienced extreme emotional, physical, and verbal abuse. Her mother

[PAGE 341]

324 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


tortured her in the context of routine caregiving (e.g., injuring her during feeding). Later,
Jasmin was prohibited from engaging in basic self-care, such as showering or brushing her
teeth. As a young child, she spent many nights contemplating suicide, and even tried to kill
herself on a few occasions from the ages of 7 to 11.
Entering therapy in her mid-20s, Jazmin built a strong bond with her therapist over the
course of their work together, and she made considerable gains in her capacity to manage
her emotions and advocate skillfully for herself Although she was quite successful in her
career, she worked in an abusive setting that in some ways was a repetition of her childhood
home. She was now considering leaving her position for a more supportive and collegial
environment—something she had never prioritized before. In spite of her significant treatment gains, Jazmin was approaching the end of the STAIR module with a sense of despondency. She described still feeling damaged to her core and could not believe that this feeling
would ever change.
She could tell that her therapist had a very high regard for her and for all her accomplishments, but she dismissed it as just a routine part of the therapist's job. She had a very
difficult time absorbing and believing any positive feedback, and even though intellectually she could challenge her negative beliefs about herself, she struggled to accept or even
acknowledge her own self-worth. Her therapist turned to the theme of the session, compassion, as an important and possibly critical idea and experience for Jazmin to explore as she
continued on the path of recovery from trauma. When the therapist presented the concept
of compassion, she responded that compassion was great for other people, but not for her
because she was too damaged.

JAZMIN: I like the idea of self-compassion, but it's so abstract and not really for me.

THERAPIST: It’s a good thing for all of us that compassion doesnt discriminate. It may
not seem like it at first, but it's for everyone. At its core, it means being kind to
yourself as you navigate the ups and downs of life.

JAZMIN: I just dont see how I'm supposed to have compassion for myself when I’ve
made so many mistakes. I was constantly punished for even being alive. It's not
that Im not grateful for this program—lI
ve learned so much about myself and got-
ten so much better at dealing with all kinds of things, and I even feel a lot better.
But feeling compassion for myself? I just dont see it.

THERAPIST: I wonder if you can tell when others have compassion for you. In fact, I
have a great deal of respect and compassion for you and what you
ve been through.
The reality is, when I hear a little about the things you've been through and the
obstacles youve overcome, Im amazed at how resilient you are. You are still alive,
and you are a fighter.

JAZMIN: I dont know...

THERAPIST: Well, I firmly believe that. Remember, it was your mother's disorder that
affected her thinking and behavior. The abuse didnt happen because there is
something wrong with you or because youre a bad person. It was truly because of
your mother’s altered sense of reality.

[PAGE 342]

19. Self-Compassion and Summary of Skills Training 325


JAZMIN: I know. Thank you for telling me this again. It really puts a whole new perspec-
tive on what happened. I had never really thought of it that way before therapy,
and it’s so easy to go back to blaming myself. Of course, I always took it personally,
like I deserved it.

THERAPIST: Let's take a step back here. You mentioned that youve been thinking about
finding another job. Tell me again why.

JAZMIN: Because I just cant stand it there any more. I am treated as less than human.

THERAPIST: This is a really big deal. For the first time in your life, youre setting healthy
boundaries, dealing in a skillful way with emotions, and establishing a safe and
supportive environment for yourself. Keep doing these empowering things, even
if they feel small and even though they are hard to do. You know they are right
to do. Recognizing that youre doing something hard but right is a wonderful way
to cultivate a sense of compassion for yourself. Remember, like everyone else, you
deserve to be treated with respect.

JAZMIN: I guess youre right. I was just a kid.

THERAPIST: Exactly, Jazmin. I know self-compassion will take practice. If in the future
you find you are having difficulty with this, you can ask yourself how you would
treat a friend. A lot of times, people who had early trauma like you find it eas-
ier to have compassion for others rather than for themselves, but in reality self
compassion and compassion for others go hand in hand. So even though our skills
training sessions are ending, your own work—including creating space to acknowl-
edge and respect your feelings, advocating for yourself, and nurturing compassion
for both yourself and others—will continue to evolve.


Jazmin thanked her therapist for believing in her and for all the help she had received.
The realization that her abuse was due to her mother’s illness, and not due to her own
inherent inferiority, was transformative for her. Although she needed to continue reminding herself of her own need for self-compassion, she felt inspired to keep making positive
changes in her life, and wanted to allow herself to be open to the idea of experiencing more
compassion as she moved forward in her recovery journey.


SUMMARIZE ACCOMPLISHMENTS IN SKILLS TRAINING

Prepare before Session

The therapist reviews their notes and the client’s completed forms in preparation for this
session, so they can identify problems and goals the client brought to the initial assessment
and early sessions, and can summarize (mentally or on paper) the changes they have seen in
the client. Creating a summary of accomplishments is especially important, because clients
with a history of trauma tend to diminish their gains and to focus on their shortcomings
and limitations. The therapist may organize the summary of accomplishments to highlight

[PAGE 343]

326 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


where the client first started and how far they have come. The therapist can refresh the
clients memories of change that has occurred over time, and can add observations about
changes that the client may have forgotten or overlooked. Using results from assessments
collected along the way can be especially helpful in letting the data speak for themselves.
If time allows, graphing the scores across treatment can provide a nice visual summary to
use in session with the client.


Reflect on Work So Far

The therapist and client review and complete Handout 19.2, Summary of Accomplishments
(So Far), to structure their reflections on the progress the client has made. Whether the client moves to Narrative Therapy or ends treatment at this session, this handout emphasizes
the continuing role of the skills learned thus far in the client’s ongoing health and recovery.
The process of reviewing the handout will clarify and affirm the most important things that
have happened in the treatment from the client’s perspective. The therapist can reflect or
elaborate on the client’s observations with their own, keeping in mind that the conversation is still primarily led by the client. This stance reinforces again the role of the client as
their own agent of change and primary source of knowledge as they gain increasing levels
of psychological health.
To guide the discussion, Handout 19.2 lists reflection questions in the order of primary
treatment targets: emotional awareness, emotional coping, and relationship patterns/communication skills. How does the client experience and express emotions differently from
before treatment? In what ways are they approaching relationships differently? This reflection will help consolidate these lessons before the client moves on to the next step in their
recovery journey.


Congratulate the Client on Progress

The therapist ends this discussion by congratulating the client on their hard work and
accomplishments as reflected through both changes in their scores and positive experiences outside of sessions. The therapist can include any observations of change that they
have wanted to share but might not have had the opportunity to do so up to this point. The
therapist can also highlight specific successes and situations from any point of the skills
training component of treatment, even if they have already provided positive feedback on
the example in previous sessions.


PREPARE CLIENT FOR NEXT STEP: SELECT OPTION 1 OR 2


We designed this treatment with flexibility to allow therapists and clients to decide whether
to combine the STAIR (skills training) and Narrative Therapy modules of the treatment
protocol. Given this choice (which ideally is made before the beginning of treatment or
in earlier sessions), the rest of this session/chapter is separated into two branching paths.

[PAGE 344]

19. Self-Compassion and Summary of Skills Training 327


Depending on what the client and therapist decide, the therapist chooses Option 1: Moving
to Narrative Therapy, or Option 2: Completing Treatment—The Final Session. To aid the
discussion of ongoing skills practice, Handout 19.3, STAIR Skills for Continued Practice, is
a component of both options and includes the new concept of compassion and its associated
Self-Compassion Meditation skill in the thought channel of emotion. This handout also provides a summary for the interpersonal themes explored in the latter half of STAIR.


Option 1: Moving to Narrative Therapy

For clients continuing to Narrative Therapy, the following provides a structure for the rest
of this session.


PREPARE CLIENT FOR MOVE TO NARRATIVE THERAPY


The next session and subsequent ones mark a shift in focus from skill acquisition to direct
processing of the client’s trauma history and memories in the context of their broader life.
The next session will introduce the nature of this treatment approach (Narrative Therapy)
more completely, but in this session, the client is given a “broad-strokes” understanding of
this new approach in the context of the work they have already completed. Some key points
for the therapist to share (and incorporate throughout the remainder of this session) include
the following:


Reviewing briefly with the client the work that they have done in building emotion
regulation and interpersonal skills, and discussing how these skills support the sec-
ond component of the program (Narrative Therapy).
Asking the client to share their own thoughts about their progress, ways the treat-
ment has been helpful, and areas that need further attention (which can be part of
the next module of treatment).
Congratulating the client on their hard work and progress during this first module
of the treatment, and emphasizing the strengths the therapist has observed up until
this point.
Discussing together the areas in which the client is continuing to grow and improve,
and letting them know that work will continue on these areas during the next com-
ponent of treatment.


Review Format and Session Changes for Narrative Therapy

The therapist can remind the client that in Narrative Therapy, their work together will
shift toward helping them to process and integrate their traumatic memories. This goal will
be accomplished by going through their traumatic memories repeatedly and coming to a

[PAGE 345]

328 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


broader understanding of their meaning for the client now. The therapist can tell the client that during the Narrative Therapy sessions, the first part of each session will be spent
reviewing the traumatic experiences and evaluating their meaning; the remaining time will
be spent focusing on current issues and the effective use of emotion regulation and relationship skills.


Elicit Client's Questions and Concerns about Transition
to Narrative Therapy

The therapist then asks the client whether they have any questions or concerns about the
transition to Narrative Therapy. Is the format of this new approach clear to the client? Do
they understand the rationale and procedure for Narrative Therapy? What are their concerns and fears about starting to do the narrative work? The therapist encourages the client
to be frank about their concerns, but also indicates that there will be more time to discuss
questions and more general information about the narrative approach in the next session. In
fact, one of the activities the client will complete before the next session is to make a list of
questions, concerns, or other thoughts they have about entering the next series of sessions.


Select Skills to Support Narrative Work

The therapist and client openly discuss how the skills the client have learned so far will still
play a vital role moving forward, despite the shift in the treatment’s focus. Handout 19.3
provides an overview of the emotion regulation and interpersonal skills they have learned,
and a checklist for the therapist and client to complete in selecting the most crucial coping
skills to bring to the next series of sessions. This conversation will parallel the one in Session 5 about distress tolerance (see Chapter 14), but will also incorporate newer skills and
concepts related to self-compassion and healthier relationship patterns.


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


As in previous sessions, the therapist provides a brief review and summary at the end of
the session. For clients continuing to Narrative Therapy, the therapist can summarize similarly as they have done with previous sessions. That is, they review the major points of the
session: reflecting on progress made in skill acquisition and symptom change; developing
more compassion for themselves (and others, if explored); and planning for the transition to
Narrative Therapy.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


To support a client continuing to the Narrative Therapy module of this treatment, the therapist and client plan for ongoing skills practice aimed at (1) enhancing and maintaining skills

[PAGE 346]

19. Self-Compassion and Summary of Skills Training 329


learned in STAIR (to continue growth in emotion regulation and relationship skills), and
(2) preparing for the more advanced narrative and trauma-focused aspects of Narrative
Therapy. The client will continue completing Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 twice a
week with situations relevant to the client's broader treatment goals (including ones related
to emotional triggers that may occur more spontaneously). If needed, the therapist can provide additional copies of Handout 16.4 for these new entries. The therapist can also confirm
that the client has a copy of Handout 19.3 with the skills marked for continued practice,
which the client will continue to do throughout the Narrative Therapy module to support
their treatment goals.
As for new skills practice, the client can plan to (1) make a list of questions and concerns they may have about moving to Narrative Therapy, and (2) practice experiencing and
showing compassion in two ways. First, they may use Handout 19.2 to practice the SelfCompassion Meditation completed earlier in the session once a day, to help keep the concept in mind. Second, they can practice interacting in a situation where they may express a
feeling of compassion for either themselves or for another person. Ideally, this situation will
relate to one of the client's goals. The client can also schedule at least one pleasurable activity in the next week, if this has not already been part of one of the activities planned thus far.


Option 2: Completing Treatment—The Final Session

For clients who end treatment after the completion of the STAIR module, the rest of the
final session can follow the structure outlined below.


SUMMARIZE THE TREATMENT AS A WHOLE


For a client who is ending therapy, the review/summary serves as a broader one overviewing the course of treatment (summarizing key aspects of earlier sessions) and the client's
commitments to continued practice and growth outside of therapy. Incorporating the conversation about compassion may be especially helpful in encouraging the client’s continued
growth and flexibility as they learn more about themselves and their relationships independent of therapy.


PREPARE CLIENT FOR INDEPENDENT SKILLS PRACTICE


Some clients may have entered this treatment expecting therapy to be something done to
them, then completed, and finally left in the past. STAIR, however, has introduced these
clients to a more active and collaborative role in therapy and in making changes in their
lives. This sense of engagement, personal motivation, and responsibility is crucial to maintain for continued success in sustaining and expanding gains made in therapy. A therapist

[PAGE 347]

330 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


and client will both benefit from explicitly discussing how the client can continue to grow
without the presence of the therapist or the sessions that provided structure for their initial
skill acquisition. The client may share some concerns about how to maintain the progress
they made, and the therapist can normalize some of this anxiety, while also eliciting the
client's sense of ownership for what they have accomplished. The therapist can remind the
client of specific instances when the client used skills during difficult moments, and/or of
successes that occurred because of what the client did outside of the therapy room.


PLAN INDEPENDENT SKILLS PRACTICE


Which skills are practiced independently after treatment will vary from person to person.
The client is ultimately the primary determinant of the plan, with guidance as needed from
the therapist. In many cases, continuing to practice emotion regulation and communication
skills will be a core component of the client’s plan. Handout 19.3 provides the best framework for selecting skills across the three channels of emotion and reviewing interpersonal
themes. Some clients may also prefer to use the structure of the Feelings Monitoring Form
or Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 to reflect on their ongoing experience. For these
clients, the therapist can provide extra copies of the relevant worksheets. Any additional
informational handouts or copies of worksheets provided by the therapist to the client also
serve to reinforce the idea that the work is not over. That is, this transition marks primarily
the move to independent practice, and not the leaving behind of lessons learned with the
help of the therapist.


PRESENT COMPLETION CERTIFICATE


In the last moments of the session, the therapist can provide a certificate of completion
acknowledging all of the client’s hard work, achievements, and commitment to healing from
their trauma. This moment is the final opportunity for the therapist to congratulate the
client. The therapist can keep in mind that while some clients may like the idea of “graduating’ from treatment, many others will prefer to view this transition as the beginning of
the second stage of treatment—treatment as their own therapists. Even so, for most clients,
having a formal certificate of completion can be a special indicator and reminder of the lessons they learned and want to continue to bring forward in their lives.

[PAGE 348]

Compassion: Recovery Is a Journey
Having compassion for yourself can be challenging, given the messages you may have gotten from
others and the negative beliefs you may still hold about yourself. There are several benefits to selfcompassion, however, including:


1. Compassion for yourself goes hand in hand with compassion for others. So self-compassion
may lead to having more compassion for others and improving your relationships.
2. Having compassion for yourself also allows you to change and experiment with new ways of
behaving and feeling, such as asking for help or being more assertive. You'll be able to prac-
tice your new skills without fear if you just have compassion for yourself as a person who is
learning, growing, and changing.
3. Finally, compassion for yourself allows success in the journey of recovery. There will be lapses
and challenges. But the more accepting you are of your shortcomings, the easier it will be for
you to focus your efforts on change. The energy you used up criticizing or defending yourself
before you started treatment can be channeled into the work needed to reach your goals.


Consider your successes in this work and accept them. Consider your challenges and limitations
and accept them too. Continue to work toward your goals with compassion for your past and your
continuing struggles.


SELF-COMPASSION MEDITATION EXERCISE

Take a moment to focus on your breathing. If it feels comfortable, close your eyes.


Now take a slow, deep breath. Exhale slowly, allowing all of the air to leave your lungs. Inhale.
And exhale slowly.


Continue to breathe at this pace.


Now imagine yourself. See all the parts of yourself.


View the parts that represent some of the positive aspects of yourself, such as happiness, joy,
pleasurable feelings, positive beliefs, and loving memories. What do you notice?


Now, take a moment to view the painful parts of yourself—those that represent your distressing
emotions, fears, negative beliefs, and painful life experiences. What do you notice?


Now imagine that these different parts of yourself are struggling with each other. It’s a long struggle that has been going on for many years. The painful parts are trying to find an advantage over the
positive parts, while the positive parts desperately respond with all of their might to avoid being taken
over and ignored. What do you notice?


(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


331

[PAGE 349]

Compassion: Recovery Is a Journey (page 2 of 2)

Now imagine that instead of allowing the positive and painful parts of yourself to fight against
each other, you allow them to exist together without needing to struggle. Rather than allowing the
painful pieces to win and viewing yourself as all bad, worthless, or unlovable, allow yourself to hold
all of these parts together with compassion. Imagine seeing yourself as a person with strengths and
weaknesses, just like others, and at the same time seeing yourself as deserving love, respect, and
compassion.


Focus on what this experience feels like. View all the parts of yourself as a whole, without judgment.


Now, return your focus to just noticing your breath... taking slow, deep breaths. And when you're
ready, open your eyes, and slowly return your focus to the room around you.


332

[PAGE 350]

Summary of Accomplishments (So Far)
Let’s review all the things you’ve learned and accomplished during this treatment!


e We discussed how trauma affects emotion and how it affected you.

Before STAIR, how did you experience your emotions?


e We then explored skills that could change how you coped with your emotions.
Later today, we'll
select the skills from the three channels of emotion (body, thought, behavior)
that you want to
continue practicing. For now, consider:

What are ways you're experiencing your emotions differently from before starting
treatment?


e We also explored how trauma affects relationships, and we identified
different ways to approach
and manage relationships—with flexibility, assertiveness, power, intimacy,
and compassion.

What are ways you're approaching relationships differently in what you believe,
feel, and do?


(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma,
Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen.
Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal
use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at
the end of the table of contents)


333

[PAGE 351]

Summary of Accomplishments (So Far) (page 2 of 2)

e As you prepare to move on, let’s reflect on the progress you’ve made.

What are the most important
lessons you've learned?


What lessons felt most
helpful?


How have your thoughts,
emotions, and behaviors
changed?


How will you continue
to build on the progress
you've made so far?


334

[PAGE 352]

STAIR Skills for Continued Practice
EMOTIONAL COPING


Compassion
As you move forward in your life,
wherever it takes you, consider how Body
to show compassion to yourself
O Focused Breathing
and to others.
L Basic Self-Care
L] Soothing the Senses
Instructions
O Progressive Muscle Relaxation
Select the skills you’ve learned
that you’d like to continue practicing.
LU Other Mindfulness-Based
Exercises for the Body


Gee


Thoughts Behavior
L] Emotion Surfing ll Take a Break/Time Out
O Evidence Technique or Slow Down
O Thought Shifting A Vv O Replacement Behaviors
OU Positive Imagery O Opposite Action
L] Reminders/Reframes O Ask for Help/Seek Support
O Positive Self-Statements O Plan Pleasurable Activities
O Self-Compassion
Meditation


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and
Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page
for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 353]

STAIR Skills for Continued Practice (page 2 of 2)

Compassion

Just as it’s important for your own emotional coping, compassion is a key part of creating the relationships
you want in your life. Compassion for yourself and for other people will help you thrive. Make sure you don't
neglect one for the other—everyone deserves compassion, especially you!


RELATIONSHIP SKILLS
Instructions: Below is a summary of the relationship skills you've learned about, organized by theme. Jot down some relationship goals you still
want to work toward, and list the skills you think would be most helpful in meeting those goals.


Assertiveness Power Closeness and Intimacy Flexibility

“| Messages” Understanding Power Balances Increasing Social Engagement Self-Compassion Meditation

Making Requests Respect Bookends Starting New Relationships Compassion for Others

Saying No Reducing Emotional Distance Distress Tolerance to Meet Goals

9€€ Repairing Relationships Pros and Cons
after Conflict

Your Relationship Goals Skills Useful to Meet Your Goals


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and
Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page
for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 354]

Narrative Therapy
Facing the Past and Imagining the Future

[PAGE 356]

Moving from Skills Training
to Narrative Therapy
How Do You Know Your Client Is Ready?


My silences have not protected me.
Your silence will not protect you.
—AUDRE LORDE (1984, p. 40)


The transition to focused attention on trauma memories is often associated with increased
anxiety and discomfort for a client, and sometimes for a therapist as well. Therapists often
fear that their clients will get worse, suffer symptom exacerbation, or flee from the therapy
when confronting painful memories. If not fearful of the task itself, therapists often uneasily
inquire, “How will I know that my client is ready for narrative work?”
Both a therapist and a client need to keep in mind that some amount of increased
anxiety in the anticipation of the task and in the initial efforts of confronting the memories
is inevitable. It is frightening to face what one fears. However, it is our experience that narrative work is more difficult to think about than to do. The anticipatory anxiety resulting
from imagining the next steps often requires more emotion management than the actual
effort involved when therapist and client structure, agree upon, and begin the task. The
skills training sessions have prepared the client and therapist for this work: The two of them
have an established working relationship; the client has developed sufficient skills and selfconfidence to face difficult emotions; and they have some amount of trust in the therapist
to guide them safely and effectively through the process. The STAIR module enhances two
therapeutic features that are important to successful narrative work.


Therapist’s Knowledge of the Client

First, the therapist is by now thoroughly familiar with the client’s trauma history, symptoms, and coping skills. The therapist is aware of the severity of the client's fear and emotional reactivity; has a working knowledge of the client's general coping style and distress


339

[PAGE 357]

340 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


tolerance; and has been able to evaluate, facilitate, and observe the clients skills strengths
and areas of vulnerability. All of this information helps the therapist proceed effectively in
the therapeutic task during the narrative work, which is to modulate the client’s emotional
experience. This task includes both encouraging the client to provide more specific and
extended articulation of feelings and beliefs than they otherwise would have, and helping
the client ease up on or move away from material that is overwhelming.


Shared Understanding and Commitment

The STAIR sessions also provide the template for the working relationship between therapist and client. The therapist’s knowledge of the client is the result of a process in which the
therapist identifies and characterizes the client's problems and skills, so that the client can
confirm, correct, adjust, or extend the developing picture. This process engenders in the
client a sense of being recognized and understood. The client develops confidence in the
therapist's growing knowledge of their strengths and weaknesses. In addition, both client
and therapist develop a specific language for referring to and describing internal emotional
states and the traumatic memories. Lastly, the treatment goals and the means to reach these
goals are repeatedly reviewed and take concrete shape through the emergence of the clients specific vulnerabilities, emotional reactivity, and strengths. Ideally, the therapist and
client will be in agreement toward the end of the skills training work that the next task is the
narrative work, and will have a good sense of how this task will go. Agreement on goals and
the means to reach these goals, based on solid knowledge of the client’s symptoms, needs,
and strengths, secures the therapeutic foundation and provides confidence in both therapist
and client for successful narrative work.


GUIDELINES FOR REVIEWING READINESS
FOR NARRATIVE THERAPY


There are no hard and fast rules about when to begin narrative work. Some clients may be
ready in the second session, while others may not be prepared to do so for many months.
The more important questions are whether an individual client is ready and whether the
treatment relationship meets the criteria described above. This is a clinical judgment that
therapists make on a case-by-case basis. The following basic questions may be helpful in
assessing whether moving to the narrative component is indicated and appropriate for a
certain client at a particular time in treatment. The assessment of readiness is helped if both
therapist and client keep in mind the core features of narrative processing of the trauma
(see Box 20.1).


Is the Client Committed to the Treatment?

Before embarking on narrative work, the therapist must have a sense of the client's motivation, ability, and willingness. Psychotherapy in general, and trauma treatment in particular,
are challenging processes that require considerable investment and effort on the part of the

[PAGE 358]

20. Moving from Skills Training to Narrative Therapy 341


The Purpose and Nature of Narrative Therapy

The goal of trauma narration is for the client to experience trauma-related feelings in depth,
but while safe and with control. Understood in this way, trauma narration is not a direct reex-
periencing of the past. Rather, trauma narration allows the client to visit the past with the tools
of the present, in the safety of the present, and with the companionship of an ally from the
present.

Through the use of emotion management skills and awareness of the safety features of
their current environment, the client reexperiences fear, but in a safe environment and without
being overwhelmed by it. The client comes into contact with the feeling that there is no escape
from traumatic events and memories, but that they have survived their past and the past cannot
harm them. The client feels the anger and sadness of being betrayed, abandoned, and hurt by
important people in their life, but with the therapist’s presence, they need not feel obliterated
by this knowledge. The client reveals the shame they feel about their trauma, and feels com-
forted by the compassion of an empathetic therapist.


client (as well as the therapist) to be fruitful. Even with a high level of motivation, facing
often distressing and painful issues to the extent required to make changes is difficult for
a client; without such motivation, a therapist is fighting an uphill battle. This is not to say
that the client cannot express hesitation, ambivalence, or even resentment about having
these problems as a consequence of traumatic experiences. The client does not necessarily
have to feel positive about or enjoy being in treatment. In addition, a client may go through
periods during the treatment when it feels particularly difficult to sustain involvement (for
any number of reasons). These and other potential obstacles are manageable if they can be
raised and addressed in the context of the therapy, and if they do not interfere with a basic
level of compliance in treatment.
If the therapist doubts a client's level of commitment or ability to participate fully in the
narrative work, then the treatment direction and goals need to be reevaluated in a nonjudgmental and realistic way. The following considerations about past experience in working
with a given client may be helpful in this regard: Up to this point, has the client demonstrated interest and motivation in the treatment? If not, has the client been able to tolerate
and participate in examining obstacles? Has the client made the treatment a priority, or
does therapy tend to take a back seat? Has the client behaved in ways indicating a belief
that the treatment is valuable (e.g., keeping most appointments, being generally on time,
not putting other activities before treatment, doing between-session work, being actively
engaged during sessions)?


Is the Client Relatively Stable at the Present Time?

The therapist evaluates the client's mental status and symptom severity continually throughout the therapy, as these will affect the treatments direction and focus session by session.
However, at this juncture when the therapist is considering whether to begin the narrative

[PAGE 359]

342 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


module, particular attention to assessing the client's current level of stability and current
strengths and weaknesses is indicated.
“Stability” is a relative and hard-to-define term, especially given that so many survivors
of trauma deal with a host of ongoing psychological, physical, and social problems on a daily
basis. Many of our clients have chaotic and overwhelming lives; indeed, this has become the
norm rather than the exception. Also, feeling consistently overwhelmed, “edgy, and easily
emotionally triggered are hallmarks of the PTSD and CPTSD diagnoses for which many
clients qualify (see Chapter 9). These factors make an accurate appraisal of a particular client's current level of stress, capabilities, and limitations challenging. It is important to keep
in mind that for most of these clients there is no “optimal” time to begin narrative work, as
there is typically some kind of disruption or crisis happening in their lives. Waiting until
things are “calm” is unrealistic, as much of the chaos is perpetuated by the ongoing PTSD/
CPTSD symptoms. Ifa therapist continues to move from crisis to crisis with such a client, it
is the equivalent of continually putting out small fires rather than locating the main source
of the primary fire, which will continue to rage. In fact, many of our clients have already
had this type of experience in previous therapies, which did not systematically address the
trauma memories and associated feelings at the root of their troubling symptoms.
However, if a therapist feels that a client is in a particularly vulnerable or precarious
psychological state in which any additional stress may be intolerable or lead to decompensation, then engaging in narrative work (even in a modified format) is not indicated, as the
potential risks outweigh the benefits. This type of situation most often arises when there
are sudden major stressors or transitions in a clients life (e.g., unexpected death or loss of
family member/friend, recent diagnosis of serious medical condition, loss of job or housing), or when for some reason the client has a particularly pressing situation that requires
immediate attention and a high level of functioning (e.g., work situation that may jeopardize
employment status, acute family emergency). In these cases, delaying narrative work makes
sense, as it requires substantial effort and energy that may be in especially short supply. This
is particularly relevant for clients who have a history of addictive or self-injurious behaviors.


Has the Client Demonstrated Some Capacity for a Therapeutic Alliance?

Addressing the clients capacity for a therapeutic alliance involves taking stock of how the
client has worked with and related to the therapist up until this point. Specific key issues
relevant to survivors of trauma, especially childhood interpersonal trauma, must be considered. Specifically, most of our clients struggle with building and maintaining healthy
interpersonal relationships, and often this particular problem is what has brought them
into treatment. A history of repeated violations by caregivers and others understandably
has a negative impact on a persons ability to develop closeness and trust in relationships,
particularly with those (such as therapists) who may be perceived as authority figures. Thus
ifa client demonstrates guardedness, suspiciousness, anxiety, hostility, or fear at times with
the therapist, this is not surprising and is not in itself an indication that the client cannot
develop an effective working relationship. In fact, these difficult feelings in the therapy
relationship can be used in a beneficial manner if the client can directly express them or
tolerate discussion of them.

[PAGE 360]

20. Moving from Skills Training to Narrative Therapy 343


However, if the client has not developed some level of trust with the therapist, has not
been able to take in feedback constructively, or cannot communicate their reservations,
there is cause for concern about moving into narrative work. The client needs to have some
belief, even if it is tenuous, that the therapist is competent and motivated to help rather than
to violate them. If not, it is unlikely that the client will be willing to engage in narrative
processing, during which the therapist will be encouraging them to take risks by stepping
outside their comfort zone. Or the client may agree to proceed with exposure, but may feel
coerced and victimized by the therapist rather than feel that they are actively participating
by their own choice. It is not uncommon in work with survivors of trauma for the therapist
and client to find themselves in respective “perpetrator—victim” roles in the treatment. This
dynamic does not have to be destructive if it can be processed in such a way that allows
the client to recognize how this old relationship pattern related to past trauma is being
generalized to the current situation. However, if the client continues to feel predominantly
controlled, manipulated, or coerced by the therapist, narrative work is likely to be untherapeutic at best and retraumatizing at worst. One option is to continue trying to process these
issues, with the hope of developing a more collaborative relationship before reconsidering
narrative work. Alternatively, if this type of dialogue is not possible and the relationship
continues in a similar vein over time, the therapist discusses the option of maintaining the
treatment with a sole focus on further developing STAIR skills or of referring the client to
a different therapist or treatment.


Has the Client Been Able to Learn and Use Skills Presented
in the STAIR Module?

The STAIR Narrative Therapy program is designed so that before beginning intensive and
emotionally demanding narrative work, the client has had the opportunity to learn skills
to manage affective and interpersonal difficulties. We have typically found in our research
that a 2-month (approximately 10-session) module of skill-based interventions is an adequate
period of time for most clients to develop a basic repertoire of skills that they can experiment with in stressful situations. Of course, there are important individual differences—
depending on how much time clients have devoted to practicing the skills both within and
outside sessions, as well as their pretreatment level of coping skills.
It is not necessary or realistic to wait until clients demonstrate complete mastery over
the skills they have been introduced to before making the transition to narrative work,
especially given that continued work on skill building is integral to the Narrative Therapy
module. Rather, it is important that the clients have been able to learn basics and have
begun to use them outside sessions to cope with difficult feelings or situations. Ifa client is
not exhibiting some degree of competence and confidence in using skills, then the STAIR
module of treatment may need to be prolonged before narrative work begins. Questions
to consider include the following: Has the client been interested in or found some value
in learning the skills? Has the client practiced skill-building exercises regularly between
sessions? Has the client made any modifications to skills that indicate an effort to integrate
them into the client’s own life? Has the client used skills independently both within and
outside sessions with some success? Since narrative work will require the client to draw on

[PAGE 361]

344 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


some of the skills the client has learned in managing overwhelming emotions, it is important to review with the client which particular skills feel most beneficial and which skills
need continued practice.


Might the Client Be Interested in Participating in “Conjoint Treatment”?

An alternative that we have found useful for clients who want to do narrative work but also
want to continue intensive skills training is “conjoint treatment.” In this arrangement, the
client continues STAIR with the current therapist, but goes to another for the narrative
work. The costs and time commitment for this type of approach need to be considered, but
we have found this to work well: A client is able to maintain a useful treatment and good
relationship with one therapist while engaging with another for more short-term and intensive work. This is also a good solution for situations where the primary therapist is trained
in STAIR but not in Narrative Therapy.


To conclude, there is no perfect time to begin narrative work. The decision to make the
transition from STAIR to Narrative Therapy is made by the therapist and client together,
and is informed by the therapist's clinical judgment. Critical for this transition is that both
the therapist and the client believe the client is ready for narrative work and can be successful. This belief, especially for the client, may be tentative. As we state above, most clients
and therapists have some anxiety in anticipating this component of the treatment, but this
anxiety tends to dissipate once the narrative processing has begun.

[PAGE 362]

Introduction to Narrative Therapy


I know this story well, because I have been stuck inside it. I have lived
with its causes and effects, its details and indelible lessons my entire
life... . And if I ever hope to leave this place, I must tell what I know.
So let me begin.
—MIKAL GILMORE (1994, pp. x-xi)


The goal of Session 11 is to orient the client to the narrative work that will begin in Session
12. The therapist provides a clear description and rationale for the use of Narrative Therapy.
The therapist and client also review coping skills learned in previous sessions and identify
ways in which these skills will support the goal of completing narrative work. Lastly, the
therapist and client identify specific trauma memories that will be narrated, organizing
them by the level of distress each of these memories causes, so that the narrative work can
be planned with sensitivity to distress management.
Interwoven into these preparatory activities are the repeated reflections that, while
painful, the task of revisiting and making sense of the traumatic past will allow the client to
be freed of it. In telling about it, the client will confront, understand, and eventually master
the trauma. By critically examining its causes and harmful consequences, the client will
summon the reasons and the will to change their beliefs and behaviors.
Lastly, because Narrative Therapy is explicitly a narrative process, it conveys the message that a life story is composed of a past, present, and future. The client's retelling of
the trauma both establishes and reinforces its “pastness.” Moreover, narration assumes a
chronological structure that not only allows the trauma to be located placed firmly in the
past, but prompts the client to consider the present and imagine a future. Through narration, clients create important links between their past and present, as well as potential
relationships among the past, present, and an imagined future. Through Narrative Therapy,
clients express themselves and become the owner of their life stories. Box 21.1 outlines the
theme and curriculum for this session.


345

[PAGE 363]

346 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Theme and Curriculum for Session 11
Introduction to Narrative Therapy


Narrative Therapy involves a client’s repeated telling of specific traumatic memories, organiz-
ing these memories into coherent life events, critically evaluating their meaning, and delib-
erating about their place in the client's life history. Confronting the memories leads to the
realization that the traumatic images and thoughts are simply memories that have no real
power over the client. In addition, telling about the trauma allows the client to organize the
traumatic events in a way that helps them understand what happened and explore their mean-
ing. The client identifies beliefs about the self and others (relationship models) that emerged
from the narratives, with the goal of understanding that these beliefs belong to a particular life
context—namely, a traumatic past. The circumstances of the client's life have changed, and
therefore these old beliefs and guidelines for living, which were once adaptive, are no longer
necessary or even valuable. The client is free to choose alternative strategies for living.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Bring a copy each of Handouts 21.1 and 21.2, as well as several copies of Relationship Patterns
Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4). This session is 60 minutes in duration.


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the current session.
Provide overview of Narrative Therapy.
Review application of emotion regulation skills.
Confirm client's commitment to narrative work.
Create memory hierarchy.
Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
Read Overview of Narrative Therapy handout.
Complete distress tolerance exercise (Pros and Cons) for engaging in narrative work.
Complete Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 twice during week.
Practice Focused Breathing twice a day, and other emotion regulation skills as relevant.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 364]

21. Introduction to Narrative Therapy 347


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 21.1. Overview of Narrative Therapy

Handout 21.2. Memory Hierarchy

Additional copies of Handout 16.4. Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


At the end of the last session of STAIR (Session 10), the client has been asked to makea list
of questions they might have about Narrative Therapy. The therapist and client now review
these questions. The therapist has prompted the client to consider issues such as whether
the format of this new approach is clear, whether they understand the rationale and procedure for Narrative Therapy, and what concerns and fears they may have about starting
Narrative Therapy. Often the client's questions will be answered during the course of this
session. But the therapist now takes the time to answer each question, directly and briefly,
and to state that more details about the process will be reviewed in this session. The therapist also reviews the Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 copies completed by the client,
and checks in regarding whether the client has maintained emotion regulation skills practice during the week. Clients sometimes experience increased stress in anticipation of the
narrative work, and mentioning this might be helpful. The therapist can remind the client
that maintaining regular practice of emotion regulation skills will contribute to emotional
well-being.


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


The goal of this session is to prepare the client for Narrative Therapy. After checking in with
the client about their feelings of anticipation about this next step, the therapist begins by
communicating that the purpose of this session is to introduce and orient them to the narrative work, so that they will know what to expect before beginning the process. Providing
this structure is critical in giving the client the message that this work will be approached
gradually, at a pace that will allow them to raise questions and concerns. This is particularly
important for survivors of trauma, who commonly feel taken off guard and not in control of
what is happening to them. It is also important that the therapist convey a sense of reassurance and empathy, because the client is likely to feel unprepared for narrative work. This is
often the case no matter how much work clients have done on developing coping skills, or
how clearly they have articulated alternative models for living in the here and now. The past
is essentially uncharted territory. A critical part of the narrative process is that the client
comes to feel strongly anchored in the present, and with the attitude that the resources they
have within the context of the treatment are more powerful than any they had in the past.
This feeling can be set in motion through a review of their coping skills, reassurance that

[PAGE 365]

348 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


the therapist is aware of their strengths and vulnerabilities, and promises that the therapist
will be there to support and guide them in the process.


PROVIDE OVERVIEW OF NARRATIVE THERAPY


The therapist lets the client know that they will begin the narrative work in the next session.
Although the client has been given the rationale for the narrative process at the beginning
of treatment (Session 1), the therapist now reviews it in detail and describes the specific
procedures involved in Narrative Therapy. The therapist delivers the information as though
they are providing it for the first time, because many clients may not have retained important parts of the information they were initially given. The therapist also tells the client
that they will be given a written version of this information at the end of the session, in the
form of a take-home sheet on Narrative Therapy for review (see Handout 21.1, Overview
of Narrative Therapy). A description of the purpose and implementation of each aspect of
Narrative Therapy is provided below. Narrative Therapy has three goals: (1) to reduce the
client’s fear and PTSD symptoms; (2) to enable the client to organize the trauma memories
in a coherent and meaningful way; and (3) to help the client develop a coherent life story by
understanding how past trauma influences current feelings, beliefs, and behaviors.


First Goal of Narrative Therapy: Reduce Fear and PTSD Symptoms

Narrative work begins with repeated telling of trauma memories until they are no longer
frightening. The therapist reviews the rationale both for this repeated telling of the trauma,
as a skill to reduce fear, and for the process by which it is accomplished, based in the logic
of prolonged exposure (see Foa & Rothbaum, 1998; Rothbaum & Foa, 1999). Talking about
the memories is not identical to reliving them, as the client is in reality safe. This knowledge
allows the task to be conducted with greater ease. The therapist starts by succinctly describing what the first step in narrative work will entail:


“What we will be doing in the narrative sessions is revisiting your traumatic experi-
ences—the ones that continue to cause distress and disruption in your life. I use the
word ‘revisiting rather than ‘reliving, because during this process the aim is not to
submerge yourself completely in the past, but rather to have one foot in the past and
the other grounded in the present. The ultimate goal is to help you make sense of these
disturbing memories, so that you will no longer feel so controlled and overwhelmed
by them. During the narrative sessions, you will be describing narratives of your trau-
matic experiences and repeating them as many times as needed, in order to diminish
the level of anxiety and fear associated with them. I will be there to provide support
and to remind you that no matter how intense it may feel, you are not in the traumatic
experience, but are instead in a safe environment.
“You will see that with repeated telling, your fear reactions to the event will
diminish. This process is called ‘habituation. The more often you tell the story, the less

[PAGE 366]

21. Introduction to Narrative Therapy 349


frightened you will become, and the better this treatment will work. You will eventu-
ally experience the memories of the past as being in the past. That is, they are only
memories and cannot harm you.”


Provide rationale for recording narratives

The narratives will be recorded during these sessions. The client will take each recording
home, with the goal of listening to it at least once a day. The recording contains not only a
narrative of the event, but also the discussion between client and therapist about the meaning of the trauma, the clients explanation of who they felt themselves to be in that story, an
exploration of the possible trauma-related relationship models embedded in the narrative,
and a consideration of how current relationship models developed during STAIR might differ. Listening to the recording will contribute to the clients habituation to the fear-eliciting
aspects of the narrative. It will also provide an opportunity for the client to reflect on their
reactions to the story and its meaning to them, both when it happened and now. The therapist describes the recording of each narrative in the first session, but a reminder of the
rationale for recording will help clients orient themselves to the work and elicit any specific
concerns they might have.


“Each time you narrate your trauma memories, we will record them. Listen to the
recording every day, and make sure you make time to do this. You will learn that a
memory is just that—a memory—and that you have nothing to fear from recalling
these past events, although doing so is painful. You will also listen to the discussion
we will have about the meaning of the trauma. You will come to see that some of the
negative beliefs you hold about yourself and others have their roots in these traumatic
experiences. Recognizing their source will allow you to make sense of why you have
the beliefs and behaviors you do. This is an important step in freeing yourself from
them. The conditions of your life are different now, and the old beliefs do not need to
hold power over you any more.”


Respond to client’s concerns

The client is likely to have a range of reactions to hearing the descriptions above, such as
anxiety, disbelief, confusion, and curiosity. It is important to recognize and address these
feelings and concerns. When presenting the rationale for repeated narration of the trauma,
the therapist explains the basis for recommending the procedure to this particular client at
this particular time. This involves reviewing how methods the client has used in the past,
such as avoidance, have not worked and indeed may have exacerbated the client's symptoms. In addition, the past trauma has invaded the present, so that the trauma continues to
shape the client’s current behaviors in negative ways.
The therapist is mindful that the client may have some strong reactions to hearing that
their ways of dealing with trauma may in fact have resulted in an increase of symptoms and
problems. The therapist will want to “normalize” this way of managing painful experiences

[PAGE 367]

350 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


and provide a sense that the client has been coping as best they could. Doing so minimizes
the possibility that the client will feel criticized or judged for using avoidance or other
unsuccessful skills. Instead, the therapist emphasizes to the client that their efforts have
been attempts to cope with very stressful life circumstances while having limited resources
or options available to them. The therapist reminds the client that they have developed
skills in treatment that will enable them to engage in effective ways of coping, including the
narrative process they are about to use.
In the service of building the client’s willingness to trust the therapist during this new
module of treatment, the therapist acknowledges that processing the memories connected
with the trauma may be frightening at first. At the same time, the therapist provides assurance and belief in the narrative process by communicating that it will get easier, and that
the client is likely to see not only a decrease in the fear and distress related to the traumatic
memories, but positive changes in their attitudes toward themselves and their relationships.


Second Goal of Narrative Therapy: Organize Memories in a Coherent
and Meaningful Way

In addition to reducing anxiety and fear, narrative work helps organize the trauma memories and allows discussion of their meaning and impact on the client. The therapist describes
the narration of the trauma as a skill for making sense of traumatic memories. This point
has already been discussed in Session 1, but the therapist reintroduces and expands on the
topic.
Specifically, the therapist highlights the contribution of developmental stage to the
impact of trauma. The therapist reminds the client about the particularly disorganizing
force of trauma occurring during childhood, when cognitive and emotional resources to
respond to trauma are developmentally limited. In addition, the survivor probably lacked
social resources in terms of parental or other social support in understanding or making
sense of the trauma when it happened, or even later in their lives. Survivors of abuse and
other traumatic experiences often report they experienced negative reactions from others,
such as disbelief, blame, and minimization, when they attempted to disclose their experiences. Thus many survivors have never had the opportunity to tell their stories in a supportive context that will help them organize and make sense of their memories.
The therapist can say something like this, for example, to a client who experienced
abuse in childhood:


“Childhood abuse, like all traumas, is an event that overwhelms a person’s senses. In
times of extreme stress or danger, the typical mechanisms we have in place to interpret
and process experiences become overwhelmed. We are particularly vulnerable to this
type of disruption if we are faced with traumatic events during childhood, when these
capacities for handling incoming information have not yet been fully developed. As a
result, the memory of the trauma is often a disorganized, fragmented mess—parts of a
puzzle in a heap. Many symptoms of PTSD, such as nightmares and intrusive images,
reflect the disorganized nature of a trauma in the persons memory. The process of

[PAGE 368]

21. Introduction to Narrative Therapy 351


putting the pieces of the puzzle together includes organizing the images into a coherent
memory. We will be doing this by organizing the events chronologically and putting
words to the experience.”


Individuals who experience trauma in childhood may have difficulty in putting the
pieces of their memories together, as the experiences may have been mislabeled, or the
attributed contexts in which the trauma happened may have been described in misleading
ways by the perpetrators. Furthermore, children rely heavily on parents as interpreters of
experience and as the central sources of names for things. In cases where children's parents
are the perpetrators, the parents themselves rarely have the motivation or ability to label
their experiences correctly or to discuss them coherently. Lastly, reliance on other adults
may have been of little value. Childhood maltreatment is frequently stigmatized; it is an
event (or set of events) that is not typically part of mainstream conversation in many educational and social environments. As a result, the event or events do not get named or understood. Children who have been maltreated often cannot even describe what has happened,
let alone make sense of what has happened and why. The reason, purpose, and impact of the
experience remain mysterious. It is essentially “unreal” and incoherent—often disregarded
by the individual, but influential all the same. The therapist can describe the situation to a
survivor of abuse in childhood as follows:


“Meaning is often made by putting words to our experiences. This capacity is disturbed
during traumatic events, leading some to describe trauma as a ‘wordless horror. The
process of organizing memories with words may be particularly difficult for survivors
of childhood abuse. Children learn and understand life experiences through communi-
cation and discussion with their parents. If their parents were the abusers, the children
are at a particular disadvantage in making sense of their experience, as their parents
may mislabel or deny the experience. In addition, opportunities to make sense of the
event (such as disclosing or fully describing the experience to others) are often not
options, since abuse is often a stigmatized experience that adults may feel uncomfort-
able discussing. As a result, the impact of these experiences on the children’s beliefs
and feelings remain unexamined and disconnected from the rest of life. Still, they con-
tinue to influence thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, in ways that are often outside of
awareness or control.”


The therapist can also highlight the importance of telling what happened as an opportunity for the client to label and define their experience appropriately. The therapist characterizes this notion by reference to the often-used “file cabinet” analogy for memory organization. The analogy can be described to a survivor of childhood abuse as follows:


“The mind can be viewed as a kind of ‘file cabinet’ in which experiences are organized
and stored. When something has its place in the file cabinet, the information in the file
and the feelings that go along with it are more manageable, and new experiences can
be integrated in the future.

[PAGE 369]

352 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


“For example, we have files for things like ‘school, where we store information
about how to act in school, things other people have told us about school, and our mem-
ories of school-related experiences. Over the years, a child accumulates knowledge of
what school is like, how one is supposed to behave, what is expected at school, and so
on. Parents, siblings, peers, and others help the child label and process these experi-
ences by communicating about school.
“In contrast, there are no clear or accurate labels or organizing systems in which
childhood abuse experiences can be meaningfully filed. There may be no label on the
file, or perhaps one that is vague (Special Times with Dad’) or inaccurate (Things That
Everyone Does with a Drama Coach’). The files are placed in some separate drawer,
or, if they are mislabeled, exist as part of another set of experiences in which they
truly do not fit. As a result, these experiences do not become integrated with all other
information about ones childhood. Rather, they remain apart from it, or they create an
inaccurate and distorted sense of some of life's themes.”


Third Goal of Narrative Therapy: Create a Coherent Life Story

As the discussion above suggests, if an individuals memories of trauma are not organized
or appropriately labeled, they remain disconnected from the rest of the persons life experience and meaning system. Narrative work helps integrate the trauma into the context of the
individual
s life experience, particularly the impact that it has had on beliefs and life themes.


Relationship models connect past with present

The identification of problematic relationship patterns and of the relationship models driving them has been an integral component of the therapeutic work in STAIR. Narrative
Therapy takes a next important step by identifying the particular ways in which problematic
relationship models have their source in the client’s past trauma. While the type of analysis
conducted during STAIR acknowledges that current relationship models represent adaptations to past events, Narrative Therapy involves a detailed review and organization of the
trauma that allows the client to make clearer and more specific connections between their
particular past traumas and problems they experience in the here and now. Exploration of
the clients traumatic experiences helps resolve the mystery of their current behavior. The
past is connected to the present through the identification of trauma-generated relationship models that have a negative impact on daily living. Their current behavior no longer
appears frighteningly irrational and nonsensical. The client now understands the motivation
for their behavior.
The circumstances of the trauma articulated in the narrative allow the client to understand the logic of their models and the source of these models in traumatic experiences.
This often enables the survivor to develop sympathy for their past self and understanding
of the power of the models to intrude into their current life. The therapist can provide an
explanation like this one:

[PAGE 370]

21. Introduction to Narrative Therapy 353


“The belief system you now live with is one of the ways your trauma continues to influ-
ence you. Often you will recognize the relationship models from the work we have
done in STAIR. Others will be new but will make sense, given the particulars of your
trauma as you talk about what happened. One of the most valuable aspects of relation-
ship model identification is that it will help you make sense of your current behaviors.
Often survivors of trauma feel themselves to be crazy because they do not understand
why they behave the way they do, particularly when the behaviors seem at odds with
their desired goals. These behaviors are often driven by models formulated in the con-
text of your trauma and are accurate reflections of your trauma circumstances. The
identification of relationship models often solves the mystery of what appears to be
nonsensical or irrational behaviors. You have a reason for acting the way you do.”


The therapist notes that the models from the traumatic past will be critically examined
and directly contrasted with the models that have been generated and tested in STAIR.
This direct comparison will help the client distinguish beliefs based in the past from beliefs
adaptive for the present. This comparison will help the client separate the traumatic past
from the present. It is intended to give the client a sense of freedom from the past and a
sense of choice about how they may live in the present.


Possibility of change supported by recognizing differences
between past and present

Contrasting the internal and external resources of the traumatic past with those of the
present will provide good examples of the fit between an environment and an appropriate
model. For example, trauma narratives will often include themes of powerlessness, vulnerability, incompetence, and dependence, and these themes will be reflected in the client's
relationship models. However, the current life circumstances of clients in this treatment are
often far improved, and the therapist reminds such a client of essential differences as they
pertain to their particular situation. Examples may include such differences as these: A client no longer lives in close proximity to the perpetrator; they do not rely on the perpetrator
for food or shelter, but have some (even if limited) resources of their own; they are much
stronger both physically and mentally than they were during the trauma; they are able to
fend for themselves in work and sleep through the night without expectation of intrusion or
retraumatization; they can come and go out of their dwelling as they please.
As the client recognizes the difference between the context of their present and their
past, the client will gain additional motivation and confidence in adopting new models and
expectations. Awareness of the distinction between the past and the present will reduce
automatic repetition of trauma-based behaviors and functioning. When clients recognize
that many of their current maladaptive feelings and beliefs have their origins in the trauma,
they will find it easier to develop awareness of the anachronistic and generally counterproductive nature of these feelings and beliefs in their present environment, and to become
motivated to develop present-focused feelings, beliefs, and behaviors.

[PAGE 371]

354 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Validating the past by understanding it rather than living it

Many survivors of childhood maltreatment have difficulty giving up certain traumagenerated behaviors, because they are among the few (or the only) forms of validation that
the traumatic past actually happened. These survivors were often in circumstances where
telling about what happened led to threats, punishment, or denial. Thus the survivors may
experience their trauma-generated behaviors as evidence of their own experiences. For
some such survivors, giving up these behaviors would mean “betraying” their own past and
their former selves.
The development and articulation of trauma-related relationship models constitute
a healthy and powerful alternative means by which to acknowledge and respect the past
trauma. The client’s awareness of changes in their circumstances allows them, with the help
of their therapist, to develop and test new models. As clients identify models generated by
their trauma and develop alternative models for their life in the present, these two sets of
models can be placed side by side and examined for how they mark the evolution of change
in clients’ sense of self and opportunities for engagement with life. A therapist may explain
narrative analysis to a client in the following way:


“Narrative analysis is the experience of going back to the past, with the final goal of
creating an alternative assessment and understanding of that experience for living in
the present. During the narrative, you will experience many emotions and percep-
tions from the past as you felt them as a child, but will simultaneously be viewing the
experience from your position as an adult. An adult is a person with additional life
experiences and an experientially based understanding of the differences between the
needs and abilities of children and those of adults. Given this additional perspective,
the meaning of the traumatic event as it was formed during the trauma is available to
you for reassessment.
“This process is not intended to distort or minimize the trauma, or to diminish its
importance. The goal is for you to have respect for your past, but an emerging aware-
ness that you are not the same person as you were in childhood and need not have the
same feelings or beliefs about your trauma as you did then.”


REVIEW APPLICATION OF EMOTION REGULATION SKILLS


The therapist refers to skills the client has learned over the course of treatment to cope with
anxiety, as a way to remind the client that they are actually more equipped to do the narrative work than they may feel they are. The therapist encourages the continued use and
practice of coping skills, especially Focused Breathing, which will be called on during the
narrative process. This is an opportune time to revisit the concepts presented in Session 5
about distress tolerance (see Chapter 14). During this session, the idea of making the choice
to tolerate distress in the service of trying to reach an identified higher-level goal has been
introduced. Having the client apply these skills to the narrative (identifying the goal as well

[PAGE 372]

21. Introduction to Narrative Therapy 355


as the Pros and Cons of tolerating associated distress) before beginning is another powerful
way to provide inspiration for the work ahead. The therapist may suggest that the client do
the Pros and Cons exercise on paper before the next session, so that it can be referred to
when sustained motivation is needed throughout the process. Also, by anticipating potential
obstacles and distress, both client and therapist can begin to think of ways the client might
approach these challenges before they arise.
The therapist mentions again that the client will set the pace of the narrative work,
and that the therapist will follow, support, and encourage the client. The therapist may also
enumerate the client’s strengths and convey a sense of their vulnerabilities, so that the client
feels that the therapist truly understands them. The therapist then inquires whether either
the client or the therapist may have overlooked any other aspects of the client's strengths or
vulnerabilities.
Finally, it is important for the client to keep in mind that narrative sessions include
continued commitment to maintaining good functioning in the here and now. The therapist
reminds the client that throughout all the narrative sessions, the work on further developing
and refining interpersonal skills will continue. This work will be particularly highlighted
as the interpersonal themes picked up in the narrative work are further characterized and
refined. Experientially based alternative models will be explored and contrasted with these
old beliefs associated with traumatic events. The therapist reassures the client that all interpersonal tasks will be based on the resources available to support the client’s success.


CONFIRM CLIENT’S COMMITMENT TO NARRATIVE WORK

Review Client’s Understanding of Rationale for Narrative Therapy

After presenting all of the information described above, the therapist checks in with the
client to see if they have understood the main points, and encourages them to share their
reactions and questions. It is expected that the client will still have some anxiety and uncertainty about beginning the narrative; ideally, however, at this point they are clear about its
purpose and goals. The narrative work does not proceed until the client generally understands and accepts the rationale for it, because otherwise ongoing and active collaboration
between the therapist and client is not possible. Both the rationale and the therapeutic
alliance need to be established before this work begins, as these are essential skills in sustaining the client's motivation and participation in this challenging yet potentially powerful
process.


Pian Number of Sessions and Timeline

Once the client expresses an adequate understanding and acceptance of the process and
goals of Narrative Therapy, it is recommended that the therapist discuss “making a commitment’ before turning to the specifics of trauma memories. This entails a verbal contract
in which the client and therapist agree to use the narrative for a set number of sessions (at
least three or four). The duration and intensity of the narrative during these sessions remain

[PAGE 373]

356 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


flexible and will depend on the individual client’s needs and reactions, but the minimum
number of narrative sessions is clearly established before beginning. The impetus for this
intervention is to put a structure in place that will encourage both the therapist and client
to give the narrative work an adequate trial. The initial narrative sessions in particular tend
to be the most challenging. It is not uncommon for client and/or therapist to want to retreat
after an emotionally intense and difficult narrative session. This could, however, lead the
client and therapist to abandon the treatment too early, based on the erroneous conclusion
that the client is not actually ready to proceed.
In our experience, it is not only ineffective but can in fact be detrimental to start the
narrative and then end it prematurely within a session or within the treatment. The process of starting and then abruptly stopping the narrative may significantly raise the clients
anxiety level, because not enough time has elapsed to allow habituation to occur. This type
of experience could inadvertently confirm the client's belief that approaching the traumatic
memories is dangerous, and that they are incapable of managing the emotions associated
with them. This could in turn result in an increase of symptoms, particularly phobic avoidance of trauma-related cues, as well as fear of engaging in future treatment.


CREATE MEMORY HIERARCHY

Generate List of Trauma Memories

During the pretreatment assessment, the client has probably reported the general nature of
their traumatic experiences, but has not provideda series of specific memories. At this point,
the therapist will need to assist the client in identifying several memories for use in the narrative work. The client does not need to go into extensive detail at this time, as the present
goal is to identify the most critical memories for later work, not (yet) to conduct a narration
of the event. The development of a hierarchy of distress is a common cognitive-behavioral
skill; its application to trauma memories has been developed and nicely described by Foa
and colleagues (see Foa & Rothbaum, 1998; Rothbaum & Foa, 1999). The procedure has
three steps. First, the therapist elicits several traumatic memories from the client (the number of these typically ranges from 4 to 10), taking brief notes so that each memory can be
referred to later. Once this list is complete, the client assigns a number that reflects the
level of distress provoked by each memory, using a scale from 0 (no distress) to 100 (highest
possible distress). The units on this scale are typically referred to as “subjective units of distress’ (SUDs). The memory hierarchy is completed when the memories are rank-ordered,
with revision as necessary following the SUDs ratings provided by the client. This process
usually takes about 20-30 minutes. The therapist can complete two organized and clean
copies (one for the client and one for the therapist) of Handout 21.2, the Memory Hierarchy
sheet, after the session. Before the client and therapist start to develop the hierarchy, the
therapist explains to the client:


“Before beginning the narrative work, we need to decide which memories it makes
the most sense for us to focus on. In order to do so, I am going to ask you to identify

[PAGE 374]

21. Introduction to Narrative Therapy 357


your most important trauma memories and describe how they continue to affect you
emotionally. In addition, you may want to identify additional memories of traumatic
experiences that occurred later in life. The goal here is not to go into extensive detail
about your memories at this point, but rather to identify and generally describe what
you believe are the most significant trauma memories, so we can have a road map for
future narrative sessions. So I would like you to think and tell me about the particular
memories that are most disturbing and disruptive to you in your current life.”


The therapist must encourage the client to discuss trauma memories in enough detail
that they can be briefly recorded and referred to individually (e.g., “the time my father
locked me in the closet”), but not in so much detail that the client feels overwhelmed.
Achieving this balance requires the therapist to be active in containing the client during
the session, so that the client does not open up without having time to process traumatic
memories within the session.
The therapist is encouraged to keep probing to a minimum in the process of developing the memory hierarchy. If a client is having trouble, the therapist may want to ask some
simple and specific questions about the perpetrator, the client’s age when each traumatic
event occurred, and/or the client's emotional reaction, in order to help the client articulate
basics that they remember. Through the narrative process, the client may or may not be able
to remember more details. The communication to the client is that whatever they remember
is a good starting point, and that specific details about content are not likely to be as important as their emotional experience of the event(s).


Dealing with Challenges in Creating the Memory Hierarchy

Lengthy or overly elaborated reporting of memories

If the client is having trouble containing their description of an important memory, the
therapist sensitively redirects the client to talking more briefly and generally about what
happened and moving on to another memory, by saying something like this:


“The information you are sharing with me is very important, and I appreciate your will-
ingness to do so. We will have the opportunity to process it in our narrative sessions.
However, right now we need to focus on identifying and briefly describing relevant
memories, so that we have a sense of the big picture before getting into the specific
details.”


Few and fragmented memories

Some clients may have the opposite problem with this task: They have difficulty spontaneously providing specific information about their memories, and only relay brief and vague
snippets. This may be because the details of the events were never encoded due to dissociation at the time of the trauma, or because they have strenuously avoided thinking about the

[PAGE 375]

358 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


distressing memories for so long. Whatever the reason, it is important to assure the client
that having incomplete or fragmented memories of traumatic experiences is common and
will not prevent the client from doing and benefiting from narrative work.


Abundant and diverse trauma memories

Many clients will have long and complicated trauma histories, which makes developing a
hierarchy of memories particularly challenging. It is important for the therapist to be aware
that this could be overwhelming; in such a case, the therapist explains to the client that
they are not being asked to specify every memory, but rather to identify the ones that feel
the most significant in the present. Some clients ask for more guidance on what memories
are most important to focus on. Such memories include those that are the focus of a client's
current reexperiencing symptoms (such as flashbacks or nightmares), or those where the
related feelings and beliefs are most clearly interfering with the client’s current life. By
reminding the client to focus on the most significant memories, the therapist decreases the
likelihood of the client’s being flooded with anxiety or becoming detached in the face of
intense emotion. However, the therapist still needs to check in repeatedly on how the client
is feeling during this process.
Clients who have been repeatedly maltreated over a long period of time may describe
a composite or confluence of many different episodes. This is to be expected. Again, the
therapist encourages such clients to report what they do remember, rather than worrying
about teasing apart the specificity or sequence of the memories at this point. If it is clear,
however, that in the process of relaying one specific traumatic memory the client moves
into talking about another specific memory, the therapist sensitively asks the client to stay
focused on the first memory; after completing that description, the client can return to talking about the second memory. It is reassuring for clients who have numerous traumas to be
aware that often work on one memory will carry over to other memories—ones that involve
similar types of trauma and/or similar emotional responses to the trauma.


Explain the SUDs Rating Scale

The therapist tells the client that the SUDs ratings will be used in making decisions about
which memories to focus on during narrative sessions and in what sequence. Before the
SUDs scores are used to rate memories, the therapist operationalizes the meaning of these
scores with each client, to ensure that the ratings can be used meaningfully and consistently. This is done by generating anchor points with the client, using the client’s own words
and descriptions as a guide. For example, 0 might be “no distress whatsoever” or “a totally
neutral state in recalling this memory”; 50 might be “moderate distress” or “very aware of
feeling distress, but definitely manageable’; and 100 might be “severe distress and discomfort” or “I cant manage.” Using the analogy of a thermometer can be helpful. The therapist
explains: “The SUDs scale is used to get a quick read on your current level of distress and
anxiety, in much the way that a thermometer is used to gauge temperature. A SUDS score

[PAGE 376]

21. Introduction to Narrative Therapy 359


identifies the level of anxiety/distress the client is currently feeling about a memory, rather
than what they may have experienced at the time of the traumatic event.


Finalize Memory Hierarchy

After obtaining the SUDs ratings for all identified memories, the therapist completes the
hierarchy by using Handout 21.2, Memory Hierarchy, to create a list of memories in which
the first entry is the memory with the highest score and the last entry is the memory with
the lowest score. Both the memory and its SUDs score are noted. The therapist will want
to check in with the client to be sure that the memories rated with the highest scores are in
fact the most distressing. In cases where more than one memory is given the highest rating,
the therapist and client will want to think further about which of these memories is the most
disruptive in the client's current life. The therapist keeps the in-session copy of the Memory
Hierarchy form and will make a copy to give to the client in the next session, plus another
copy for the therapist's own use.


Describe Use of SUDs Ratings during Narratives

The therapist discusses with the client that the SUDs ratings will also be used during the
narrative work itself as a way for the client to indicate how they are feeling immediately
before they begin, during the telling of the story, and immediately after the narrative is
complete. During each session in which the SUDs scores are used, the therapist reminds
the client that the scores are based on how the client is feeling in the present, rather than
how the client felt in the past.


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


The therapist can take this time to review what has been accomplished in the session. The
rationale for conducting Narrative Therapy has been provided; the number of the sessions
and duration of this module has been identified; and the Memory Hierarchy sheet has been
completed. The therapist now congratulates the client for their good work in this session.
The process of memory elucidation, in particular, although not part of the formal narrative
processing, can be quite demanding in its own right—particularly if the client has many
trauma memories to describe. Though it can cause distress, creating a list of significant
trauma memories and having to view them as a whole can also be quite powerful, especially
for those clients who lack compassion for themselves and/or minimize the extent of their
traumatization. It is critical to allow some time at the end of the session to check in with the
client about how it has felt to complete this session. If the client is still aroused or anxious,
the therapist uses this as an opportunity to practice coping skills (e.g., Focused Breathing or
Thought Shifting) before ending the session. It is also important to give the client feedback
and encouragement about the fact that they have been able to complete an important first

[PAGE 377]

360 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


step in the narrative work. The therapist reminds the client that it would not be surprising
if between now and the next session, they find themselves thinking more about their traumatic experiences than usual. This will subside. The therapist encourages the client to use
their emotion regulation skills during the week (e.g., Focused Breathing and Soothing the
Senses) to keep a good balance and to remind them that they are safe now and the memories
are only memories. The narrative work will help the client put the memories into the past,
where they belong and where they cannot harm the client.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


The therapist asks the client to read Handout 21.1, Overview of Narrative Therapy, as it
will be useful in future sessions. The therapist also assigns the distress tolerance exercise
(i.e., evaluating Pros and Cons) in relation to beginning the narrative work. Finally, the client continues completing copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet—2, practicing Focused
Breathing, and engaging in other relevant emotion regulation skills (e.g., Plan Pleasurable
Activities, Thought Shifting, and Positive Self-Statements).

[PAGE 378]

Overview of Narrative Therapy
Beginning in the next session, you will carry out narrative exercises in sessions and every day at home
for the duration of the treatment program. This is very likely to be one of the most difficult parts of your
treatment. However, it will help to bring about long-term relief from your distress and to facilitate positive changes in the way you think about yourself and relate to others. It is important, therefore, that
you do your best to do the narrative work and resist urges to avoid doing it. To assist you, this handout
reviews the rationale and instructions for Narrative Therapy.


RATIONALE

The purpose of narrating the trauma is to have you revisit and organize your trauma memories. It is
not easy to understand and make sense of traumatic experiences. When you are reminded of your
trauma, you may experience extreme anxiety or other negative feelings. So you may tend to push
away or avoid these painful memories. You may tell yourself, “Don’t think about it,” or “I just have to
forget about it.”
But as you have discussed in therapy, no matter how hard you try to push away thoughts about
the trauma, the experiences come back to haunt you through nightmares, flashbacks, fears/phobias,
and negative beliefs about yourself and others. These symptoms serve as signals that the trauma is
still “unfinished business.” This is because avoidance prevents you from processing the thoughts and
feelings that go along with the memories.
After a traumatic event, your mind begins the work of organizing the experience. When various
aspects of the experience are organized into a story, this process is completed. Additionally, your
feelings are organized within the context of the story and as a result become more manageable. The
meaning of the event—particularly beliefs about yourself and the world—is evaluated and placed in
the larger context of other life experiences. If, however, the process is interrupted, the story never gets
organized, and the emotions remain intense and unmanageable. Powerful and emotionally charged
fragments of a story never settle into a sensible or coherent account of what happened or how it
affects you. The unanchored memories dominate your internal experience, leaving you feeling fragmented, disorganized, hostile, out of control, and fearful. Relationships are equally fragmented and
undermined by strong and unexpected emotions. These reactions are often intrusions of unsettled
feelings from the past. They may have little to do with the present.
The goal of Narrative Therapy is to help you process the memories connected with your traumas
and createa life story that (1) helps you understand the trauma’s impact on your feelings and relationships, and (2) allows you to put the past in its place. As you confront the memories and experience
the intense emotions that go with them, the emotions will become less distressing. This process is
called “deconditioning” or “habituation.” In addition, the process of narrating the trauma will help you
distinguish the feelings and beliefs that are results of the trauma from your current desires, wishes,
and plans for yourself—in other words, to separate the past from the present. By identifying the relationship models in your narrative after you finish it or finish listening to a recording, you can explore
how those beliefs influence your functioning in the present, whether they are helpful to you, and how
relevant they are to your current goals. Although these relationship models were consistent with and
adaptive to your traumatic environment, they are not likely to help you now that you are out of this
environment and have goals other than avoiding, escaping, or confronting threat. Awareness of these


(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


361

[PAGE 379]

Overview of Narrative Therapy (page 2 of 2)

models and their lack of relevance to your current life will help you recognize when you are using them
and help you disengage from them. Practice and success with the alternative relationship models that
you have developed in the STAIR treatment module will gradually replace behaviors generated from
the trauma-related models.


PROCEDURE FOR BETWEEN-SESSION NARRATIVE REVIEW
AND ANALYSIS

To help you carry out the narrative work you will do between sessions, your therapist will have you
record the narratives you have completed in your treatment sessions. Listen to the recordings of the
narrative conducted with your therapist in the session, and use the material from the session to guide
you through the narrative analysis (relationship patterns work) again. When you listen to the recording,
if you have trouble arranging the privacy you may need, it may be helpful to use headphones. Try to
find a comfortable place where you will not be disturbed.
During the narrative, try to relive the experience; smell, taste, and feel everything as if you are
really there. Although this can be scary, in the back of your mind you will know that you are safe. Some
people find it helpful to have a trusted family member or friend nearby in another room or available
by phone the first time they do the narrative homework alone. If you feel you will not be able to follow
through without support, you may make arrangements for someone to be present or easily available
to you during the task.
You will use the Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs) during Trauma Narration form, which will be
introduced to you during your first in-session narration, to record your “subjective units of distress”
(SUDs) immediately before and after the narrative. Also note the highest SUDs level you reached during
the narrative. Next, jot down on a copy of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 the event described in
the narrative and the relationship model you associate with this story. If possible, formulate an alternative way of interacting with others and a relationship model that is more representative of the beliefs
you wish to hold about yourself and your relationship with others in the present. If you cannot do this
on your own, you and your therapist will complete this work in your next session.


362

[PAGE 380]

Memory Hierarchy

Number Memory SUDS Score


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


363

[PAGE 381]

Narrative of First Memory

And suddenly it had come to her . . . that the voice she
was hearing was her own, for the first time in her life.
—ANNA QUINDLEN (1992, p. 393)


I. Session 12, the client completes the first trauma narrative. The therapist will help put
the client at ease by reviewing the rationale for Narrative Therapy, identifying the client's
available coping skills, and reminding the client of the therapist's presence as a support. The
client first practices with a neutral memory, in order to become familiar with the structure
and pacing of the narration. The same structure and process are then implemented with a
selected traumatic memory. The main goal of the session is for the client to experience mastery over the memory, so it is important for the client and therapist to titrate the intensity of
the client’s emotions carefully during this process, according to the client's strengths.
When the narrative ends, client and therapist conduct grounding exercises if the client needs these. The client then identifies feelings that emerged from the telling, including
what parts of the story elicited these feelings and how intense they were. Therapist and
client then listen to the recording together. This gives the client some familiarity with the
task before the client listens to the recording at home. It also helps the therapist monitor
and explore the client's reaction to their own story. We have found that clients experience a
range of reactions, many of which appear unavailable when they are engaged in the actual
narration. These often include sympathy for themselves and curiosity—as if they are experiencing themselves as people with histories and with interesting stories to tell. Box 22.1
outlines the theme and curriculum for Session 12 of treatment.


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


Although this is the first session of Narrative Therapy proper, it begins like previous sessions: with a brief check-in about the client’s current emotional state, followed by a review


364

[PAGE 382]

22. Narrative of First Memory 365


Theme and Curriculum for Session 12
Narrative of First Memory


The client's recollection of the trauma is only a memory, and as such it cannot hurt the client.
When the client is able to revisit the memory in a detailed and emotionally alive way, there is
an opportunity to help the client experience mastery over the traumatic memory. When the
client listens to the recording of the narrative plus the narrative analysis of the memory, they
often become aware of feelings that were not available during the telling of the story. These
include sympathy for what they have been through, and curiosity about the self as a person
with a story to tell.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Prepare two completed versions of the Memory Hierarchy (Handout 21.2), one for the client
and one for your own use as the therapist. You will need to make a recording of the trauma
narrative, both to listen to with the client in session and for the client to bring home. Often this
is easiest if done on the client's smartphone, but if the client does not have that capacity, then
identify other options for recording the narrative. Bring a copy each of Handouts 22.1 and 22.2,
and several copies of the Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4). This session is 60
minutes in duration.


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Practice narrative of a neutral memory.
Conduct first narrative of a trauma memory.
Ground the client in the present.
Listen to the first narrative recording together.
Explore beliefs about self and/or others in narrative.
Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 383]

366 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Listen to the recording daily; monitor distress with SUDs, using Subjective Units of Distress
(SUDs) during Trauma Narration form.
Initiate at least one interpersonal situation and practice an alternative relationship model,
using a copy of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 to record the practice and the results;
include emotion regulation skills as relevant to situation.
Continue to practice Focused Breathing twice a day.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Two completed copies of Handout 21.1. Memory Hierarchy

Handout 22.1. Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs) during Trauma Narration (several copies)
Handout 22.2. Assessment of Postnarrative Emotional State
Additional copies of Handout 16.4. Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2


of the client’s skills practice over the week. The planned skills practice from the last session
included reviewing Handout 21.1, Overview of Narrative Therapy; depending on what was
agreed upon with the client, it may also have included completing distress tolerance exercises, review of their trauma narrative and related themes, practicing Focused Breathing,
and practicing other emotion regulation skills as needed. The therapist begins by briefly
reviewing whether the client completed all of the planned work, asking for a brief summary
of how the practice went, and offering to answer any questions that may have arisen since
the preceding session.


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


The focus of this session is on the narrative of the first memory. Before beginning the first
narrative, the therapist reviews in whatever detail is appropriate to the particular client the
rationale for Narrative Therapy and the nature of the analysis that follows each narrative.
Also, the therapist takes the time to talk with the client about how the client is feeling about
starting Narrative Therapy. The therapist reminds the client that they have many more
resources now than they did as a child, and that these resources will be available to them
as they engage in this challenging work. The client will revisit the past with the strengths
and resources of the present. The client will view the experiences of their childhood from
the critical and more informed perspective of an adult. The therapist can say something like
this:


“When you experienced your traumas, you were just a child, alone, with limited coping
skills, and the experience was overwhelming. Our goal is to create a different experi-
ence for you. You will not be alone this time; I will be with you every step of the way.

[PAGE 384]

22. Narrative of First Memory 367


Part of the rationale for the first module of the treatment was to prepare you for trauma-
focused work. As an adult, having gone through this treatment, you have skills and
resources you didn't have as a child. You have the resources to confront these memories.
Does this make sense to you?”


PRACTICE NARRATIVE OF A NEUTRAL MEMORY


In prolonged exposure (Foa & Rothbaum, 1998), prior to beginning work with traumatic
memories, a client first practices with a narrative of a neutral memory. This practice is
extremely useful in allowing the client to learn the process and structure of Narrative Therapy before having to confront intense emotions. The therapist explains to the client:


“Before focusing on your trauma memories, let's practice with a memory from your
childhood that is not related to your trauma. Some people choose a memory of a birth-
day party, or a vacation, or a friend they liked to play with, or their childhood room.
Can you think of a memory like that? [The therapist helps the client choose a memory if
the client has difficulty. This memory is neutral to positive in valence.] OK, so we will
focus on this memory in the same way we will later with a trauma memory. Sit back
in your chair in a comfortable position. Close your eyes, or let them rest on an object
or location that is comfortable and where you will not get distracted. Tell about this
particular incident or person in your life. The story should have a beginning, a middle,
and an end. You should describe it in the first person, as if you are there right now—
for example, “When I wake up, I am happy because I remember it is Saturday, which
means no school today. *


As the client talks through the memory, the therapist probes the client for details about
what the client sees, hears, smells, and touches. The therapist also asks them what they are
feeling and what sensations they experience in the body. A client who forgets to stay in the
first person is reminded to do so. When the client has finished, the therapist provides support and continued direction:


“That was very good. That is exactly what we are going to do again, but this time you
will narrate a trauma memory. We are going to start with a memory that is difficult, but
one that you think you can manage.”


CONDUCT FIRST NARRATIVE OF A TRAUMA MEMORY

Selecting a Memory

The memory selected is the one that elicits the most distress the client feels they can handle
at this point. This will ensure that processing for fear reduction is relevant, but that the client will succeed in experiencing distress reduction in the session. Our experience has been

[PAGE 385]

368 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


that when a client succeeds in managing a high-distress memory, those memories associated with less distress become easy to narrate, and in fact may become uninteresting and
irrelevant to the client in their recovery work.
If the client has more than one distressing memory of equal weight, the client picks
the one that has the most relevance to problems the client is dealing with in day-to-day life.
This also serves the purpose of enriching the postnarrative analysis with particular value.
Therapist and client work together in the selection of the memory.
The client goes through the narration of the memory once with no interruptions. The
second time the client begins the narration, the therapist reinforces the instructions as
needed. For example, the therapist may need to remind the client to stay in the first person
if the client has forgotten, to speak more slowly, or to provide more details. The therapist's
goal is to help the client make the memory as real as possible, so questions facilitate this process. How this works best depends on the client. For some clients, asking them to provide
more detail about sensations (sights, smells) enables them to get deeper into the memory. If
a therapist believes that a client is avoiding reexperiencing the feelings associated with the
memory, the therapist asks the client how they are feeling. Some general guidelines for the
therapist during the session include the following:


. Active listening. Since some clients will have their eyes closed or focused away from
you, show that you are listening with vocalizations such as “Uh-huh,” “Yes,” or “T
see.”
2. Be supportive. If the client demonstrates strong emotions during narrative work,
reinforce this by being empathic: “I know this is difficult. It takes courage to do this.
I am listening. You are doing well.”
3. Clarification. If the client moves out of the first person (“T’), rushes through the
memory, or doesnt seem to be allowing themselves to relive the experience, clarify
the procedure before the client begins the memory the next time.
4. Details. Help the client emotionally engage in the memory by asking the client
questions about details of the experience, particularly details about sensations (e.g.,
touch, smell).
5. Encouragement. Praise the client for their courage in confronting their traumatic
memories: “You can be proud of yourself. You have done something very difficult.”
6. Focus. If the client becomes distracted (e.g., by noise outside the office), gently
remind the client where they were in the memory: “You just said you were falling
asleep and your stepfather came into the bedroom.” Or sometimes the client will
break out of the memory and ask a question. If the client does this, tell the client that
you will make a note of it and answer it later. For now, ask the client to return to the
memory.


The therapist can begin the process by saying:


“Now we are going to focus on your trauma memory, just like we did a few minutes ago
with the memory of your [the therapist describes the neutral memory]. Sit back in the

[PAGE 386]

22. Narrative of First Memory 369


chair, and close your eyes or focus on an image from the memory. We are going to travel
back in time to when this memory occurred. Make the memory as real as possible. Talk
slowly, in the first person, using ‘I, as if the events were happening to you right now.
Describe what you are experiencing, feeling, thinking, tasting, and touching. I may ask
you questions along the way to help you make the memory more real. It is sometimes
tempting to avoid the memory by speaking quickly and trying to get it over with. If I
think you are doing this, I will help you slow down. Remember, I will be here next to
you every step of the way. To keep in touch with how you are doing, I will be asking for
SUDs ratings every few minutes. I will say, “Rating, and then you are to give me your
SUDs for how you are feeling in that moment, on the scale from 0 to 100. Does this
make sense? When you have finished the memory, I will ask you to start over again. We
will cycle through the narrative two or three times. Ready?”


The therapist records the ratings on Handout 22.1, Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs)
during Trauma Narration, as the client revisits the trauma memory. The length of the trauma
memory will determine how often the therapist asks for a SUDs rating. In the beginning,
these memories are often short, so the therapist may ask only once or twice during the memory (every few minutes). After the memories become more elaborate, the therapist usually
asks for ratings every 5 minutes, or more often if a client is appearing distressed. The use of
SUDs ratings is an excellent way for the client and therapist to stay in touch with the client's
emotional movement through the narrative. These ratings becomea rapid, rather telegraphic
way for clients to communicate their in-the-moment emotions as they narrate the event.
As the client goes through the memory, the therapist notes parts that seem particularly
distressing. These parts provide clues to the meaning of the memory for the client, and also
point to which parts of the memory the therapist might choose to focus on in later sessions.
In addition to SUDs ratings, the therapist records any relevant observations in the “Comments” section on Handout 22.1—for example, any physical reactions, facial expressions, or
voice changes noted during the narrative.
When the client has gone through the memory once, the therapist asks the client to go
back to the beginning and start again. For instance, the therapist can say this:


“Very good. I know that was hard to do the first time. Now we are going to go through
the memory again. This time I am going to ask you more questions, to try to make the
memory more real to you.”


Number of Repetitions and Duration of Narrative Retelling

The therapist has the client go through the memory at least two or three times. This can
take from 10 to 20 minutes, depending on the length of the narrative. It is recommended
that the client spend at least 10 minutes engaged in repeated narrations of the memory (or,
if the telling of the memory is relatively lengthy, at least one repetition). Ifthe memory takes
longer than 20 minutes to describe, client and therapist can work on breaking the memory
down into shorter, more emotionally focused, and more manageable narratives.

[PAGE 387]

370 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


In later sessions, a narrative may need to be completed only once. This can happen
when the SUDs levels are relatively low, or the intensity of the event is no longer as strong
as it was when it was first rated. The initial narrative work often diminishes fear reactions
to other memories in the hierarchy that have not been described when those memories are
related in content or theme. Sometimes rapid fear reduction occurs when the client experiences a significant insight about what has been described. Insight often reduces fear. The
client moves from experiencing fear to experiencing excitement, curiosity, or satisfaction.


Ending the Retelling of the Narrative

If the client’s distress or anxiety decreases within this session of narrative work, the therapist asks if the client notices a difference (in terms of SUDs ratings) between how they are
feeling at the end and how they felt at the beginning of the session:


“When we started today, you rated your distress at a [SUDs score]; by the end of the
session, you were at a [SUDs score]. This is what we talked about earlier: Your distress
decreases if you allow yourself to face the memory.”


If the client’s distress does not decrease, the therapist reminds the client that this happens when someone is struggling with a particularly difficult memory, and praises them for
sticking with it:


“I know this was very difficult today. You showed a lot of courage sticking with the
memory, even though it was very difficult. We will be discussing the meaning of the
memory, and in doing that, we can identify what makes it so hard. Before that, let's do
some distress reduction exercises.”


If the therapist and client are interested in obtaining a more detailed picture of the
client's emotional reactions at this stage, Handout 22.2, Assessment of Postnarrative Emotional State, can be used. After briefly describing the 1-10 rating scale, the therapist asks
the client about the intensity of their feelings in each domain following the initial telling.
This form creates a more specific preliminary profile of the client's emotional state, and the
therapist and client can also use it in later sessions to guide the narrative work.


GROUND THE CLIENT IN THE PRESENT


The therapist helps the client begin making the transition from narration to analysis by
simply stating that the narrative work portion of the session is finished and asking how
the client is feeling. These comments or similar sentences signal that the narrative work
is over, and that the client is ready for review, discussion, and exploration of the narrative
experience. The therapist ensures that the client is clearly in the present, is physically comfortable, and is engaged with the therapist. Although many feelings and thoughts from the

[PAGE 388]

22. Narrative of First Memory 371


narrative work may be resonating with the client, the client also needs to be able to maintain a comfortable distance from the experience.
If the client feels somewhat disoriented, the therapist and client can use several skills
to ground the client in the present. These include having the client do Focused Breathing,
look around the room and share what they see, drink a hot or cold beverage, rub their hands
together, or press their feet into the floor. The client and therapist will at this point have
identified the skills the client prefers to use to increase physical comfort and awareness of
the immediate environment.
Sometimes the therapist's voice is soothing to the client and can orient them to the
present. In addition, the therapist can make several comments that reinforce a sense of
safety and of being grounded in the present. The therapist can state that the client is in a
safe environment, and that the events described belong to the past.
The therapist also congratulates the client for completing the narrative. The shift from
narration to analysis is a passage from immersion in the traumatic past to engagement in
the present. This transition is a therapeutic experience in itself: It demonstrates to the client
that they have the skills to shift from the past to the present, and that the feelings elicited
during the narrative work can be tolerated and diminished. The therapist comments on this
by specifically identifying the ways in which the client has been able to manage their feelings and use coping skills—not only during the narration, but also in coming to successful
closure on the task.


LISTEN TO THE FIRST NARRATIVE RECORDING TOGETHER


Next, the therapist and client listen to the recording together. Again, it is important to reiterate the purpose of this activity. The therapist can say something like this:


“At this point, I would like us to listen to the recording together. This is what I will be
asking you to do on your own between sessions. Listening to yourself detailing a trauma
narrative for the first time can be daunting, so doing it in session first will be helpful in
decreasing this initial anxiety and will give us a chance to talk about what it felt like to
hear yourself. Often clients have very different reactions to telling the narrative of their
trauma versus listening to themselves tell it on the recording.”


EXPLORE BELIEFS ABOUT SELF AND/OR OTHERS IN NARRATIVE


After the client has identified and labeled the central feelings emerging from the narration,
the client explores what beliefs about self and others are embedded in the narrative. The
client can use the feelings they have identified as a springboard for this. At this point in
treatment, the therapist and client are aware of many of the client's core relationship models
and patterns, based on their work in the STAIR module. However, new, more detailed, or
more precise beliefs often emerge from organizing the trauma narrative or from articulating

[PAGE 389]

372 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


details to which the client has never given thought. The central goal of the analysis is to
clarify and repeatedly reinforce the fact that certain beliefs the client holds about the self as
a traumatized child are no longer applicable to the client as an adult. Alternative and more
adaptive relationship models, along with supporting evidence from current experience, are
discussed.
Below is a case illustration of a narrative analysis that occurred after the first telling of
the trauma history. We have found that our clients are often full of thoughts, feelings, and
observations after the first narrative experience. Clients experience relief, sadness, amazement, and curiosity about what might come next. It is valuable to take an informal approach
to the analysis after the first telling and follow a client's lead about important observations.
In the example below, the most important observation for Tom was the difference between
the therapist's reaction and his ex-boyfriend’s reaction. The therapist helped Tom to summarize his insights at the end of the session, using two copies of Relationship Patterns
Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4).


CASE EXAMPLE: TELLING ABOUT THE TRAUMA, THEN AND NOW


In the STAIR module of treatment, Tom's therapist focused during the skills training on
helping him develop ways to manage his anxiety and to be more direct in communicating
his distress with others. When presented with the rationale and description of the narrative
work, Tom reacted strongly: “I feel like what you are saying goes against all of my natural
human instincts. It's like youre suggesting I jump off of a cliff” In addition, Tom had never
told anyone the whole story of his abuse. The first and only occasion on which he had disclosed what had happened had been about 8 years ago to an ex-boyfriend. Tom described
his boyfriend's reaction as “disturbing, because the boyfriend became distressed when he
heard about what happened. It started to have a major impact on their relationship, and ultimately his boyfriend broke up with him, stating he “just couldnt handle it.” Tom decided
never to tell anybody about the abuse again. Tom’s therapist spent time discussing his fear
of telling about his abuse and reiterated the connection among his symptoms, his problems
in relationships, and his trauma experiences. Although Tom was hesitant and frightened
to begin narrative work, his distress over his worsening symptoms and their impact on his
functioning gave him incentive.
At the beginning of the session in which the narrative work was to begin, Tom continued to express anxiety and skepticism. His therapist repeated the treatment rationale and
reviewed the reasons Tom had given for wanting to be in the treatment. At the end of the
first narration, Tom saw the experience in a different way and felt much more comfortable
with beginning to talk about his abuse. He had experienced some sense of mastery in the
process, even during this first time. He compared the process of revisiting his abuse memories to trying to hold onto a handful of sand: “Tf you hold it tightly, it slips out through your
fingers, but if you keep your grip loose, you can actually keep it in your hand.”
Tom and his therapist also discussed his strongly held belief that talking about the
abuse was dangerous and would have disastrous consequences. Tom linked this belief to his

[PAGE 390]

22. Narrative of First Memory 373


experience with his ex-boyfriend, and he expressed the belief that he would be considered
“damaged goods.” Tom's therapist focused on the fact that he no longer had to believe that.
Instead, he could believe that he could tell about the abuse and expect that at least some
people would still be there for him—in fact, would feel closer to him than before. Tom
expressed feeling supported and “much lighter” following the disclosure of his abuse to his
therapist.


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


This session is profoundly therapeutic in itself for many clients. For some, this will be the
first time they talk in detail about their trauma with another person. For others, this will
be the first time they have spoken about their trauma and have been truly and compassionately heard. At the end of the session, the therapist briefly summarizes the goals of the
session and describes how the goals fit within the larger treatment goals for the specific
client. These may include reducing anxiety and PTSD symptoms, and/or reaching a better
understanding of how beliefs and feeling related to the trauma influence the client's current
life. The therapist checks in with the client to see how they are feeling about completing
their first trauma narrative and continuing with other narratives in the next several sessions. The therapist praises the client for the courageous work done in this session and all
the work done during the STAIR module, which has strengthened the client's skills and
enabled them to begin engaging in the narrative work. The therapist also highlights the
importance of listening to the recording of the first trauma narrative between sessions, and
briefly reviews the rationale for doing so.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


At the end of the session, the therapist gives the client the recording of the first trauma narrative. The therapist requests that the client listen to it once a day. The therapist also tells
the client to record their SUDs ratings and any comments or observations on Handout 22.1
after each listening. As with previous planned skills practice, the therapist spends some
time predicting any potential obstacles to the client's completing this work and suggesting
ways to make it feasible. In order to maintain the skills the client has developed during the
STAIR module, the therapist also assigns the client to initiate at least one interpersonal
situation and practice an alternative relationship model, using Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4) to record the practice and the results. The client should also continue to practice Focused Breathing twice a day, as well as other emotion regulation skills
relevant to their needs and situations.
The client will need to be able to listen to the recording of the narrative. Clients most
commonly use their smartphones for this nowadays, and they may or may not want to listen
with headphones. The therapist and client also discusses when it makes the most sense to
listen to the recording, taking into consideration the client's schedule and possible times

[PAGE 391]

374 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


when they are free and can have some privacy. Another consideration is the surrounding
environment while listening. A client should not listen to the recording along with other
people. However, if the client has identified safe and supportive people, they might enlist
these individuals in certain ways (such as calling them before and after listening to the
recording, to check in). The client might also make a social plan for after they listen to the
recording if this would be helpful.
As always, it is up to the client to decide how much they would like to share with others.
For example, some clients feel comfortable sharing details about the treatment process with
significant others; other clients want to make contact with other persons without directly
involving them in the process; and still others prefer to keep the process a private experience. Whereas some clients prefer to listen to recordings when nobody else is around, others prefer to do it in a place where they feel less isolated (e.g., using headphones at a coffee
shop, or doing it at home when others are present in another room). As long as distractions
are minimized and a client can devote time to concentrating on the recording, the choice
of context is of relatively minor importance and is based on what the client feels would be
preferable. After listening to the initial recording, the therapist and client will discuss how
the process went and whether the client may want to make any adaptations for listening in
the future.

[PAGE 392]

Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs)
during Trauma Narration

This form is to be used when you are listening to the trauma narrative as between-session practice.
First, provide a brief description of the memory. Then record the date of practice, along with the
subjective units of distress (SUDs; 0-100) ratings for before, highest during, and after listening to the
memory.


Brief description of memory:


Date Preexposure SUDs Comments

Highest SUDs

Postexposure SUDs

Date Preexposure SUDs Comments

Highest SUDs

Postexposure SUDs

Date Preexposure SUDs Comments

Highest SUDs

Postexposure SUDs

Date Preexposure SUDs Comments

Highest SUDs

Postexposure SUDs


Date Preexposure SUDs Comments

Highest SUDs

Postexposure SUDs

Date Preexposure SUDs Comments

Highest SUDs

Postexposure SUDs

Date Preexposure SUDs Comments

Highest SUDs

Postexposure SUDs


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


375

[PAGE 393]

Assessment of Postnarrative Emotional State
After completing the narrative of the trauma memory, rate the intensity of each emotion on the scale
of 1 to 10 below, with 1 being “the least intense/not at all feeling that emotion” and 10 being “the most
intense.”


Date: Exposure #: Session #:


Rating scale

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Not at all Mild Moderate Severe Extreme


Fear/anxiety

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10


Numbness

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10


Anger

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10


Sadness

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Y 10


Shame

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10


Guilt

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10


Strongest feeling:


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the box at the end of the table of contents).


376

[PAGE 394]

Narratives of Fear

The patient reproduces instead of remembering. . . . This condition is shifted
bit by bit within . . . the treatment . . . [W]hile the patient lives it through
as something real and actual, we have to accomplish the therapeutic task,
which consist chiefly in translating it back again into terms of the past.
—SIGMUND FREUD (1914/1963, p. 163)


The sessions following the first narrative (Sessions 13-17) maintain essentially the same
structure as Session 12. This includes a review of the feelings elicited by the narrative, an
identification of the relationship patterns embedded in the story, a critical analysis comparing the patterns of the traumatic past with the clients current situation, and applications of
new models to current life difficulties. These procedures will become routine, and the sessions will move fluidly from one activity to the next. Clients will progress from one memory
to the next, repeating this cycle of activities.
Some clients will have difficulty making progress, however, because they tend to
react to fear with avoidance or dissociative responses to fear-laden memories. This chapter
describes strategies for managing such reactions, to be used as needed. This chapter also
describes the benefit of close and sensitive attention to, and possible revision of, relationship
patterns. In narration, as the particulars of trauma histories are told, a better understanding of critical interpersonal experiences emerges and can lead to more precise, “emotionally real” versions of established relationship patterns. The strategies for management of
fear-laden reactions, sustained emotional involvement in the narration, and the evolution
of relationship patterns all share the recognition that these experiences belong to the past.
Although memories have extraordinary power to influence current behavior, they nevertheless have, by definition, one weakness: They belong to the past. The client, in contrast, has
one major strength, which is that they live in the present.
The client’s capacity to live in and feel the power of the present will provide an important
resource in putting distance between the client’s self and their memories, and developing a
perspective on the limited influence these events need to have. Accordingly, a basic principle of the work is for the therapist to maintain the client's engagement in and appreciation


377

[PAGE 395]

378 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


for the present. The therapist and client work together to maximize the resource of the here
and now. This can be done through words, through sensory exercises, and through repeatedly contrasting the past with present living conditions and opportunities. Negative beliefs
about self and others belonging to the traumatic past can be countered with alternative
models and experientially based demonstrations that disconfirm these beliefs and support
new formulations about the self. As this effort proceeds, the client will begin developing
a sense of a historical self—a self with a past that is distinct from the present. Box 23.1
outlines the theme and curriculum for working with narratives of fear in Sessions 13-17 of
treatment.


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


During Narrative Therapy, the therapist begins each session by checking in with the client
about their reaction to listening to the recording made in the preceding session. This will
help identify the next step in the narrative work. After the review is complete, the therapist
can remind the client that the ability to think about and discuss painful memories is a skill,
and can congratulate the client on their efforts. This ability will allow them to become free
of their past, and will give them the energy and ability to focus on the present and plan for
the future.
If the client did not listen to the recording or only listened once or twice between
sessions, the therapist works with the client to identify what interfered with completing
the task. For example, did something unexpected happen that interfered with the assignment, such as an unplanned family visit or illness? Or was the client avoiding listening out
of fear or anxiety? If the latter was the case, the therapist will want to work with the client
to identify and address the specific fears or anxieties that interfered with listening to the
recording. The therapist may need to revisit the rationale for listening to the recording as
well. If the client’s concerns center around feeling distressed or overwhelmed during or
after listening to the recording, the therapist problem-solves with the client in regard to
these concerns, and then reviews the skills the client finds most effective when they find
themselves distressed (e.g., Focused Breathing).
Often a client will identify parts of the narrative that were particularly difficult. A brief
discussion will determine whether the memory should be further explored. The therapist
can review the pattern of SUDs ratings with the client and determine whether they should
go on to a new memory, repeat the memory, or focus on a particular aspect of the memory.
Before this is decided, the therapist elicits from the client any insights the client might have
had as a result of listening to the recording—about their feelings, views of self, or relationship patterns they have identified. This will also help inform the therapist whether the
client feels “done” with the memory. In addition, the therapist explores whether the client
had any interpersonal difficulties during the week, especially ones relating to the narrative
work, and briefly problem-solve in regard to these issues. More detailed discussion of using
skills can be interwoven during the session as appropriate.

[PAGE 396]

23. Narratives of Fear 379


Theme and Curriculum for Sessions 13-17
Narratives of Fear


Clients quickly learn the structure and process of Narrative Therapy. The five sessions that
follow Session 12 involve conducting repeated narratives of the most distressing aspects of a
particular traumatic event, or moving to other events that would have been too distressing with
which to begin the narrative work. The resolution of fear reactions results in large part from
the realization that the trauma belongs to the past, and as such cannot hurt the client. The client begins to experience control over their memories and is actively working to organize them.
The client also begins to assess the memories’ influence over the client’s current attitudes and
behaviors. Consequently, the narrative work is a form of self-reflection and the beginning of
the development of a historical sense of self. The repeated narration of an organized past, and
identification of its relationship to the present, establish and reinforce an experience of continuity in the self.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Bring therapist’s copy of completed Memory Hierarchy (Handout 21.2), and ensure that the
client has a way to record the narrative processing. Bring other handouts as listed below. This
session is 60 minutes in duration.


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Complete narrative of fear memory.
Work with avoidance behaviors.
Manage dissociative reactions.
Conduct narrative analysis.
Summarize the goals of the session.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 397]

380 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Plan skills practice:
Listen to recording daily; monitor distress with Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs) dur-
ing Trauma Narration form.
Initiate at least one interpersonal situation and practice alternative relationship model(s),
using Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 to record the practice and results; include emo-
tion regulation skills as relevant to situation.
Continue to practice Focused Breathing twice a day, and other emotion regulation skills
as relevant.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Completed copy of Handout 21.2. Memory Hierarchy
Additional copies of Handout 22.1. Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs) during Trauma Nar-
ration

At least one additional copy of Handout 22.2. Assessment of Postnarrative Emotional State

Additional copies of Handout 16.4. Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


The focus of Session 13 and subsequent sessions is the processing of fear memories. An
important component of these sessions is memory selection. The therapist takes the time to
talk with the client about how the client is feeling about processing their traumatic memories. The therapist will often find it helpful to remind the client that they have many more
resources now, having completed the STAIR module, and that these resources will be available to them as they engage in this challenging work. The client may find it useful to review
the skills they found most helpful in the STAIR module, to help them cope with feelings
that arise when processing their traumatic memories.


COMPLETE NARRATIVE OF FEAR MEMORY


This and the next four sessions will begin with memory selection and then move to narrative processing.


Select a Memory

The decision to move on to a new memory is determined by the amount of fear the client
still experiences when revisiting the memory, as well as the client's satisfaction with their
understanding of it. The therapist and client review the SUDs ratings the client reported
on each day the client listened to the recording. Ratings of 30 or below indicate low fear

[PAGE 398]

23. Narratives of Fear 381


responses, suggesting that the therapist and client can select a new memory. If there are
particular areas of difficulties, indicated by the client's report and high SUDs ratings for
only certain sections of the narrative, the next portion of narrative work can be a repetition
and analysis of these “high-distress” sections. If the client did not listen to the recording
between sessions or did not record their SUDS ratings, the therapist will likely want to
continue focusing on the memory from the preceding session.
The selection procedure is the same for each new memory: The client and therapist
select the memory that has the highest SUDs rating the client believes they can manage.
The choice is also influenced by the relevance of particular memories to the clients day-today life. A memory with an initially low rating may become relevant to the further elaboration of a theme in a memory, or may become more significant due to life circumstances.
For example, if a client identifies a theme of chronic fear of suffocation from narratives of
adolescent sexual abuse memories, the client may eventually recognize the same theme in
a less intense memory of an early childhood molestation. Alternatively, a memory of physical abuse by the clients mother may be reactivated upon a visit from or some news about
the mother. The memory thus becomes more salient to the client and should be addressed.
SUDs ratings for this memory can be revised accordingly.


Complete Narrative

The procedures for conducting the narrative are identical to those described for the first
narrative in Session 12 (see Chapter 22). These include orienting the client to the task,
recording the narrative, following the client with SUDs ratings, occasionally inquiring
about details, and determining the number of repetitions. When the client is done, the
recording is shut off, and grounding exercises are conducted as needed. This is followed by
analysis (which is also recorded) of feelings in the narrative.


Assess Feelings in the Narrative

The therapist facilitates activities that label and contain the traumatic feelings and associated material. These include literally labeling the recording of the narrative with a title
selected by the client. The title can provide clarity of feeling and some distance from the
event via humor (albeit black humor)—for example, “Trapped in the Closet: Part HI.”
In addition, the therapist inquires about the client's specific feeling states, such as fear/
anxiety, numbness, anger, sadness, shame, and guilt. Handout 22.2, Assessment of Postnarrative Emotional State, is again used as an in-session worksheet for this activity. After
briefly reviewing the 1-10 rating scale in this handout, the therapist inquires about the
intensity of the client's feelings in each domain after the narrative work. This creates a specific profile of the client’s feeling states, which informs both client and therapist about the
key feelings that have emerged as a result of this narrative work.
The therapist will be able to compare this profile to others that have been elicited from
the same memory. It is likely that there will be reductions in the severity of fear and anxiety
states in this first narrative. The therapist identifies these changes to the client as examples

[PAGE 399]

382 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


of the clients growing mastery of the trauma memory. An essential part of narrative work
includes explicit recognition of mastery over overwhelming reactions to the trauma memory. This highlights the client’s progress in an essential aspect of trauma recovery.


In the following sections, we address common challenges that arise in Narrative Therapy with our clients, including avoidance behaviors and dissociation.


WORK WITH AVOIDANCE BEHAVIORS


Avoidance behaviors are behaviors that distract the client from approaching a distressing
aspect of the trauma. They are often evident in the clients speech or gestures. A client may
hesitate before moving to the next word or sentence in their narrative, or may turn away
or look down at certain segments of the narrative. Over time, the therapist will become
familiar with these “clues.” The therapist may initially simply observe these behaviors if
the overall level of emotional engagement in the narrative is strong. However, if the client
seems to have habituated to many fear-related elements of the story and seems to be going
through the story in a rote fashion, the therapist gently inquires at the moment the behavior
is observed: “I noticed that you hesitated. Was there something you thought or felt?” This
can be enough to orient the client to pursue a detail they would have otherwise discarded.
The therapist can also prompt the client by asking them what particular feeling or image
they are having, which can lead to better engagement in meaningful aspects of the trauma.


CASE EXAMPLE 1: IDENTIFYING A HIGH-DISTRESS MOMENT
IN THE NARRATIVE


Avoidance behaviors can be “flags” for identifying aspects of a narrative that are particularly
distressing and have not been addressed in sufficient detail or possibly at all. A therapist can
facilitate identification of high-distress, high-conflict memories by becoming familiar with
a clients particular patterns of avoidance and bringing them to the client's attention. Some
of these patterns can be subtle.
For example, a client, Jillian, was observed turning her body away when she described
how her older brother slid into her bed before he raped her. Initially the therapist didnt
comment, but this behavior continued in the repeated narrations. The therapist then called
Jillian’s attention to this behavior, and she was able to move further into the details of the
story. It became clear that Jillian had been avoiding a key aspect of her trauma. Jillian
described the moment when she turned around in her bed, looked into her brother’s face,
and saw “someone whom I did not know.” This had been a very frightening moment. As she
described it, her world completely crumbled. Her brother became a stranger to her. She
felt she had “lost” her brother, who was the only member of the family still living in their
abandoned household and on whom she depended in every way. She was able to describe
this moment in detail in one of her final narrations of this event:

[PAGE 400]

23. Narratives of Fear 383


“I am feeling mortified, dirty, scared, angry, revolted. My heart is absolutely pounding.
Still, I am afraid of running away. I am paralyzed with fear. It is like moving through
molasses. If I try to get up and leave, it will be acknowledging that this is really hap-
pening. And I cant do that. It will send me over the edge.”


Jillian noted that from then on, she knew she was “pretty much alone in the world,” although
at the time she would not have identified the source of this belief as the assault by her
brother. In reflecting on her experience at the time, she added an important postscript:


“A few days later, I told him that I was moving out. At the time, I did not think it was
because of what had happened. I was very shut down. If someone had told me it had
happened, I would not have believed them, even though I knew it had.”


Completing the narrative with access to a greater range of feelings led Jillian to recognize the devastating impact the assault had on her relationship with her brother, where she
lived and why, and how she conducted herselfin her adolescent years. This was difficult. But
telling about this aspect of the trauma led to greater clarity about one of Jillian's principal
relationship patterns, which was “If you rely on someone, then that person will just exploit
and abandon you.” This relationship pattern had previously been a free-floating belief that
had been, to her, a self-evident truth about the world. Pinning the origins of this belief on
this particular moment with her brother allowed her to consider limiting this belief to the
context of the abuse. Once this relationship pattern was anchored in a particular episode in
her life, she was able both to make sense of this belief and to consider that it might not be
generally applicable to all relationships.


MANAGE DISSOCIATIVE REACTIONS


As the narrative work moves toward the client's more challenging memories, the client will
be facing their worst fears and worst experiences. Some clients respond to high-stress material by dissociating. Below, we provide guidelines for managing, and ideally preventing,
these kinds of reactions.


Dissociation and Trauma Narration

The best intervention for dissociation is prevention. A guiding principle of our narrative
work is that the emotional intensity of the experience must be titrated so that the client
always remains in the here and now and retains control of the process, particularly in the
modulation of their fear. The purpose of the narrative is for the client to confront the trauma
and to experience mastery of the memory. A successful narrative exercise is an empirical
demonstration of the client's mastery over their trauma and emotional experiences. A key
aspect of the client’s initial trauma (and indeed of the very definition of trauma) is loss of
mastery and control. During the trauma, the client did not have the ability to control the

[PAGE 401]

384 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


event or its outcome. Narration of the traumatic memory is therapeutic because it demonstrates to the client that although the client was helpless to stop the trauma as it happened,
they can now regain control of the event via its influence on their memory and emotional
reactivity. This success can lead to remarkably rapid resolution of PTSD symptoms.
Dissociation, in contrast, indicates that the traumatic material overwhelms the client.
This is countertherapeutic, as it reinforces the clients experience of the self as having little
control over the memories—an experience similar to the loss of control during the trauma
itself. Indeed, this type of experience can be retraumatizing or can become a new trauma
in its own right. The battle between the client and their PTSD symptoms is the battle
between the power of the memory and the power of the client to confront and manage the
memory.


Strategies for Managing Dissociation

When working with a client who has a tendency to dissociate, the therapist talks with the
client about it, reassures the client that the therapist is aware of it, and identifies specific
strategies for dealing with it.
We have found it helpful if the therapist and client agree on a signal for indicating that
the client is feeling vulnerable to dissociation. This can be as simple as having the client
raise their hand. The client and therapist can use such a gesture as a signal to reduce the
emotional intensity of the narrative or to back away from certain material.
In addition, clients may exhibit specific automatic behaviors indicating that they have
reached their maximum coping capacity and may be at risk for breaking off emotional or
cognitive engagement with the present. These include small gestures such as rubbing their
fingers together, “pilling” the fabric of their clothing, rapid blinking, or other kinds of eye
or hand movements.
Perhaps the most powerful intervention in reducing dissociative experiencing is to
remind the client regularly that the traumatic event is in the past. This can be done in a
straightforward statement at the end of the narrative, such as “All of this happened in the
past.” This reality will be elaborated in relation to the client's particular core fears, and reinforced through role play in sessions and experiential exercises outside of sessions.


Additional Grounding Techniques to Orient Client to Present

Some survivors of trauma have strong fears of physical injury or death, particularly
if their trauma was life-threatening or chronic (i.e., sustained and regular injury was
inflicted). Other common are fears are of the perpetrators coming after them, intruding
upon them, and violating their bodies. Perhaps most particular to chronic interpersonal
trauma—such as abuse by caregivers or relationship violence, which often happens over
years—are clients fears that they will never “get away” from their perpetrators because
the perpetrators “live inside” them. This is evidenced not only in nightmares and images,
but in their own day-to-day emotional reactions and behaviors that remind them of their
perpetrators.

[PAGE 402]

23. Narratives of Fear 385


These fears are often effectively resolved through the repeated narration of the trauma
and habituation to the fear associated with particular aspects of the traumas. After the narration, repeated reminders of differences between the conditions of a clients childhood and
the present create a “life history” in which to contextualize the trauma as an event of the
past. A client can be told, “You are no longer in your father’s house. You have a home of your
own, or “Your mother cant hurt you any more. She is old and feeble,” or “Your ex-partner
cant get you any more. He is in jail.”
Exercises in mastery that invite contrast to the traumatic memory can provide evidence
supporting these statements. If the client experienced abuse in childhood, this may include
visiting the old neighborhood or house that the client lived in when the abuse occurred.
Often the power of this environment is much diminished when it is actually viewed from
the perspective of the adult survivor. If the client experienced abuse in childhood, fears
of being physically overwhelmed by the perpetrator can be addressed in a similar way, by
looking at pictures of the perpetrator as that person is now or was in the past. The perpetrators size and strength are usually much less impressive from the adult survivor's perspective. Similar exercises can also be used if the client experienced chronic interpersonal
trauma in adulthood. However, the therapist will want to ensure the clients safety before
proceeding with exercises such as visiting a former neighborhood. In addition, the therapist
helps the client recognize their own physical strength and resources. The client may also
be encouraged to engage in activities that reinforce development and awareness of physical
strength. This might include engagement in sports, yoga, martial arts, or any activity that
creates awareness of physical integrity and agency. Such an activity can be as simple as
walking or stretching, or using Focused Breathing.


CONDUCT NARRATIVE ANALYSIS


Relationship patterns identified during STAIR may be based solely on problematic behaviors
and beliefs identified in day-to-day difficulties. Often very good progress can be made in the
development of alternative relationship patterns and their implementation in role plays and
between-session exercises. However, sometimes alternative relationship patterns and role
plays do not elicit any significant change in a client’s behaviors and are resisted by the client.
Under these circumstances, it is worthwhile to consider that the relationship pattern
formulation is not quite accurate or conflicts with other fear-based relationship patterns.
Little progress may occur during this time, but it is worthwhile for the therapist to keep
tracking the expression of behaviors claimed to be associated with this relationship pattern.
Reformulation of the relationship pattern can occur during Narrative Therapy, where, in
the context of narrative work, previously unidentified feelings and memories will inform the
“grain of truth” that was in the first relationship pattern. The relationship pattern identified
as embedded in the narrative may be a more accurate and precise formulation of the beliefs
and feelings driving the client’s problematic behaviors. A more substantial and relevant
alternative relationship pattern can then be formulated, and shifts in behavior can be more
easily accomplished. An example of this process is provided below.

[PAGE 403]

386 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


CASE EXAMPLE 2: REFORMULATING RELATIONSHIP PATTERNS

identify Fear-Related Relationship Models in Narrative

During the STAIR module of treatment, Rose and her therapist had identified some maladaptive relationship patterns that kept her from asking for things she wanted. The initial
identified relationship pattern was “If I love you, then I put your needs first.” The behaviors
associated with this relationship pattern of putting others needs before hers had created
conflict in Rose’s marital relationship. Her husband, a likeable and easygoing person, did
not particularly share her beliefs. Thus he did not engage in giving things he needed to his
wife; nor was he particularly observant of her efforts to “sacrifice her needs” as expressions
of her love for him. As a consequence of her husband's lack of response to her efforts, Rose
felt angry, disregarded, and unimportant.
Rose and her therapist critically examined this relationship pattern, and an alternative
was developed that explored an opposite principle: “IfI love you, then I share my feelings and
needs with you.” The therapist and client engaged in assertiveness role plays in which Rose
asked her husband for things and sometimes simply told her husband she was going to do
things in accord with her own wishes. Both in life and in role plays, the husband was agreeable to these changes and to the more equal sharing of responsibilities and resources. Still,
these activities were only modestly successful and yielded little change in the relationship.


Develop Alternative Relationship Models during Narrative Therapy

During Narrative Therapy, Rose described many different episodes of having been physically abused by her mother. The mother had in fact terrorized all of her children. Rose
recalled her mother coming home in a drunken state in the middle of the night and rousing
all of the children to look for her cigarettes or to clean out the bathroom. Rose also described
some frightening scenes in her childhood home, which involved random demands by her
mother that were enforced with physical violence. These demands included giving up food
on their plates to their father. The narration of each of these stories was followed by an
analysis of the relationship patterns embedded in the narrative.
The relationship pattern that had first been articulated during STAIR was eventually,
in the context of Rose’s abuse history, developed and refined into a much more meaningful
belief: “If I make demands, then I am just like my cruel and crazy mother.”
The therapist and client then discussed ways in which Rose was unlike her mother.
Rose, having reached the age of 47 years, had never been physically abusive to her husband, nieces, and nephews. She was consistently kind and considerate of others. She was
articulate and had a sense of humor, unlike her mother, who had been surly and had spoken
rarely (and generally incoherently). Her mother had been addicted to alcohol; Rose was not.
Her mother tended to like dark rooms, while Rose thrived in sunlight and open spaces.
Distinguishing herself from her mother, and distinguishing appropriately assertive request
behaviors from abusive demand behaviors, freed Rose to approach request behaviors in a
more healthy and positive way.

[PAGE 404]

23. Narratives of Fear 387


Conduct Role Play

During both the STAIR and Narrative Therapy modules of treatment, a therapist and client continue to engage in assertiveness role-play practice at the end of sessions. In Rose's
case, one role play with particular relevance to the narrative described above concerned
Roses reported difficulty in distributing food on the table and uncertainty about how much
to give herself compared to her husband. Rose and the therapist practiced scenarios (with
appropriate language, tone of voice, and behavior) that allowed Rose to engage in a variety
of exchanges with her husband. In one, she gave all of the remaining food to her husband; in
another, she shared the remaining food. Finally, in a third, Rose was to express her desire
for the remaining items to her husband, make an explicit request to her agreeable husband
(“I really would like those two baked potatoes”), and engage in the behavior of placing the
food on her plate. The client was in fact unable to complete the third scenario in the initial
attempts. First she disavowed her desire (“You know what? I am really not that hungry. Why
dont you have some more?’
). In the second effort, when she began reaching for the platter,
she asked her husband, “Do you want me to cook you up something else?” even when he
stated he was already finished with his meal.
It was not until Rose and her therapist had elaborated the initial relationship pattern
to include its relevance to her perceptions of her mothers behavior that she was able to
participate in this role play effectively. The final alternative relationship patterns generated
from this effort were “If I make demands, then I can still be a good person,” and a more
emphatic variation, “I must identify my needs to be a good person.” In a complementary
fashion, Rose’s perceptions about her husband
's view of her were also changing. Her earlier
assumption that her husband would view her as selfish, mean, and abusive was altered to
this expectation of what he would think: “He will still love me (maybe even respect me
more) if I ask for what I want.” (See Box 23.2.)


Apply New Relationship Model to Current Life

Over time, Rose was able to view her some of her current beliefs as related to her childhood
abuse experiences, and consequently as not particularly valuable or adaptive for living in
the present. Through a review of some of her family history, and with the help of the therapist, it became apparent that her mother might have had a significant psychiatric illness; the
mother had been hospitalized at least twice, according to the reports of her siblings. This
information helped Rose create a way of understanding her mother’s behavior and of seeing
herself as quite different from her mother. The narrative work gave her a more organized,
coherent, and understandable version of her childhood. It also helped her understand why
she was “where she was at” in the present. Awareness of the particular ways that the past
influenced her present—for example, her difficulty in expressing her needs—gave her the
ability to critically analyze the necessity and value of this behavior. She also importantly
recognized that she now had the skills and resources to change her current behavior and
plan her future, guided by different expectations of herself and others.

[PAGE 405]

uossad poob v aq ]]135 vivd |Uay}
Spuvwap ayvw |y], :|epOW diysuonejes ene ula y
MOM |F0YM
AO} 750 |Y! (2AOW aw 12Y90w
hm zou wo |
4jashm aM 240] ]]125 JIM 2H
‘uosuad
‘209 09 210
djay puv ozv30d so} sv poob v ag //195
2q 39m 07 puv Spaau
‘5903020d 243 2MOYS ‘quaplJuoz
‘snolang buryso ajiym dıysu0120]34
4932049
JIM aH “wow umosb hm 10] 50 UI | bulao) UNOFUIO WN
¿Op Aayy }4biw asja yeym guonenys
hddoH
0} éulyy ** * * * 0] ¿199]
ynoge quly] * ** ynoqe 199, ** siy} ul sjeoß Aw 948 yeu
SUONDE 2,1 18U4191|y * * * uOSJad 19yO dU} JOAadxe * ** |pinos asa 1eym :JJosÁu
|PINO9 9S|9 1eyM :UOSJAd 19yJ0 9U} moqe s6ul¡99, pue sjaijeq 93A1J8U19 Y 103 sjeoß ¡euos13d.19]u]
inoqe s6ul¡99] pue sja119q 94118419] y 388
4ayzowm AZOAO puv panas hm 231] 45nT wv |uauy] ‘ SPUDW>P axow |y], :¡9pou dıysuonejoH
‘uosuad ‘QAISNGYY ‘quvzodwiur
poq “uvam ‘ysij as 6 49270) d
‘5903030d |v wmv |‘spaau sly 07 Uv 95414 spaau MO papaevaAsia au? vo 24a] S903020d
Y20q puvgsny aAvhy pu2330 ou op |J] ‘YSIFJOS and |nof ano) |A ‘habuy oma Rjuo asam 21941
¿OP |PIP 12UYM s}yBnouy} 119y1| sbfuljaaj 119y1 siyBnouy) A sBu991 A ¿pausddey yeum
JoIAeyeq Bun¡nsal Aj ~uosied 19y]o ¿yosÁuv uonenys ¡euos/ad.3]u]
984} moqe suoljej9adxa AW 319M JjeyM moqt Yuly} Pue 199] |PIP JEUM
Z-19 48410M SUSY Adiysuonejay pajajdwoy s,asoy

[PAGE 406]

23. Narratives of Fear 389


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


At the end of the session, the therapist briefly summarizes the goals of the session and discusses how the goals fit within the larger treatment goals for the specific client. These may
include reducing anxiety and PTSD symptoms, and/or reaching a better understanding of
how beliefs and feeling related to the trauma influence the clients current life. The therapist checks in with the client to see how they are feeling about completing their narrative(s)
and continuing with other narratives in the next several sessions. The therapist praises the
client for the courageous work done in this session and all the work done during the STAIR
module, which has provided the client with the skills to enable them to engage in the narrative work. The therapist highlights the importance of listening to the recording of the
trauma narrative between sessions, and briefly reviews the rationale for doing so.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


The skills practice will be similar to that assigned after Session 12. At the end of the session,
the client will have their recording of the narrative(s). The therapist requests that the client
listen to it once a day. The client therapist reminds the client to record their SUDs ratings
and any comments or observations on Handout 22.1, Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs)
during Trauma Narration, after each listening. As with previous planned skills practice, the
therapist spends time predicting any potential obstacles to the client’s completing this work
and suggesting ways to make it feasible.
The therapist will also assign specific between-session work. In Roses case, appropriate between-session work included implementation of the new relationship pattern “I can
ask for my needs to be met and still be a good person” with her husband in situations other
than negotiating at the dinner table. The client, for example, had significant health problems that she had not even disclosed to her husband, let alone asked for his help in managing. The particular conversations and requests inviting him into her life would need to be
titrated in a way that would not overwhelm him and disappoint her. Rose jotted down her
successes on additional copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2. She also continued to
practice Focused Breathing, particularly to deal with her anxiety in confronting her health
problems and making an appointment to see a doctor. Finally, as part of her continued emotion regulation skills practice, she scheduled a pleasurable activity: going for a walk around
a local lake with a friend.

[PAGE 407]

Narratives of Shame

If the client is ashamed of her past, she cannot create
an integrated life history.
—JUDITH HERMAN (2007)


Shame is an inevitable and salient consequence of interpersonal trauma, particularly
childhood abuse and neglect, but it can be difficult to explore deeply in therapy. As one
survivor wryly observed, “We have shame about feeling shamed.’ Clients often feel profound shame about their victimization because they think that they deserved or provoked
it in some way. The ensuing feelings of shame often serve as self-confirmation of their own
wrongdoing, creating a vicious cycle. The present chapter provides information to share
with the client about how shame influences the survivor, as well as reasons for telling about
shameful experiences. It also includes suggestions about the therapist's reactions to disclosure of shaming events, the importance of the therapist’s positive regard for the client, and
guidelines for sensitively conducting narrative retelling and analyses with shame themes.
Box 24.1 outlines the theme and curriculum for this session.


Guidelines for Therapists’ Response to Disclosure of Shaming Events

The aspects of the trauma about which the client is most ashamed tend to emerge only in
the later part of the therapy, during the narrative work. Disclosure of shaming experiences
creates a variety of risks, and so a client may delay or avoid doing so. A client may fear that
disclosing an experience in which they were diminished will lead the listener to view them
in a diminished way. They may worry that the listener will be disgusted and repelled by
the event, and so will be disgusted and repelled by them. They may worry that they will be
stigmatized not only for the event, but also for not having stopped the event; for not having
had the capacity to do so; or for having maintained, provoked, or encouraged the traumatic
events in some way. A clients disclosure of these events risks the revision of the therapist's
view of them as “less” —of less value, interest, or importance to the therapist. The client may


390

[PAGE 408]

24. Narratives of Shame 391


Theme and Curriculum for Sessions 13-17
Narratives of Shame


Often the most difficult aspects of a trauma story involve themes of shame. Effective work with
shame involves several aspects, the most important of which is repairing the client’s diminished
sense of worth. Ways in which this can be accomplished are critically analyzing the sources
for the client’s shame, building alternative relationship models in which they feel competent
and valued, and developing opportunities for building self-confidence and for having positive
experiences with others who value the client. The therapist also accomplishes this through
direct expressions of positive regard for the client.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Bring therapist’s copy of completed Memory Hierarchy (Handout 21.2); at least one copy of
Assessment of Postnarrative Emotional State (Handout 22.2); and several copies each of Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs) during Trauma Narration (Handout 22.1) and Relationship
Patterns Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4). This session is 60 minutes in duration.


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Discuss value of telling. Complete narrative about shame.
Conduct narrative analysis.
Provide support: Express positive regard.
Summarize the goals of the session.
Plan skills practice:
Listen to recording daily; monitor distress with Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs) dur-
ing Trauma Narration form.
Initiate at least one interpersonal situation and practice alternative relationship model(s),
using Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 to record the practice and results; include emo-
tion regulation skills as relevant to situation.
Practice Focused Breathing twice a day, and other emotion regulation skills as relevant.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 409]

392 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


SESSION HANDOUTS


Completed copy of Handout 21.2. Memory Hierarchy

Additional copies of Handout 22.1. Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs) during Trauma Nar-
ration

At least one additional copy of Handout 22.2. Assessment of Postnarrative Emotional State

Additional copies of Handout 16.4. Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2


assume that the human connection (so difficult to forge in the first place) will be broken, and
that they will be worse off than before.
A supportive, compassionate, and practical response to the client’s shaming experience
is integral to helping the client resolve negative attitudes about the self. In the experience of
shame, a person fears the negative opinion and evaluation of another. The client expects that
disclosing events in which they were demeaned will make the therapist see them in a negative light. The repeated responses by a therapist of continued support and positive regard
will help disconfirm this expectation, facilitating the client’s capacity to think in other ways
about their experiences and themselves. This attitude will be reinforced as the therapist
proposes alternative relationship models that help the client identify their own value, and as
the therapist helps them identify opportunities for building competence and having positive
experiences with others who value them.


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


The therapist begins any of these sessions with the same structure as in previous Narrative Therapy sessions: by checking in with the client about ways they practiced emotional
or relationship skills over the week, and then by focusing on what they experienced while
listening to the narrative recording from the preceding session. The therapist reviews patterns of SUDs ratings and discusses any reactions, observations, or challenges the client
may have had. After the review is complete, the therapist can once again remind the client
that the ability to think about and discuss painful memories is a skill, and can congratulate
the client on their efforts.


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


Any type of victimization leads to feelings of shame, because such events are often interpreted as signs of weakness, defeat, worthlessness, or inferiority (see Chapter 7). Childhood
abuse and neglect impose added burdens on the victim because of the social stigma associated with violation, especially sexual violation. The therapist can identify shame themes
when stories involve the client's self-description as feeling “small,” “humiliated,” “weak,”

[PAGE 410]

24. Narratives of Shame 393


“inferior, “worthless, “defective, or “nonexistent.” After a narrative, a client may judge the
earlier self in the story as a pathetic or despicable person.
Though the client has already learned by this point in the treatment that avoiding emotions only makes them stronger and feel more out of control, they will often resist exploring
feelings of shame. In fact, however, a powerful antidote to feelings of shame can be the
satisfactory disclosure of these painful experiences.
The therapist opens up the discussion by clearly articulating the several benefits of telling about shameful experiences. It is important for the therapist to be aware that their own
reactions and comments will be relevant to the clients ability to benefit from this process.
The therapist can note any of the benefits below that apply to a particular client.


DISCUSS VALUE OF TELLING

Reducing Feelings of Alienation

Shame burdens a person with a feeling of being different from others. The client may believe
that “if you knew I was victimized in this particular way, you would not connect with me.”
Telling about the trauma, and receiving a response of understanding and recognition, can
dissipate the feeling of having an “outsider status.” The client's belief that the experiences
they have undergone are “beyond the range of normal” can be revised when the therapist
conveys that what happened was terrible, but that they are not alone in their experiences.
Even when the client believes the particulars of the experience to be unique, the client can
come to realize that their feelings are experienced and understood by many.


Reducing Strength of Bond to Perpetrator

The client's traumatization has been one of the defining experiences of their life. Often,
because of the secrecy in which the trauma (particularly sexual and sometimes physical
abuse) takes place, the reality of the trauma is shared only with the perpetrator. To the
extent that the clients self-definition is reflected in this shared reality, the client remains
psychologically bonded to the perpetrator for a feeling of authenticity. The survivor may
feel that the only person who knows everything or perhaps the worst about them is the
perpetrator, and thus that the perpetrator is the only person who knows the “real me.” By
telling about the trauma, the client is able to dissolve that link and become independent
of the perpetrator for their sense of authentic personal history. The client becomes free to
experience their “real” self in full with others.


Enhancing Self-Compassion

A survivors shame often arises from belief that the trauma or their inability to escape from
it indicates that they were inherently weak, deserving of the victimization, or even inviting
of it. These beliefs are often the result of the client's childhood view of the self as “frozen in
time’ and the feeling that they are responsible for the things that happened around them.

[PAGE 411]

394 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Reevaluation of this conclusion, perhaps prompted by observation of children in day-to-day
life, can lead the client to understand the essential vulnerability of children. In addition, listening to the recordings of their trauma can provide the client with sufficient distance from
their own experience to give them sympathy for what they have lived through. Listening to
the recording can also provide a different perspective about the locus of responsibilities and
shame. The narrative is a story of what happened to the client, and it includes not only the
client but also the perpetrator. Shifting focus or widening the perspective of the story can
help the client understand the active role of the perpetrator, the perpetrators own motivations, and the powerful forces that the client was up against.


Gaining Appreciation and Awareness

The experience of self-compassion is particularly beneficial if the client is able to appreciate their capacity to have survived as they did in very difficult circumstances. A more
positive, more open, and less defensive attitude about the self will allow the survivor to
understand their own motivations and vulnerabilities with greater clarity (e.g., relationship
models based on efforts to avoid shame, or perceptions of shaming behaviors). It will provide insight about the meaning of their feelings, actions, and reactions, and help the client
map out strategies for effective change.


improving Interpersonal Relationships

Survivors negative and critical views of themselves also affect their evaluation of others.
Survivors who internalize the ideas that vulnerability is weakness and that weakness is
bad not only view themselves negatively, but often judge others in the same fashion. These
attitudes diminish opportunities for positive social experiences and the development of
sustained interpersonal relationships. The growth of self-compassion allows clients to live
much more easily with themselves, and perhaps even to feel some pride and enthusiasm.
This more positive and more generous process of self-evaluation may lead to more generous
appraisal of others. Positive changes in self-regard go hand in hand with positive changes in
regard for others. Clients thus benefit in their relationships with others, as well as in relationship to themselves.


Experiencing Agency and Facilitating Growth

Narration is an action, and as such can be an effective antidote to shame. Shame, which
often arises from a sense of being ineffectual, is countered by the experience of agency in
the creation of the story. A common, immediate, and understandable reaction to shame is
silence. But in silence, many aspects of a persons experience and identity are left misunderstood or are not understood at all. The clients personal history is reduced to a simplistic
and incomplete version of what they have experienced. In contrast, disclosure of the trauma
story can liberate the client from the burden of secrecy that often paralyzes the capacity
for self-expression and growth. If the client can tell about the trauma, even the shameful

[PAGE 412]

24. Narratives of Shame 395


parts, they can tell about anything. The client’s feelings and imagination are liberated and
can be harnessed as resources for understanding their needs and for planning their present
and future.


COMPLETE NARRATIVE ABOUT SHAME


In the way that narratives of fear must be titrated so that the client experiences mastery
over fear rather than a reinstatement of it, so too narratives of shame need to be titrated so
that the client experiences dignity rather than humiliation in the telling. Attention to feelings of shame can derive from the client's description of these feelings during the narrative
or the review of it (see Chapter 20). The therapist can suggest further exploration of events
related to these feelings, or can support the client's interest in doing so.
In shame-based narrative work, the greater portions of effort, time, and energy are
spent on the analysis of the narrative after it has been completed and an appraisal of its
meaning. Repeated telling of the story is useful to elicit details of the experience that produced the critical moments of shame. However, the transformation of shame lies in an
exploration of the client's understanding of what happened and why, and a purposeful designation of its value to the client now. A clients shame may arise from having engaged in
reprehensible acts during the course of the traumatic event(s), such as active participation
in ones own abuse or the abuse of others. The therapeutic task is to help the client realistically evaluate the context in which these events occurred, which often involve dire circumstances and limited choices. Shame also arises from the perceived lack of action or inability
to act in ways that would have averted or ended the trauma. Here too, the therapeutic goal
is to help the client toward a realistic and compassionate evaluation of their circumstances.
The transformation of shame requires continual reference to the essential worth of
individuals as they confront the ways in which they have been humiliated and diminished.
This cannot be done in a naive or simplistic way that directs clients to attend to their “positive qualities.” Rather, this process involves recognition of the psychological harm and accumulated losses that are results of the trauma, and an attendant and emerging sense of compassion for the person in the narrative and for the person who tells the story. In this way,
clients can more readily explore the past in a respectful way and can simultaneously work
toward seeing value in themselves now.
Perhaps the strongest feelings of shame emanate from circumstances in which a client reports obtaining physical pleasure from sexual abuse, or actively participating in such
abuse by initiating abuse events or engaging in the established sexual activities that constituted the abuse scenario. When a client repeats that they felt compelled to submit to
either sexual or physical abuse, the client's feelings of self-blame are often fairly easy for
the therapist to counter. A child is outmaneuvered emotionally, cognitively, and physically
by an abuser. However, in situations where the client reports initiating or provoking events,
the therapist may have more difficulty in articulating this reality. From our perspective,
however, a child's active engagement in abuse scenarios typically represents the extreme
end of the abusers domination over the child's life and the child's effort to exert a sense of

[PAGE 413]

396 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


personal control—and, in some cases, to secure their own survival when other avenues are
closed off. The following case provides an example of such a situation and describes effective therapeutic interventions.


CASE EXAMPLE 1:
CLIENT AS ACTIVELY INVOLVED IN HER OWN ABUSE


Shanique had completed three narratives of physical and sexual abuse committed by her
older brother when she was between the ages of 4 and 8. She believed that before she was
born, her brother had been physically and sexually abused by her father. Her father took off
shortly after she was born, and all she knew of him was that he had spent a lot of time in jail
for drug-related offenses. She now began telling of another period of abuse in her early teen
years. At this time, her brother was in his mid-20s.


“When I was about 9, my brother enlisted in the armed forces. So the sexual abuse
by my brother ended for a while. But things were still pretty bad for me at home. My
mother was having long periods of depression where she stayed in bed for days, just
staring at the ceiling. I'd have to take care of myself—borrow money from one of my
aunts, and do the food shopping, cleaning, and cooking. When she was up and about,
she just went out for days at a time, looking for drugs.
“About the time I was 12, my brother came back. The armed forces hadn't done
much for his temper or attitude. He was just a lot bigger now. My mother did not seem
to notice one way or the other that he was back. I was terrified. I thought I had escaped
from his torture, but no. I thought about how he had sodomized and beat me until I
was a bloody mess. I knew there was no one I could go to. Then (starts crying)—I
feel terrible to tell about this—I just gave up fighting him. It's worse. I started getting
involved with him, anticipating his moods. Hed get this glassy-eyed look, and I knew
it was time for me to give him a blow job. Sometimes I'd even bring it on more, doing
the things he liked or telling him howI liked it.
“It makes me sick. It makes me hate myself. After about 5 months of this, I realized
he was settling into the house for good. Seeing how things were going, I convinced my
best girlfriend to let me move in with her family. When I turned 18, I joined the armed
forces. I got out of there ASAP. I still hate myself, though. What I did was sick, and it
makes me sick to my stomach to think about.”


Admission of her active involvement in her own abuse was a shameful component of
Shanique’s story, and it took several narratives before this aspect of the experience emerged.
The therapist knew Shanique fairly well at this point and was able to articulate several reasons for this behavior. She presented them to Shanique, with compassion for her situation
and support for how well she had done under those circumstances.
When her brother returned from his military service, Shanique was thrown back into
a situation she thought she had escaped. At that point, she literally feared for her life and

[PAGE 414]

24. Narratives of Shame 397


knew, without a doubt, that she could not count on anyone (including her mother) to help her
survive her brothers presence. After a few years of relative peace and independence, and
just as she was entering her early teens, she was desperate for a sense of control over her body
and her environment. Her active efforts in prompting and participating in the abuse was a
way to experience control over being abused, so that she did not feel so dominated and terrified. It was a “counterphobic” response, similar to the one many individuals engage in when
confronted with a fear (such as heights or flying). Shanique hated being at the mercy of her
fear and her brother. Her behavior gave her a sense of mastery. Unfortunately, in “matching”
her brother, she also became, like him, a perpetrator of abuse—her own abuse. This left her
with feelings of self-loathing and an inescapable core belief in herself as evil and bad.
By emphasizing the purpose of Shaniques behavior, the therapist was able to provide
a way for Shanique to be more sympathetic to herself. Shanique was not being masochistic;
she was engaged in reaching a goal that most people wish for and attain relatively easily—
self-control and mastery of her body. Shanique had few if any other options to reach this
goal. The alternative for her risked complete physical dominance and subjugation.
In addition, Shanique’s past experience with her brother had informed her that he was
capable of severe violence. Now he was bigger and angrier. Shanique believed, probably
accurately, that he could kill her. She protected herself by anticipating his needs, essentially
acting like an external mood modulator. If he was not angry, he was less likely to hurt her.
She took the situation into her own hands as best she could. Taking care of his needs kept
her alive.
The therapist acknowledged the horrors that Shanique had gone through. She noted
especially that Shanique had been a survivor in the most basic meaning of the word: She
had probably saved her own life. Shanique had also effectively used the resources she had
at hand. As soon as she was able, she found other accommodations for herself with a friend’s
family, again showing her resilience in this situation. In reviewing her story with the therapist, Shanique understood that she had done the best she could, which was very good. She
had held on to her life, to emerge at another time and place where things were very different. She now had the gift of life and a choice about how to live her life in freedom and with
future opportunity.


CONDUCT NARRATIVE ANALYSIS


Clients who have experienced interpersonal trauma, particularly childhood abuse and
neglect, can have long-held negative beliefs about themselves and deeply entrenched maladaptive behavioral patterns. Change is difficult and can be frightening. Although there
is a desire for new and better ways of living, there is also resistance to leaving behind
the comfort of the familiar. This work can be very challenging for both the client and the
therapist. Narrative analysis in cases of shame involves several aspects. First, therapist and
client identify shame-related relationship models that emerge through the clients telling,
and determine how they developed in the context of the client's specific environment and
traumatic experiences.

[PAGE 415]

398 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Next, the therapist assists the client in developing alternative relationship models that
can be explored and applied in the present. To be successful, the development of alternatives to shame-driven relationship models (and their role plays) requires the regular identification, development, and support of psychological, practical, and emotional resources
that reinforce the client’s sense of value. Active efforts to demonstrate the clients value and
current competencies include explicit identification of latent positive characteristics in the
client and the enhancement of these characteristics in the STAIR activities.
The testing and application of alternative relationship models may utilize—and may
in fact require—circumstances in which the client has confidence in an identified ability
and the opportunity to share this skill with interested others. Role plays help clients practice presenting themselves in ways previously unimagined. Below, we present the case of
Jerome, which illustrates these components of narrative analysis and demonstrates how to
put it all together.


CASE EXAMPLE 2: POWERLESS OR A PERPETRATOR?


Throughout his entire life, Jerome carried a huge sense of guilt and shame related to the
childhood abuse he endured at the hands of his father. Not only did his father physically
abuse him, but he was forced to witness the abuse of his mother and little brother as well.
He believed that he should have been able to protect his mother and brother, but that he
failed to do so. Viewing himself and others as either victims or perpetrators with no roles in
between, Jerome had experienced a series of failed romantic relationships, difficulty keeping a steady job, and constant disappointment in most aspects of his life. Below, we describe
each intervention that helped Jerome to move toward the goal of reevaluating his history,
resolving some of the shame he felt about himself, reorganizing his view of himself and others, and exploring new behaviors and attitudes.
Jerome believed that he was essentially a bad person, and that this was why he had
been abused and failed to save those he loved from also experiencing trauma. He believed
that he was a failure as a man, and that he was entirely responsible for the violence his
family had endured. Several steps were taken to explore the source, viability, and adaptive
nature of these beliefs. These steps included (1) listening to the recordings of his narratives, from the perspective of an adult listening to the story of a child and revising views of
himself as “bad”; (2) engaging in critical analyses of relationship patterns by reevaluating
the sources of blame for the traumatic events; and (3) proposing alternative interpersonal
patterns and behaviors that would support connection to others and the development of
healthy models of relating.


identify Shame-Related Relationship Models in Narrative

Jerome's view of his abuse was that he must have deserved it (i.e., been a bad child), or that
he was bad because he had “let the abuse happen” to him and his family. After the childhood abuse narratives were completed, the therapist explored the reasons for these beliefs.

[PAGE 416]

24. Narratives of Shame 399


Jerome's belief that he was a bad child stemmed from being told that he was bad by his
father. This label organized and explained his experience; it created consistency between
what was happening to him (how he was treated) and who he thought he was. Jerome's
belief that he was bad for “letting himself” be physically abused as a child was being maintained by a distorted sense of his own culpability in the situation.
The therapist and Jerome reviewed the logic of these beliefs from the perspective of
an adult rather than a child. For years, Jerome had believed that he was bad for “letting
the abuse happen” because he had held on to the childhood perception that he was in
control of the events of his early life. The therapist explained that children have relatively
underdeveloped cognitive and emotional resources to control events; rather, they depend
on adults who are charged with the responsibility to care for and protect them. However,
what was most striking to Jerome was engaging in a between-session assignment to watch
neighborhood children approximately the same age as he was (between 5 and 8 years) when
he was abused. Watching them play and interact with adults provided very concrete and
realistic information about the significant levels of dependency and trust children exhibit
toward adults. Hearing his own voice on the recordings, Jerome began to have immense
compassion for that little boy who was being abused by his father. Rather than deeming him
somehow responsible for the violence inflicted upon him when he was a young, dependent
child, he began to see that in fact he had done absolutely nothing to “cause” or “deserve”
his father’s abuse.


Develop Alternative Relationship Models

Jerome had already been working in the earlier portion of treatment to reassess underlying
relationship expectations, notably the pattern “If I assert myself, then others will hurt me.”
His therapist helped him generate an alternative approach: “If I assert myself, then others
may not hurt me.” Over time, and with more successful assertiveness practice (including
stating which restaurant he wanted to go to, asking for directions, and even telling a friend
no), he was able to extend this belief to “If I assert myself, then others can still respect me.”
This underlying relationship pattern took on a whole different meaning and significance
in the context of Narrative Therapy. In the course of describing one particular memory
in which his father abruptly switched from physically abusing him to abusing his brother
instead, Jerome confided, for the first time ever, that part of him was relieved his father
gave him a break and focused on his brother instead of him. This initial relief only lasted
a split second, and then Jerome felt intense shame about his reaction. Now not only did he
view himself as bad because he allowed this to happen to his brother; he also viewed himself as a perpetrator because part of him was glad.
As Jerome completed the memory, he recalled that he had actually run in between his
father and his brother and attempted to stop his father’s violent behavior. Instead, his father
yelled at him, and then grabbed his mother and began to hit her too. Again, Jerome felt like
a perpetrator, because from his child’s perspective he had caused his mother to be hurt as
well. Rather than using this as further ammunition against himself, the therapist helped
him see that he actually was trying to save his brother. He was not a perpetrator at all; in

[PAGE 417]

400 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


fact, he was quite the opposite. Again, for the first time in his life, Jerome began to develop
a sense of compassion for that little boy who had tried in vain to protect his brother and his
mother.
When Jerome first told this narrative to his therapist, he spoke so quietly the therapist
could barely hear him, with his head hung low and his entire body slumped over in his
chair. The therapist validated his reaction and did not judge him or castigate him, as he had
anticipated. He was heartened by the therapist's response to his deepest, darkest secret. She
explained that it was perfectly natural that he would feel an initial sense of relief that he
had a brief reprieve from the hurt his father inflicted. Then when Jerome explained that it
felt even worse seeing and hearing his poor brother be hurt, the therapist could understand
how he would feel that way, too. She had him retell his narrative, but this time while sitting
up straight and using a louder, more direct tone of voice. When they processed the memory
afterward, she asked him to do his best to maintain eye contact with her. He saw her acceptance and understanding, rather than the hatred and disgust he had expected. With each
repeated telling of this story, Jerome felt the burden of shame grow less and less.
As part of the narrative analysis, Jerome identified another related trauma-generated
relationship pattern: “If I assert my needs, then others will be hurt.” He had linked his
attempts to protect himself and his family with not only his own punishment, but punishment of those he cared about. The alternative pattern—
If I assert my needs, then others
can still respect me’—took on extended meaning as he reassured himself that in the present, standing up for oneself did not equal terrible things happening.


Determine Resources

With a new perspective on his abuse history, Jerome turned to building capacities in the
present. Armed with the realization that he had not caused his abuse, and that he was not
a failure because he could not protect his mother and brother, he continued to experiment
with new, revised relationship patterns that were more applicable to the here and now. He
continued to make requests and express his opinions and feelings. He reminded himself
repeatedly, “That was then; this is now,” when he worried about the consequences of being
assertive.
His budding sense of compassion for himself and what he had been through allowed
him to finally consider that people actually meant it when they said they liked him or liked
his work. Jerome was a very skilled carpenter, but he had never pursued this as a career
interest, because he did not believe the positive feedback he received. He always gave away
his work for free, assuming that he did not deserve to get paid for his efforts. Furthermore,
he had never before entertained the possibility that he could be self-employed doing something he truly loved. He was now interested in exploring the possibility of starting his own
carpentry business and began advertising his services.
Jerome also wanted to challenge himself in what he called “the final frontier”—romantic relationships. He had never sought out anyone; all of his relationships had developed
from women who had approached him. For years he had been interested in Tonia, a friend
of his cousin. He had recently asked her out on a date, and much to his delight, she said yes.

[PAGE 418]

24. Narratives of Shame 401


He was now trying to enact alternative relationship patterns with her, such as “If I express
my opinions, people will be interested.” He was starting to believe that friendships and
romantic relationships could be resources for coping with life's difficulties and for experiencing life's pleasures.


Conduct Role Play

Jerome had the opportunity to test these new relationship beliefs when he accepted a potential job: building a bookcase for an acquaintance. The acquaintance, however, offered to pay
him less than what it would cost for him to purchase the materials. He was not sure how to
handle this, and he brought in a completed Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 to discuss
with his therapist (see Box 24.2).
When the therapist proposed that he negotiate for more money, his first reaction was
“T am being selfish. They are probably just doing me a favor, anyway.” The therapist pointed
out that this way of thinking was based upon a trauma-based relationship pattern: “If I am
assertive, then others will hurt me.” Together, they developed new ways of approaching this
situation, focused on the acknowledgment that it was OK for Jerome to ask for a fee that was
commensurate with his effort and time. This capitalized on the new relationship pattern: “Tf
I assertive, then others might respect me.”
Jerome and the therapist engaged in a role play so that he could practice negotiating a
reasonable fee. Initially he was very apologetic and explained how the cost of lumber had
risen exponentially in recent weeks; he also spoke in a quiet and subdued tone while looking
down at the floor. The therapist praised some aspects of the role play, but also pointed out
that Jerome need not apologize for the price of lumber—that he had the right to ask for a
fair fee in a way that was direct and clear. The therapist then modeled how he might ask for
the fee in a respectful yet unapologetic manner. Jerome reminded himself that being assertive would not automatically lead to something terrible happening, and he then tried the
role play again. This time he adopted a bit of the therapist's style in a way that felt comfortable to him, and he requested a reasonable fee in a more confident fashion. Now that he had
practiced this in session, he was ready to try it out in the real world.


PROVIDE SUPPORT: EXPRESS POSITIVE REGARD


The therapist’s capacity to convey their continued perception of the client's positive value
can counter the clients incipient feelings of shame provoked by struggles in meeting the
challenges in the treatment work. These struggles may include difficulties in completing
the narratives, assimilating new relationship models, and/or practicing self-enhancing exercises. The therapist makes observations about what the client has felt, said, or done that support the positive valuation of the client. This valuation is reinforced by working steadfastly
with the client on the tasks of the therapy with hope and vigor.
A therapist's positive regard for a client is generally viewed as a “nonspecific” positive
aspect of the therapy. Some of our own research, however, suggests that the therapist's

[PAGE 419]

s,awoser pa}ajdwoy diysuonejay Su1oNed 2-19 ysy1oM
Jeym |PIP 1994 pue Yuıyı Inoge
Jeym 219M AW suoepedxe moqe dy]
¡euos1ad13]ul] uolj}enys és[asAw 19yjo ~uosied Aj Bun¡nsal Joineyoq
1eym ¿pausddey AW sBu199} Aw sıyßnoy} L
119y sbuljaoy |119y1 siybnoy] 1UYM PIP |¿OP

Y 12WM0ISNI SIUOM BW 09 |"PINOIS |pjnoys 3uno9 abu aH yzsnfs) buihaz 07 |92044 puv plus |pjnom
ayow Y WMO0FSNI 950970 9 “pas vsdvqad Jyashw avohuy Axon) pjnom 20929 ıppaid OP am 0 JOAO] yulyz 32nogo 91
40} Wily 10} 552] VOY? 949

aaiad Jo ‘saljddns zuvM am 07 ayow
‘bulyzawos ¿mo

dıysuomejay |y], :¡9pou WMV BAIZAISSO ‘ uay] ¡Im Any am
402


9A12UI9YY sja119q pue sHhuljaej inoqe
¡euos.13d.13]u] sjeoß 103 95118U19]y sja119q pue s6ul99] moqe ay} J9ylO :uosıod JEU 3S|3 PINOD | suonst
9AIJEUJIONY
:JJ9asÁv JeyM asja p¡no9 |* * " 1909dX9 ay] 190 uosıod -*
** ¡99] moqe
** 0] el88 04°" ¿MUIU] yeym asja Pinos |¿OP

euolenyis 2H how R]]oaı quem Jeym asia ıyBıu Aay} ¿op
Pjan219ssy puv
391 O A10} ‘aaiad Y 9)F21) “SNOAAaU
Inq Oso ‘95097009 h)ny200dsa, 23o130b9u v
'¿UIPIJUOI
AamOJSNI ‘002,


SANUS Ciysuoijejas |y], :|opow WO 21919550

UdU} sAay70 34biw 399d524 am

[PAGE 420]

24. Narratives of Shame 403


positive regard for the client does not exist in a vacuum, but is part of a collaborative working relationship, which is expressed through active engagement in competency-enhancing
activities (Cloitre et al., 2004). The experience of someone (in this case, a therapist) expending effort on behalf of a client and showing interest in their problems may contribute to
persuading the client of their own value.


Challenge: When Clients Don’t Tell

Clients in short-term treatment may not have the opportunity, readiness, or inclination to
reveal humiliating details of what has happened to them. There is a risk that if clients withhold something important about themselves, they will discount the therapist’s good opinion
of them and the value of the work they have completed. A client may think, “If the therapist
really knew who I was, they would not think well of me,” or “If the therapist knew what
happened then, they would realize I am “damaged goods. ” This outcome may be avoided
by saying something to the client that acknowledges and “normalizes” the possibility that
they may not be able to disclose particularly painful or humiliating aspects of their trauma.
Here is an example:


“I understand that there may be some things that are very difficult for you to say, and
that you may in fact not be able to tell about them right now. Many people have this
experience. This will not in any way reduce the value of your efforts here or the prog-
ress you have made. You can identify important trauma-based relationship models
without necessarily stating or even knowing all of the reasons you hold these beliefs.
Similarly, the new relationship models you have developed are valuable and consistent
with the person you are now and are becoming. You have gone through terrible things.
You deserve to live a good life now, and as best as you are able.”


Role of Therapeutic Relationship in Transforming Shame

The therapist's behavior plays a particularly important role in the client's recovery from
shame. As described in some detail in the case of Jerome, the therapist actively works
with the client in implementing the interventions of the treatment to identify and revise
shame-based relationship models and behaviors. In addition, the therapist’s attitude of
compassion about what has been shaming for the client is itself a therapeutic intervention.
It contradicts the expectation that when the client discloses events of gross humiliation, the
therapist will be appalled, think less of them, or create distance or a break in the relationship. Shameful events engender not only a fear of rejection, but, in the big picture, fear of
permanent dislocation outside the mainstream of ordinary life. The positive interaction
between the therapist and client upon disclosure of demeaning stories models for the client
the possibility of acceptance by another. When the therapist describes the clients circumstances with respect and compassion, the client understands their own experience in a new
way, through the therapist's eyes. The client's experience of shame is transformed into one
of self-respect.

[PAGE 421]

404 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


At the end of the session, the therapist briefly summarizes the goals of the session and
discusses how the goals fit within the larger treatment goals for the specific client. These
include exploring feelings of shame that are the consequence of the client's interpersonal
trauma, and beginning to rework negative beliefs that the client was somehow deserving of
or to blame for their victimization, which have perpetuated isolation. The therapist checks
in with the client to see how they are feeling about completing their narrative(s), especially
in regard to telling about the aspects of which they have been most ashamed. The therapist
expresses admiration for the courageous work done as well as appreciation for the risks that
the client has taken by sharing in this session. The therapist highlights the importance of listening to the recording of the trauma narrative between sessions, and again briefly reviews
the rationale for doing so.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


The client is instructed to listen to the recording of the latest narrative daily during the
week, and to identify relationship models of shame they hear in the narrative. The therapist
and client have already identified some of these models and role-played some alternative
formulations of them. Now the client and therapist can also determine a real-life circumstance in which the client can practice alternative relationship models, using a copy of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4) to record the results. Practice of Focused
Breathing twice a day, as well as of other emotion regulation skills as relevant, continues.
The therapist and client can determine collaboratively the skills that make the most sense
for the client to practice at this point in the treatment.

[PAGE 422]

Narratives of Loss


Grieving for . . . lost opportunities, for lost childhood, for lost
innocence, for losses of long ago and far away is quite difficult. .. .
for traumatic losses that do not involve immediate death, grieving
is often an uncharted and socially unsupported wilderness.
—SANDRA L. BLOOM AND MICHAEL REICHERT (1998, p. 193)


The experience of loss, like that of shame, has not always been directly addressed in traditional trauma treatments. In part, this is because feelings of loss often emerge relatively
late in the working through of trauma, particularly childhood abuse and neglect. In order
to truly understand and mourn losses suffered in the context of interpersonal trauma, one
must first feel deserving of the care, protection, and resources that were not available at the
time of the event(s). The belief among some clients that their traumatic experiences were
deserved or are in some way “normative interferes with the development of self-compassion
and a healthy sense of entitlement, both of which are relevant to the grieving process.
In addition, the grief for “what never was and never can be” is often very acute and
can amplify other negative trauma-related feelings, such as shame. Typically, survivors have
warded off feelings of sadness about their histories through avoidance and numbing, or
through focusing solely on their anger. As one client put it, “If I let myself really feel how
sad my life has been, I would never stop crying. I would turn to mush, and you would have
to peel me off the floor.”
However, until a client can conceptualize what their past might or should have been,
and can allow for sorrow associated with this recognition, it is likely that they will remain
stuck in this past. In contrast, helping the client to tolerate and process feelings of sadness
and grief associated with interpersonal trauma and its costs can, over time, serve to further
decrease symptoms of numbing and avoidance. It can also increase the possibility of developing a more positive and meaningful personal identity and better connections with others.
Box 25.1 outlines the theme and curriculum for working with narratives of loss in Sessions
13-17 of treatment.


405

[PAGE 423]

406 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Theme and Curriculum for Sessions 13-17
Narratives of Loss


Themes of loss tend to emerge during narrative work. This emergence provides a valuable
opportunity to help the client initiate the grief process. Successful engagement in this effort
can result in decreased avoidance and numbing symptoms, increased self-compassion, and
increased intimacy and openness in relationships. The therapist listens for ways sadness and
loss are expressed in narratives (e.g., loss of protective parent figure, loss of childhood, loss of
time), and describes potential long-term benefits of tolerating and processing painful trauma-
related loss experiences. The therapist provides support and containment while encouraging
the client to elaborate on feelings and to mourn losses. The therapist also helps the client to
identify the impact of loss experiences on current relationships through relationship models,
and to generate and practice alternative models that will increase positive connections with
others in the present.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Bring therapists copy of completed Memory Hierarchy (Handout 21.2); at least one copy of
Assessment of Postnarrative Emotional State (Handout 22.2); and several copies each of Sub-
jective Units of Distress (SUDs) during Trauma Narration (Handout 22.1) and Relationship
Patterns Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4). This session is 60 minutes in duration.


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Explore reasons to discuss loss and to grieve.
Complete narrative about loss.
Conduct narrative analysis.
Provide support: Share the burden of pain.
Summarize the goals of the session.
(continued)


From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright O 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 424]

25. Narratives of Loss 407


Plan skills practice:
Listen to recording daily; monitor stress with Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs) during
Trauma Narration form.
Initiate at least one interpersonal situation and practice alternative relationship model(s),
using Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 to record the practice and results; include emo-
tion regulation skills as relevant to situation.
Practice Focused Breathing twice a day, and other emotion regulation skills as relevant.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Completed copy of Handout 21.2. Memory Hierarchy

Additional copies of Handout 22.1. Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs) during Trauma Nar-
ration

At least one additional copy of Handout 22.2. Assessment of Postnarrative Emotional State

Additional copies of Handout 16.4. Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


The therapist begins with checking in about ways the client practiced emotion or relationship skills over the week, and then by focusing on what the client experienced in terms of
listening to narrative recordings from last session, including a review of SUDs ratings as
well as any reactions, observations, or challenges the client encountered. After the review
is complete, the therapist can again remind the client that the ability to think about and
discuss painful memories is a skill, and can congratulate them on their efforts.


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


The therapist needs to listen for how themes and layers of loss (e.g., loss of protective parental figure, loss of childhood, loss of time) are expressed in narratives, and to observe these
with the client. The therapist elicits the clients own observations of these themes as they
listen to recordings of narratives both in and outside of sessions. Often clients have been
too busy recruiting their emotional and cognitive resources to manage fear reactions, which
typically carry with them a sense of urgency and crisis, and have not attended to their experiences of loss.
As they often are with feelings of fear, clients may be somewhat avoidant of, or reluctant
to deal with, feelings of sadness. If themes of loss are present in a narrative, the therapist
may broach the theme by making comments such as “It sounds like such a sad and terrible
thing to have happened.” Sometimes a clients feelings of anger indicate an awareness or
belief that the trauma has “cheated” them of what they should have had. If so, the therapist

[PAGE 425]

408 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


asks the client to articulate what specifically makes them angry about what has happened.
Typically underneath anger are feelings of sadness and hurt.
Sometimes clients who were maltreated as children say they feel angry or sad when
they think or tell about their abuse or neglect, but cannot specify what makes them feel that
way. One exercise that can be helpful in this regard is to ask such a client between sessions
to observe a child who is about the same age as they were at the time of the abuse or neglect.
The client watches how a “normal,” nonmaltreating caregiver interacts with the child, and
then wonders, “What does that child have or do that I did not?” This exercise often evokes
powerful loss-related feelings.


EXPLORE REASONS TO DISCUSS LOSS AND TO GRIEVE


Though the client has already learned by this point in the treatment that avoiding emotions
only makes the emotions feel stronger and more out of control, many questions and anxieties
are still often raised: “Why do I have to feel sad about it?”, “How is that going to help me?”,
“What good is feeling sorry for myself?”, and the like. The therapist must acknowledge the
pain and distress involved in this process, empathize with the client's fears about delving
into feelings of sadness, and understand their skepticism about how this will be helpful. In
response to the implicit or explicit question “Why should I grieve?”, the therapist articulates
clearly to the client potential important long-term benefits of doing this work, described
below.


Liberate Emotional and Physical Energies

Giving voice to feelings of underlying sadness and grief can provide tremendous relief and
decrease the level of mental energy the client has been consistently expending to avoid feelings and reminders of the past. This makes more energy available for the client to develop
their life in the present. Since it is not possible to numb only negative feelings, allowing sadness to come to the surface also increases the possibility of experiencing more positive emotions, such as happiness. In this way, the grief process ultimately facilitates the availability
of a fuller spectrum of feelings, where previously there was access to only a constricted
range.


Disrupt Links between Loss/Grief and PTSD Symptoms

As appropriate, the therapist helps the client recognize ways that unprocessed loss feelings
may be keeping them stuck and perpetuating PTSD symptoms. When difficult feelings from
the past are expressed in the present, their power to disrupt the future may be decreased.


Cultivate Self-Compassion

Often even if a survivor is no longer in a traumatic relationship, they are still perpetuating
these experiences through self-blame, intolerance of their emotions, and invalidation of

[PAGE 426]

25. Narratives of Loss 409


their life experiences. One of the main goals of grieving is to gain more compassion toward
oneself and to cultivate respect for what one has endured.


increase Capacity for Meaningful Interpersonal Relationships

As self-compassion develops, a client also has the possibility of forming more meaningful interpersonal connections. Being dismissive of one’s own emotional experiences can
make it difficult to be understanding and remain open to those of others. Being locked in a
self-protective mode breeds isolation and alienation. In contrast, becoming more empathic
toward the self often translates into becoming more empathic toward others. The increase
in openness and authenticity that often accompanies the grief process is likely to elicit more
responsiveness and engagement on the part of others.


Find Value in the Present

Developing a deeper understanding of what has been missing can allow a client to put
more value on the things they do have in the present and could have in the future. The
distress associated with loss can provide a powerful impetus for making life changes, so
that at least some of what has been lost can be balanced by what can be had in the present.
The alternative—avoidance of grief—keeps the client emotionally paralyzed and prevents
growth.


COMPLETE NARRATIVE ABOUT LOSS


Although a client may accept the value of grieving and be aware of their sadness, they still
may not have a clear understanding of what exactly they have lost and feel sad about. By
revisiting the trauma, the client can experience greater clarity about what makes them sad.
Telling about the losses will help clarify events that were significant to the client and the
impact that these experiences have had on both their beliefs about the self and their current behaviors. Procedures for conducting loss narratives are the same as those described
in Chapter 22.
Narratives of loss, like all trauma narratives, also provide the client with the opportunity to have someone bear witness to the loss and share in remembrance of the child
who once was before the trauma, or who never was and could have been. This may lead to
ways of creating some aspects of the imagined but lost self, or identified experiential losses,
through planned activities in the present.


CONDUCT NARRATIVE ANALYSIS


Grieving for the losses engendered by interpersonal trauma requires that they first be recognized. This recognition is often hampered bya client’s critical and self-blaming attributions
about their history. The therapist can make efforts to promote respect and understanding

[PAGE 427]

410 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


of the experiences the client has endured. Often listening to recordings provides useful
distance, which can be effective in helping the client develop self-compassion (e.g., “T felt
sorry for that little girl”). If the client is still having difficulty accessing feelings of sadness,
sharing the impact that hearing the narrative has had on the therapist can be an effective
catalyst (e.g., “When I was listening, I was aware of how desperate and abandoned that little
girl sounded, and it made me feel very sad that nobody was taking care of her”). In this
context, the client will be able to identify relationship models they developed that reflect
themes of loss and that perpetuate associated painful feelings in their present relationships.
The therapist helps the client understand how their feelings of loss typically get reactivated and reenacted, and identify current relationships in which this is most likely to
happen. The development of alternative relationship models will emphasize changes that
decrease the sense of loss and increase social connection. This may include the client's
either distancing/detaching from, or making changes in, particular relationships that tend
to trigger loss feelings. Covert modeling and role playing can be used in sessions to experiment with different ways of interacting, so as to identify how the client could increase
feelings of connection and decrease feelings of detachment in interpersonal interactions. A
description of this process is provided in the case example below.
Coming to terms with trauma-related losses can be more tolerable if clients can gain
a sense that some good can come in the present from having had to endure such painful
experiences in the past. Clients may benefit from considering how their loss experiences
give them a unique ability to value and appreciate certain things others may waste or take
for granted. Clients can also gain from realizing what they have lost by identifying areas in
their lives where they want to make changes. For example, clients who feel they have lost
time because of the trauma can work on turning that feeling around by better valuing and
making use of the time they still do have.
Role plays associated with grief usually reflect fears of intimacy and of abandonment.
Role plays about building relationships are successful when a client is guided by strategies
that allow them to go slowly and in an informed way (“Who is this person?”, “What do I
do?”) in seeking out the companionship and friendship of others. The case of Juanita demonstrates this process.


CASE EXAMPLE: LAYERS OF LOSS


The case of Juanita, a 67-year-old single woman with a history of sexual abuse and longstanding PTSD symptoms, serves to illustrate some common ways loss themes emerge in
narratives and how they can be worked with in the treatment.
Juanita’s mother was a single parent who worked long hours to support the family.
Juanitas uncle lived nearby and often helped out by doing repairs around the house and
caring for the kids. When she was 10, her uncle began molesting her. After the first few
times, Juanita told her mother that she no longer wanted to be left alone with him. Juanita’s
mother found her change in attitude toward her uncle surprising, but did not make much of
it and also felt that there was no alternative to relying on the uncle for help. Over the next
few months, her uncle began forcing himself on her more frequently, and Juanita realized

[PAGE 428]

25. Narratives of Loss 411


that she would have to explain what was going on if there was to be any change: “I didnt
want to tell her about the things he was doing to me, because I knew she would be upset,
but I wanted it to stop.” According to Juanita, her mother initially dismissed it by saying,
“Your uncle loves you and would never hurt you or me.” Juanita persisted and got more specific about the abuse. In shock and disbelief, her mother asked Juanita for more details and
began shaking upon hearing them. Juanita remembers her mother desperately grabbing her
and sobbing as she said things like “How could he do this to me?” and “How could I not
have known?”
Juanita felt incredibly guilty and frightened by her mother's reaction. In order to stop
her own mounting anxiety and dread, she told her mother that she had made it all up.
Juanita’ mother accepted this explanation, asked no further questions, and never brought it
up again. Juanita’s uncle continued to spend time around the house and continued to molest
her until she was 16, at which time he moved to another state. Juanita did not try to tell her
mother or anyone else about the abuse again, figuring it would be in everyone’ best interest
if she pretended it never happened.


identify Loss-Related Relationship Models in Narrative

Loss of parental protector

Juanita remembered idealizing her uncle prior to the abuse and viewing him as a surrogate
father—someone she loved and could turn to if she needed help. Her subsequent abuse
experiences with him led her to believe that trusting others in relationships was dangerous
and likely to end in betrayal of that trust. The way she managed her feelings of bewilderment and anger at this betrayal by someone she had been raised to believe loved her and
had her best interests at heart was to “turn off” all thoughts and feelings about it. The
unprocessed anger and grief that emerged during the narrative process, though at times
overwhelming, did not surprise Juanita: “I always knew it was there, but was afraid to face
it” With the support of her therapist, and equipped with improved emotion regulation
skills, Juanita was able to verbalize and move through some of these feelings. Over time,
they lost some of their power over her.
What caught Juanita off guard were her intense and complicated feelings toward her
mother, which also emerged through the narratives. Prior to this phase of the treatment,
Juanita had remained protective of her mother, feeling that she had done her best with limited resources. Juanita said she had forgiven her mother for “not knowing” that the abuse
was going on, and felt that it was in large part her own fault for making the decision to take
back her original report of the molestation.
During Juanitas telling of the abuse during the narrative portion of treatment, the deep
loss she felt with regard to her mother became apparent to both the therapist and herself.
It was Juanita’s sense that after she disclosed the abuse, there was a change in her relationship with her mother. For example, she felt that her mother spent less time alone with her
and avoided asking her what was going on when Juanita seemed upset. The therapist was
able to identify how these experiences formed the basis for another of Juanita’s relationship
models—the expectation that if she were to tell others about pain she was experiencing,

[PAGE 429]

412 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


they would be likely to become overwhelmed and withdraw from her. Juanita became very
panicky as feelings about being abandoned by her mother came to the forefront in the treatment. The therapist worked with Juanita to integrate and accept her previously unexpressed
feelings of anger and grief about her mother’s absence and her failure to protect Juanita,
allowing them to coexist with the knowledge that her mother was fragile and depressed. It
was important for Juanita to realize the extent of her losses: She had in effect been abandoned not by one of her central caregivers, but by both. This knowledge and understanding
allowed her to feel more tolerant of her continued difficulties in putting her childhood abuse
behind her.


Loss of childhood

In one of her narratives, Juanita vividly recalled being able to hear kids from the neighborhood laughing and playing outside while her uncle was having sex with her. This memory
tapped into the reservoir of grief she felt about not having had a “normal,” carefree childhood. Because she had been victimized and forced into having sex prematurely by a trusted
adult, she was not afforded the period of dormant sexuality and innocence most children
have during their early preadolescent years. Juanita went on to share how knowing more
than she should about sex made her feel very different and isolated from other kids her age,
which was another source of great sadness to her: “While other kids were playing tag with
friends, I was inside having sex.” Juanita described her transformation from a happy and
trusting little girl to a scared, shy, and strange one. Prior to the narrative analysis, this dramatic shift in her demeanor had been incomprehensible and had been viewed by Juanita as
further evidence of her “defectiveness —which drove her anxiety about being exposed, and
which continued in the present to minimize the degree to which she was willing to let other
people get to know her. Being able to link these changes to her trauma experiences provided
her with a way to challenge her belief that she had been at fault for taking back her original
story. Instead, Juanita was able to see how she did in fact continue to try to communicate
to others that something was very wrong. This understanding of events and their sequence
also provided Juanita with a sense of order and meaning about what had previously felt
confusing and mysterious to her.


Loss of time

Symptoms of avoidance and the loss-related relationship models Juanita had developed perpetuated her social discomfort, mistrust, and disappointment in others, and continued to
affect Juanita in numerous ways in adulthood. Though she was likeable and often sought out,
Juanita had very few close relationships. The friends she did have, she kept at arm's length;
she rarely socialized and did not invite anyone over to her house. She had been intimately
involved with one man when she was in her late 20s, but according to Juanita, this relationship had been a constant source of pain. She described a cycle in which he often made
plans and promises that he did not keep, which left Juanita feeling “needy” and “deserted.”
Juanita had trouble understanding why, instead of ending the relationship, she continued to
hold out hope for so long that she would get what she wanted from him. After he eventually

[PAGE 430]

25. Narratives of Loss 413


ended the relationship, Juanita made the decision that she would not give another person
the power to hurt her so deeply. As a result, she did not pursue any potential romantic situations when they arose, because she felt much more comfortable being on her own. However,
she was now acutely aware of the consequences of shutting herself off in this way, and she
began to feel despair at never having had children and created a family of her own.
Instead, Juanita had thrown herself into her work, which she described as her “relationship.” She volunteered to take on extra duties and work extra hours, and she explained that
her work was her greatest source of fulfillment. Now that she was on the cusp of retirement,
however, she was feeling very anxious about how she would spend her time. Most importantly, she was now realizing how lonely she was, and she could not help wondering how her
life might have been different if she had not experienced trauma.
Through narrative analysis, Juanitas growing awareness of the connection between her
abuse experiences and current interpersonal difficulties compounded her anger and grief.
She wondered how she would ever be able to make up for the time and life experiences she
had lost. She also felt depressed that her early abuse experiences were continuing to have
such an impact on her life. Juanitas therapist worked with her on accepting that what had
been lost could not be reclaimed, but also on identifying ways in which these losses could be
used to make meaningful changes in the present. Though it was quite distressing for Juanita
to face just how much her trauma experiences were continuing to “rob” her in the present,
this awareness ultimately provided tremendous motivation for her to finally begin making
some important life changes, including taking more risks in relationships.
Juanita also began to recognize that though her trauma-related losses would always be
there, they could become more manageable and ebb and flow at different times, rather than
remain at such an intense and disorganizing level. Also critical was her belief in her therapist's rationale that the grief related to the past would lessen as she became more engaged
in the present.


Develop Alternative Relationship Models

Accessing her loss and grief feelings in Narrative Therapy provided Juanita with more clarity about the emotional context in which her models of relationships were developed. Based
on her experiences, Juanita had learned to expect that people she trusted would use or
abandon her, and that expressing her needs would ultimately lead to loss of relationships. In
order to cope with these contingencies, Juanita had learned to be extremely guarded and
to maintain a facade of independence and self-sufficiency. Though this strategy had once
served an adaptive function, it was no longer useful, as evidenced by her ongoing PTSD
symptoms, depression, and isolation.
Juanita’s therapist worked with her to identify the benefits and costs of this method of
self-protection that had become so ingrained. Through continued use of both Relationship
Patterns Worksheets, she could observe concretely how at present these models, rather than
sparing her emotional pain, actually perpetuated her feelings of disappointment/abandonment and confirmed her belief that others could never fill the void created by earlier losses.
Though she did not give others much opportunity and sent strong signals for others to keep
their distance, she still often felt abandoned by others and believed that they should figure

[PAGE 431]

414 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


out what she was really needing or wanting. The therapist was also able to work with Juanita
on noticing how her assumptions about others were based on the past and not necessarily
applicable to some of her current relationships. She began to consider the idea that rather
than driving others away or setting herself up for hurt, being more open and less guarded
could actually result in others’ feeling more connected and interested in her.


Conduct Role Play

An opportunity soon became available for Juanita to experiment with an alternative way of
interacting. One consequence of Juanitas taking more social risks was that she began getting more invitations. When a long-time acquaintance, Ben, asked her out on a date, Juanita
was taken off guard. She told him she would get back to him, but then avoided contacting
him and stopped going to places they both frequented. She reported feeling guilty and “like
a coward.”
Using a copy of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (see Box 25.2), Juanita and her
therapist were able to break down and examine her beliefs and expectations of the situation
that were driving her avoidance behavior. Juanita said that she was interested in Ben, but
felt she could not afford to risk being hurt: “He thinks he wants to get to know me better, but
what if he does and then decides he doesnt like me?” In addition to prematurely preparing
for a negative outcome, Juanita was also assuming that if things did not work out, she would
be unable to handle it. Juanita's automatic beliefs about Ben were that he probably did not
know many other single women and was really just desperate.
When asked about her interpersonal goals, Juanita identified her desire to break her
cycle of avoidance and stop basing her behavior on negative expectations from the past.
Juanita agreed that if nothing else, the situation with Ben could be a good practice opportunity. When asked about her alternative beliefs, she said she could believe it possible to
take the risk to go out on a date and potentially get to know someone. She could also try to
trust that if it did not work out, she would be able to cope. Juanita and her therapist discussed how this potential “loss” would be different from past losses, given that she was now
an adult with coping skills who did not need to rely on others to take care of her. In terms
of Ben's intentions, Juanita felt she could believe that he was not out to use her, but that
maybe he was interested in actually getting to know her. Juanita and her therapist did some
role playing of a scenario in which Juanita called Ben, expressed an interest in a date, and
offered an apology for not getting back to him sooner. Also, the therapist and Juanita agreed
that it would be important for her to determine the parameters that were comfortable for
her, and to take it slowly by keeping the date brief and casual.
This example shows the importance of encouraging a client toward new behaviors in
seemingly safe situations, while keeping in mind that other people's responses are not in
the client's control. In this case, Juanitas alternative belief that she could handle it even
if things did not work out kept the emphasis on her own role in the interaction. Luckily,
Juanita’s willingness to take this work outside of the session resulted in her getting positive
feedback from Ben. Thus, as Juanita was in the process of mourning past losses, she was also
simultaneously building more opportunities for intimacy in the present. These therapeutic

[PAGE 432]

s,eyuenr payajdwoy dıysuonejay SUsa}Jeg Z—J9 4S4 0M

Jeym 919M Aw suonej9adxa moqe 3y1
jeuos ads9}U] uoljenjis és;esAw 19yjo ¿uosiad Aj Bunnsal J0/Aeyaq
1e4ym ¿paueddey AW sbujae} AW sıyßnoyp 119yL sBuloa] eyL| sıyßnoyp Yeum PIP |¿OP
|SOM parysv NO vio 0 220p ||wv hj oaA hym ppnom ay uum |
aH hjguvgord 2H 2.usaop h]]0a4 paploay bulnib wiy uv
hg “ug auoawos |2Awy “paxo9s| 02 2q yalm dam s}aa4 AJOS 404 aavy| Ruv Jayzo Aamsuv paddoys bulob 07
UMOVA 10) v haar Duo) |uvm 2MPppmoo03 fos ou 1 |
aw (Bard)
9402 JH suolgdo 2yb14 ‘mov saoojd| ay aybım ‘aq
3119 os ay zybiwm so Jam 9/24 21] O “PAOMOI
| 99499UM09 Y2IM
ob qno yaım “am
wily puv vayz ay

99399194 ‘am


415

anAıeUJ94Y sjaijaq pue s£6ul¡99, inoqe
¡euos.3d.13]u] sjeoß 103 y
91184191] sja119q pue sbulj99] moqe ayl 19440 :uosıod JeyM osjo PINO9 | 321118U191|y SUONDE
uonenys :yasAw 1eym asja p¡no9 |* * JDadxa ay] JOJO uosı1od "*

Jeym ose Aw sjeoß ul siy} ** 0] ¿1994 01°" emul 1LUYM 3S|9 PINO9 |«OP

«uonenys és[asAw 1eyM asja
quasaj ip 2H how aq 2H how 30u 2q qno 146
ru Áay1 ¿op
| O wo
OL 93702 210m JO190S 9945919441 Ul 02 asn am
vos4ad |Voy. Vl SOM 221by 07 ob vo ‘az0p ang
SASIA puv faz 02 dojanap buiyo7 249 SIA daar 7) jonsva pu yalıq
sdiysu0140)24 yaım 03 295 09 movy 22 ‘sud 09 MOUY ‘am
“ajdood
‘Quoawos
O] ayow UD 21990 |Mow arvy buidoz
VIOISIDIP 1IYIVA UOY?
J] 2) saop jou S))IAS Pu ‘S9DANOSA

Isn! “prono 20N 02 2509
+ 2]puo
aAlzobau ‘sui0lz0390dxa

sAjeusay Aiysuoiejas :¡9pou y], |2302 V ASIA 03 7ab 09 mov ‘Wy USy] ay IM ]2g 295919341 ul bulg32D 07 MouY am

[PAGE 433]

416 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


activities reinforced each other and provided the needed momentum for continued progress
in treatment.


PROVIDE SUPPORT: SHARE THE BURDEN OF PAIN


The therapist's role is to offer a consistent source of containment, support, and empathy
while the client elaborates on loss experiences and begins mourning. This involves reminding the client that they do not have to bear their pain alone, and identifying ways they can
keep this in mind between sessions (e.g., letting other trusted people in their life know what
is going on; reading something written in the clinician's handwriting; or keeping a symbolic
token from the therapist with them, such as a paperweight or stone). This also involves
reminding the client of coping strategies they have learned earlier in the treatment (e.g.,
distress tolerance) to deal with intense feelings that may arise.


SUMMARIZE THE GOALS OF THE SESSION


As in previous sessions, the therapist briefly summarizes the session goals at the end, and
how they fit within the larger treatment goals for the specific client. These include helping
the client to identify and process feelings of sadness associated with their interpersonal
trauma history, and to understand how their losses may continue to impact current relationships. The therapist checks in with the client to see how they are feeling about completing
their narrative(s). The therapist also acknowledges the courageous work done by the client
in this session around facing grief, which will ultimately allow them to be more present and
connected to others. The therapist reiterates the importance of listening to the trauma narrative recording between sessions, and if needed, again briefly reviews the rationale for it.


PLAN SKILLS PRACTICE


As in other Narrative Therapy sessions, the client is directed to listen to the recording of
the latest narrative daily during the week and to monitor stress with the Subjective Units
of Distress (SUDs) during Trauma Narration form (Handout 22.1). This time the client will
focus on recognizing relationship models of loss as they come up in the narrative. The therapist and client have already identified and begun work on revising these models through
the role plays; they can now determine how the client can build on this work in interpersonal interactions outside of treatment, using copies of Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2
(Handout 16.4) to record the results. Practice of Focused Breathing twice a day continues,
as well as practice of emotion regulation skills, with specific exercises being based on the
individual client's needs and circumstances.

[PAGE 434]

The Final Session


Freedom is what you do with what's been done to you.
—JEAN-PAUL SARTRE (quoted by Steinem, 1992, p. 63)


The goals of the final session are to summarize and reflect on the client's progress, identify
relapse risks and associated recovery strategies, and plan for the client’s next steps in their
journey. Above all, the therapist gives recognition to the survivor for their accomplishments
in the treatment, and conveys a sincere appreciation for the courage and strength that this
work has involved. The therapist spends time reflecting beforehand and adapts the session
contents and time spent on each domain to the needs of the particular client. Some clients
will be well prepared for this final session; others will feel very anxious and may even experience reactivated fears of abandonment. Some clients will prefer to spend time reflecting
on the process of therapy and will be prepared to articulate their feelings; others will want
to focus on the future in general and on what comes next after weekly therapy ends in particular. The therapist's ability to respond openly to whatever the client needs to discuss in
this final session models a compassionate and flexible attitude that can be healing for the
client, no matter what they bring to the process of ending the treatment. Box 26.1 outlines
the core content of this session (with corresponding flexibility to adapt to the client’s needs).


CHECK-IN AND REVIEW OF SKILLS PRACTICE


Even though this session marks the final session of STAIR Narrative Therapy, it begins
as others do: with a brief check-in about the client’s current emotional state, followed by a
review of the client's between-session practice. The agreed-upon practice from the previous
session included emotion regulation and interpersonal skills relevant to the client’s goals and
needs, as well as the client’s ongoing review of their trauma narrative and related themes.
The therapist begins by briefly reviewing whether the client completed all of the planned


417

[PAGE 435]

418 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


Theme and Curriculum for Session 18
The Final Session


The goals of the final session are to summarize the client's progress, identify any relapse risks
and highlight relevant coping skills for risk management and recovery, and plan next steps for
the client’s ongoing recovery. Most importantly, the therapist gives recognition to the client
for their specific accomplishments and shows sincere appreciation of the courage and strength
that this work has involved.


PLANNING AND PREPARATION


Create a summary of the client’s progress. Create list of resources for next steps and relapse
recovery. Bring a copy each of Handout 26.1 and 19.3, along with copies of additional handouts
as needed (see list below). This session is 60 minutes in duration.


AGENDA


Check-in and review of skills practice.
Identify focus of the session.
Reflect on client's change and progress.
Prepare and plan for client’s independent skills maintenance.
Identify plans for next steps.
Review relapse risk and associated management/recovery strategies.
Indicate respect for pace of change and role of ongoing self-compassion.
Provide resources for transition and future needs.
Present completion certificate.
Say good-bye.


SESSION HANDOUTS


Handout 26.1. Summary of Accomplishments

Handout 19.3. STAIR Skills for Continued Practice

Individualized resource list (to be compiled by therapist)

Additional copies of Handout 11.3. Feelings Monitoring Form and/or Handout 16.4. Relation-
ship Patterns Worksheet-2, if desired by or helpful for client

From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interpersonal Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy
by Marylene Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020
The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use or
use with clients (see copyright page for details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material (see the
box at the end of the table of contents).

[PAGE 436]

26. The Final Session 419


work, asking for a brief summary of how the practice went, and offering to answer any questions that may have arisen since the last session. Reviewing changes in SUDs scores from
the trauma narrative practice can be done briefly, as a broader discussion of overall progress
in treatment (of which SUDs and other markers of change are reflections) will take place
later in this session.


IDENTIFY FOCUS OF THE SESSION


Because this session is the final session of Narrative Therapy and of the STAIR Narrative Therapy program as a whole, the session serves to integrate themes from all previous
sessions, with a particular focus on the narrative work that has just been completed. The
importance of compassion is reintroduced to mark this important transition; this topic plays
a part similar to the role it played in the final session of the STAIR module. The main goal is
to reflect on and appreciate the client’s accomplishments and to prepare them for continued
independent work after ending treatment.


REFLECT ON CLIENT’S CHANGE AND PROGRESS


Among the most important tasks of the final session are to identify the progress the client
has made and to give positive recognition of this progress to the client. The client, ofcourse,
will have their own ideas about which aspects of the work they are most proud of and most
satisfied with, and the therapist elicits these appraisals. As needed, the therapist can prompt
the client to consider changes in their symptoms, emotion regulation skills, interpersonal
functioning, general life functioning, and experience of self since the beginning of treatment, as well as to compare the client’s overall past and present states.
Typically, the client has done more work and has changed more than they are able to
see and experience. The therapist, as an observer, has had the benefit of a different vantage
point and thus may be able to identify further accomplishments, or to elaborate on and give
depth to the changes the client has identified. To accommodate this common pattern, it is
especially helpful for the therapist to prepare beforehand in reviewing the client's progress
over the course of treatment, including reviewing therapy notes, the client’s problems and
goals, and the results of any formal symptom assessments over time.
Creating a summary of accomplishments can be especially helpful, because (as mentioned in Chapter 19 in connection with the end of the STAIR module) clients with a history
of trauma tend to diminish their gains (at least partially) and to focus on their shortcomings
and limitations. As at the end of STAIR, the therapist organizes such a summary of accomplishments to highlight where the client first started and how far they have come. If time
allows and the client has completed assessments regularly in treatment, graphing the scores
across the course of treatment can provide a nice visual summary to use in session with the
client. For clients who have completed both key components of this intervention (the STAIR
and Narrative Therapy modules), this conversation can also consider how the individual

[PAGE 437]

420 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


responded to each of these modules. The therapist can use the review of data to refresh the
client’s memories of important events and changes, and add observations about changes that
the client may have forgotten or overlooked.
For any client who has completed Narrative Therapy, Handout 26.1, Summary of
Accomplishments, can help guide the conversation and even give the client something to
bring home and use as a reminder in future times of distress and moments of reflection.
Below are recommendations of how to have this type of conversation and how to guide it
to the specific treatment targets of the STAIR and Narrative Therapy modules. The nature
of the conversation and amount of time spent on each domain with any given client will
depend on the specific client's personal goals and course of treatment.


Note Decreases in Severity of PTSD/CPTSD Symptoms

By the end of this treatment, pronounced changes are likely to have occurred in the frequency and severity of PTSD/CPTSD symptoms. If completing a measure of these symptoms has not already been a routine practice during sessions, it is useful in the week preceding or at the beginning of the final session to have the client fill out a symptom questionnaire
identical to the one completed during the initial assessment. The client may have forgotten
the significant distress they were experiencing when they entered treatment; if so, they are
likely to discount the amount of symptom reduction there has been. A comparison of the
total PTSD/CPTSD scores before and after treatment is an effective way to summarize and
demonstrate this change.


Reflect on Improved Emotion Regulation Skills

The therapist elicits, and participates with the client in, an enumeration of the improvements
the client has experienced in emotion regulation and emotional experiencing. Changes in
emotional experiencing to discuss include the following:


y
General acceptance of emotions as normal and as containers of information.
» Ability to face fear and anxiety.
Ye


+ Ability to manage angry feelings with specific skills.
+ Ability to tolerate sadness and reduce the amount of time spent in a depressed state.
» Reductions in dissociative experiencing (less spacing out, derealization, and deper-
sonalization).


Note Changes in Interpersonal Skills

Changes in interpersonal functioning are often best reviewed by referring to experiential
exercises or other specific skills practices that were successfully completed. It is unrealistic to believe that interpersonal functioning can be entirely transformed within just a few
months; such behaviors are strongly ingrained habits. However, the therapy has provided
three important interventions that will help the client maintain and continue the change

[PAGE 438]

26. The Final Session 421


process. These interventions align with the “triple As” of awareness, alternatives, and actions
that have been explored across different interpersonal themes and types of relationships.


1. Awareness of interpersonal patterns is the first step in changing behavior. Interpersonal patterns of behavior have been clearly identified. They are no longer automatic
behaviors, out of the client's awareness. The client has learned that with awareness comes
the opportunity to intervene and choose alternative ways of thinking and alternative behaviors. Sometimes the insights may occur “post hoc” after particularly triggering interpersonal
encounters, but with continued practice, the client will gain more and more control in the
moment.


2. Alternatives to interpersonal patterns from the past have been formulated. The client has begun developing alternative templates for ways of thinking about relationships in
the form of more adaptive interpersonal models (If... , then... .”). These new templates
can guide the client in analyzing difficult situations, identifying interpersonal goals, and
organizing alternative behaviors to reach these goals well beyond the end of treatment.


3. Actions have demonstrated the client's capacity for change. The client has developed
and successfully practiced alternative behaviors. These new behaviors provide building
blocks for new situations as they emerge. They have also demonstrated the client’s capacity
for genuine change, which might have seemed impossible before treatment. Knowledge of
this capacity gives the client confidence in experimenting with new behaviors and seeking
out new people. The world opens up in exciting ways when a person realizes they possess
a sense of agency and choice, independent of the fears and perceived constraints that have
previously held them back in life.


Reflect on Client’s New Experience of Self

Moving from more concrete treatment targets, the conversation can expand to the more
abstract but no less important target of improving the clients sense of self. The therapist
elicits from and explores with the client their subjective experiences during each component of the treatment. How did the client feel about themselves during the STAIR module?
What about during the Narrative Therapy module? Were there times when they felt the
treatment was just right for them and resonated with their goals? Were there times when
they disliked the treatment, or felt alienated from the tasks, methods, or goals? How did
they experience each of the components as a change or growth experience? Each of these
questions elicit reflections on the client’s experience, likes, dislikes, personal values, and
independent perspective—all of which reinforce a stronger, more integrated sense of self.
The therapist's nonjudgmental, open stance during this conversation allows the client to be
simply who they are. That alone may be a new experience different from how their caregivers or significant others have treated them in the past.
The STAIR modules interventions have provided the client with tools for behaving,
thinking, and feeling in more positive and competent ways. As such, this module has laid

[PAGE 439]

422 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


the groundwork for the possibility of continued positive change. In contrast, the Narrative
Therapy module has required going back to the past and telling about events in the distant
past with emotional depth and intensity. The process has returned the client to a traumatic
early life history and led to the recognition of the far-reaching influence these formative
experiences have had on the trajectory of their life. Together, the two components of treatment have helped the client integrate the past with the present and with a sense of the
future, giving the client a sense of a coherent self that was not possible before.
Honestly grappling with the pain, shame, and loss generated by these experiences
deepens a person's inner emotional life. Recognizing and experiencing a gamut of feelings,
and surviving them, lead to renewed emotional strength. Increased capacity for openness in
emotional experiencing also provides the opportunity for authentic connection with others.
These connections are supported by the very necessary skills of self-management and social
competence that have been in practice throughout the treatment. In this way, the STAIR
and Narrative Therapy components of treatment are necessary, complementary partners for
a truly comprehensive recovery process. The client who reaches this final session has completed both parts of the treatment, so they are well prepared to continue to use these skills
to express who they are and who they hope to become as they move forward in their life.


Congratulate the Client on Progress

After reviewing all relevant data and reflecting on the course of treatment, the therapist
congratulates the client on their hard work and accomplishments, including any positive
experiences outside of sessions. The therapist can include any additional observations of
change that they have wanted to share but might not have had the opportunity to share
before now. Either in the previous conversation or at this point in the session, the therapist
can highlight specific, memorable moments of success from the client's treatment, even if
they have already provided positive feedback on the example in previous sessions (which
may have occurred several weeks prior to this final session).


PREPARE AND PLAN FOR CLIENT’S INDEPENDENT
SKILLS MAINTENANCE


Some clients may have entered this treatment expecting therapy to be something done
to them, passively accepted, then completed, and finally left to the past. STAIR Narrative Therapy, however, has introduced these clients to a more active and collaborative role
in therapy and in making major life changes. This sense of motivation, engagement, and
responsibility is crucial to maintain for success in sustaining and expanding the gains made
in therapy. A therapist and client will both benefit from openly discussing how the client
can continue to make progress without the therapist's presence or the sessions that provided structure for the initial skill acquisition. The client may share some concerns about
how to do all this independently, and the therapist works to normalize some of this anxiety,
while also reinforcing the client's sense of ownership for what they have accomplished.
The therapist can remind the client of specific examples of the clients use of skills during

[PAGE 440]

26. The Final Session 423


difficult moments, and/or of successes that occurred because of the client’s actions outside
the therapy room.
Which skills are practiced independently after treatment will differ from person to
person. The client is ultimately the primary creator of the plan, with guidance from the
therapist as needed. In many cases, continuing to work on emotion regulation and communication skills will be a core component of the plan. As in Session 10 of STAIR, Handout
19.3, STAIR Skills for Continued Practice, provides good guidance to selecting skills across
the three channels of emotion, as well as the interpersonal skill domains. Some clients
may also prefer to use the structure of the Feelings Monitoring Form (Handout 11.3) or
Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2 (Handout 16.4) to reflect on their experience. For these
clients, the therapist can provide extra copies of the requested worksheets. Any additional
psychoeducational handouts or copies of worksheets given by the therapist to the client also
support the idea that the work is not over. In other words, this transition marks primarily
the move to independent practice and skills maintenance, and not the abandonment of lessons learned with the therapist's help.


IDENTIFY PLANS FOR NEXT STEPS


There will inevitably be many tasks and areas of growth remaining for the survivor of trauma
as they move out of this treatment. The client and therapist identify the client’s goals during
this transition and for the near future. These goals can include emotional and interpersonal
goals, such as “being kinder to myself when I make mistakes” or “being more assertive with
my friends about plans for what I like to do.” They may also include specific ways to apply
insights made during the trauma narrative work. For each kind of goal, it is useful to clarify
which skills or resources the client has that will allow them to reach these goals and maintain
progress as it is made. The therapist and client can take some time to jot down these goals and
potential strategies for reaching them (see the second page of Handout 19.3). During periods
of depression or demoralization, the client may forget the goals they have set for themselves
and may not recall that they do have the basic capacity and knowledge to tackle new challenges. Handout 19.3 can serve as a reminder and morale booster during such periods.
In addition, the client may have concerns about dealing with the exacerbation and
management of symptoms—particularly PTSD or depression symptoms; feelings of anger,
anxiety and sadness; and dissociative phenomena. Here again, the therapist and client
review which skills they have learned work best to help the client navigate these difficulties.


REVIEW RELAPSE RISK AND ASSOCIATED MANAGEMENT/
RECOVERY STRATEGIES


It is inevitable that the client will experience additional stressful life events in the future. It is
therefore useful to identify any such events that seem likely, particularly those situations the
client is fearful of managing. Examples include confronting the perpetrator of interpersonal
trauma, disclosing the experience of this trauma to friends or family members, becoming a

[PAGE 441]

424 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


parent, or making a relationship commitment. Again, written guidelines for effective management of these stressors are useful to create now, so that they will be available when the
client needs them but may be less able to formulate them effectively. The spaces on the second page of Handout 19.3 for outlining goals and skills to meet the goals can also be used to
outline specific plans related to these ongoing or potential future stressors.
Other practical preparations for managing setbacks can be made ahead of time. These
preparations may include keeping medication prescriptions up to date or checking regularly
with a physician, and identifying which friends are best at helping with which type of crisis
and reaching out for help accordingly.
The therapist articulates general principles for coping with setbacks. First, the client
can accept and remember that relapses into old behaviors and symptom exacerbations are
inevitable and manageable; they are not signs of failure. A second general guideline is for
the client to avoid putting energy into self-criticism, languishing in humiliation, or viewing
any relapse into old patterns as meaning that all progress is lost. The therapist encourages
the client to adopt a healthy, compassionate response to any relapse, and immediately to
begin (or prepare to begin) a plan to recover from any effects of the relapse. The client can
remind themselves that they have accomplished many things in therapy, and that these
successes demonstrate their capacity to manage difficult and emotionally demanding situations. If they were successful in making healthy changes in the past, then they can succeed
at this again!


INDICATE RESPECT FOR PACE OF CHANGE AND ROLE
OF ONGOING SELF-COMPASSION


A client may feel unsure of their readiness to continue their recovery without the structure of weekly therapy or without the therapist’s presence. The therapist can convey that
this anxiety is natural and understandable. After all, the clients experience of success—
sometimes the first such experience they have had with their symptoms—has occurred in
the context of treatment with a therapist. Often the therapist can effectively respond to a
client's anxiety about making the transition out of therapy by repeating the many successes
that the client has achieved. The therapist has supported the client’s achievements, but the
client has done the real work of putting to practice in the “real world” the skills they have
learned in the therapy room.
A particularly skeptical client may respond to the therapist's sharing a summary of interview feedback with clients who participated in STAIR or STAIR Narrative Therapy programs as part of one of the published research studies (e.g., Cloitre et al., 2010). These data
indicate that after treatment ends, clients continue to improve even further—generalizing
the gains they have made as they encounter new opportunities to master their skills and
put these into practice. Introducing the data should not distract from the client's emotional
experience, so the therapist works primarily to ensure that the client feels sufficiently satisfied to go forth in the world and try their new skills independently. They can be their own
scientist and let their experience speak for itself, adapt to what arises for them, and reach
out for support if needed.

[PAGE 442]

26. The Final Session 425


For some clients, especially those with multiple traumas, the work accomplished during the therapy may seem like a “drop in the bucket.” Such a client and their therapist can
concretely evaluate outstanding problem areas. If the opportunity exists in the clinical setting to extend treatment and the client is willing to do so, this option may be considered.
One approach within this option may be to titrate the frequency of sessions over time to
encourage greater levels of independence. For example, the therapist may see the client
again in 2 weeks, then again in 3 weeks, then again after a month, and so on until the client
feels comfortable about the transition. This approach has the added benefit of paralleling
the development of a more secure attachment: Such an attachment allows independence
and exploration of the world, without the need to be near the attachment figure at all times.
Throughout this treatment, the client has likely internalized the therapist as a secure base;
with this gradual transition, the client can learn to rely more and more on the internalized
therapist even when contact with the therapist lessens in frequency. This process is a key
one for the ending of more intense therapies like STAIR Narrative Therapy. Alternatively,
the therapist may be able to make recommendations for continuing treatment in a program
or modality that best suits the client at this point in their recovery.
Handout 19.1, Compassion: Recovery Is a Journey, is a helpful handout to review in this
session. Completing the Self-Compassion Meditation again in session may also be beneficial
to the client, but the therapist uses their clinical judgment and discusses collaboratively
whether this practice would be helpful for the particular client. Encouraging the client to
continue their practice and exploration of compassion is an important aspect of starting the
client on the independent journey toward continued growth and recovery.


PROVIDE RESOURCES FOR TRANSITION AND FUTURE NEEDS


The therapist provides a list of local services or programs that the client may find to be
useful resources in the transition or in the near future. This list can include information
about programs related to the client’s identified goals or continued recovery needs, such as
Twelve-Step groups, legal services, employment skills training programs, or other community services. It can also include basic resources, such as telephone numbers for the client's
local emergency room, domestic violence bureau, or crisis hotline.
For many clients, a reminder of the skills learned can be especially helpful. For clients
with smartphones, STAIR Emotion Coach is a free app available on iOS and Android that
lets people practice skills “on demand” in the moment and on the go (see Chapter 27 for a
fuller description). This resource may be most beneficial for clients who are already familiar
with STAIR skills and thus do not need a therapist to review the skills and how to use them.


PRESENT COMPLETION CERTIFICATE


Many clients appreciate receiving an official completion certificate as a concrete symbol
of their hard work and accomplishments. This certificate may also act as a reminder in the
future for when they need to refocus on their personal goals, skills, and well-being. In the

[PAGE 443]

426 PART Ill. STAIR NARRATIVE THERAPY, SESSION BY SESSION


last moments of the session, the therapist can provide such a certificate and congratulate
the client one last time. As we have noted at the end of Option 2 in Chapter 19, some clients
like the idea of “graduating” from treatment, but others may prefer to view this transition
as the beginning of a new stage of treatment—one in which they act as their own therapists
and make further use in their lives of the many skills they have learned in their initial work.
Either way, this moment is a meaningful one, so the therapist shows respect for the emotional importance it likely holds for the client.


SAY GOOD-BYE


Throughout this session, the therapist has had opportunities to summarize their appreciation of the client’s hard work. If anything has been left unsaid, the therapist can communicate these messages in the final moments of the session when saying good-bye. They generally extend a message of hope and good wishes for the client's next steps.
The issue of future contact with the therapist is likely to be brought forward by the
client at some point. If it is not, the therapist can address this issue here or earlier in the
session (as relevant), since most clients do wonder about contact after therapy has ended
(even if they do not verbalize this question). There is no “right” decision in this situation. It
depends on many factors, including the nature of the treatment setting, the client’s needs
and preferences, and the therapist's own guidelines in their work and their own personal
and professional boundaries. The discussion is guided, however, by the therapist's awareness that the client has shared some of the most intimate details of their life. The therapist
has borne witness to this history and is also now a guardian of it. Therefore, whatever the
particulars of the ensuing discussion, it is important for the therapist to express respect for
the client's history, appreciation for having learned about their life, and gratitude for having
had the opportunity to learn from them.
After saying their final words, the client and therapist may shake hands, hug, wave goodbye, or smile as they part ways. Once again, the decision about how to proceed depends on
both the therapist's and the clients personal boundaries, cultural expectations, ethics, and
needs. No matter what makes sense for the two parties involved, the moment offers a sense
of warmth, conclusion, and pride in what has been accomplished. Congratulations are in
order for both!

[PAGE 444]

Summary of Accomplishments
Let’s review all the things you’ve learned and accomplished during
this treatment!

e We discussed how trauma affects emotion and how it affected
you.

Before STAIR, how did you experience your emotions?


e We then explored skills that could change how you coped
with your emotions. Later today, we'll
select the skills from the three channels of emotion (body,
thought, behavior) that you want to
continue practicing. For now, consider:

What are ways you're experiencing your emotions differentl
y from before starting treatment?


e We also explored how trauma affects relationships, and
we identified different ways to approach
and manage relationships—with flexibility, assertiveness,
power, intimacy, and compassion.

What are ways you're approaching relationships differently in
what you believe, feel, and do?


(continuea)

From Treating Survivors of Childhood Abuse and Interperson
al Trauma, Second Edition: STAIR Narrative Therapy by Marylene
Cloitre, Lisa R. Cohen, Kile M. Ortigo, Christie Jackson, and Karestan
C. Koenen. Copyright © 2020 The Guilford Press. Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of
this book for personal use or use with clients (see copyright
page for
details). Purchasers can download additional copies of this material
(see the box at the end of the table of contents)


427

[PAGE 445]

Summary of Accomplishments (page 2 of 2)

e Inthe last series of sessions, we explored your traumatic memories and ways to create new
meanings from them, while also exploring themes of fear, shame, and loss.

What are ways you're viewing your traumatic memories/experiences, and yourself, differently? How
are these changes influencing what you believe, feel, and do?


e As you prepare to move on to the next chapter of your life and recovery, let’s reflect on the
progress you've made.

What are the most important
lessons you've learned?


What lessons felt most helpful?


How have your thoughts,
emotions, and behaviors
changed?


How have you changed your
relationship with your traumatic
memories and experiences?


How will you continue to build
on the progress you've made
so far?


428

[PAGE 446]

New Developments
for STAIR Narrative Therapy


Adaptability enforces creativity,
and creativity is adaptability.
—PEARL ZHU (2016)


S ince the first edition of this book was published, we have adapted STAIR Narrative
Therapy for use with different client populations, clinical settings, and delivery modalities. These adaptations have often been the results of requests by clinicians or community
leaders who have identified the potential benefits of the STAIR interventions for their specific client populations, services, or communities. STAIR, in particular, has been popular
because its focus on skills training differs from those of various other trauma-focused treatments. We view this interest from other professionals as reflecting a broader recognition of
the importance of emotion regulation and relational capacities in daily life and in trauma
recovery. In this new chapter, we briefly review current adaptations of STAIR and describe
how they fit within the larger framework of mental health care service delivery. We also
share published research related to each adaptation when such research is available. Box
27.1 provides an overview and summary of these adaptations.


CLINICAL TREATMENT ADAPTATIONS


The specific clinical adaptations of STAIR Narrative Therapy have evolved from a broadened understanding of different delivery models and different client populations that can
benefit from specific areas of focus. The adaptations discussed here are examples of programs that have matured past the initial development and brainstorming phases, with many
having supporting data.


429

[PAGE 447]

Adaptations and Extensions of STAIR

Specific Target
Adaptation Length Format Population Intervention Focus

Group STAIR 12 sessions Group Adults with Emotion regulation and
PTSD and/or interpersonal skills
depression

STAIR-A Variable (three Group or Adolescents with Emotion regulation and
90-minute modules individual PTSD and/or interpersonal skills,
vs. 16 sessions) depression with or without written
trauma narrative
homework

STAIR-PC 5 sessions Individual Adults with Emotion regulation
PTSD or and social support
depression skills individualized to
personal goals

STAIR-R 5 sessions Individual Refugees Emotion regulation
with PTSD or and social support
depression skills individualized to
personal goals

Parenting 5+ sessions Individual, Parents who Parenting skills in
STAIR (usually 5-8) family have children at teaching emotion
(parents only), home and have regulation and good
or group completed STAIR communication to
children

STAIR Variable (user Self-guided Clients who A mobile app (Apple
Emotion choice) are currently in iOS and Android) that
Coach STAIR and/or offers guided tools,
have completed symptom and goal
the intervention tracking, and brief
psychoeducation

webSTAIR 10 online Self-guided + Adults with An online webwith coaching interactive lessons coach support | subthreshold based therapy
+ 5-10 coaching to mild PTSD program with guided
sessions or depression psychoeducation and
symptoms skills exercises

Telehealth Variable Individual or Clients with Variable (depending
delivery (depending on group mental health on version of STAIR
version of STAIR treatment access _— Narrative Therapy)
Narrative Therapy) issues (distance,
mobility, etc.)


430

[PAGE 448]

27. New Developments for STAIR Narrative Therapy 431


Group STAIR

Perhaps the most often requested adaptation for STAIR has been a group version. Group
STAIR (Cloitre et al., 2019) is a 12-session version of the skills training module and follows
the session work as outlined in Chapters 10-19 of this book, with two important exceptions.
First, the group program introduces and organizes the emotion regulation skills within the
“three channels of emotion” framework one channel at a time, instead of combining the
thought and behavior channels; it thus divides individual STAIR’s Session 4 into the third
and fourth group sessions. This change helps with the conceptual organization of the program and allows more time and attention for the individuals in the group to generate examples of situations and engage in skills practice. Second, an additional introductory session
for the interpersonal work expands the concept of changing relationship patterns before
diving into the specific relational themes of assertiveness, power, and intimacy/closeness.
This session introduces the idea of healthy boundaries, which individual STAIR explores in
Session 9 (see Chapter 18).
There are several benefits to delivering STAIR in a group format. First, it can increase
access to care by allowing a greater number of clients to engage in treatment and reduce the
wait time for limited numbers of individual therapy time slots. In addition, group delivery
requires only one or two trained therapists to serve 3-10 clients. These two benefits can save
a great deal of clinical and system time and costs. Beyond the pragmatic aspects of group
delivery, this format also allows important group processes to emerge that provide fertile
ground for experiential learning of interpersonal communication skills and boundary setting. Learning occurs not only through the process of group therapy; it also occurs in more
explicit ways. For example, group members can participate in role-playing scenarios; can
learn from other members experiences, perspectives, and practices; and can brainstorm
together how to approach different socioemotional situations with their new skills. If the
therapist(s) can establish group safety and cohesion (a necessary and occasionally complex
task), the group experience can enliven the work of STAIR in impressive ways. Some clinics
have broken down the STAIR work into two groups, one for the emotion regulation skills
training (six sessions) and the other for the interpersonal skills training (six sessions). The
limited number of sessions seems to support commitment to and completion of the groups.
Clients also like having the option of either repeating the emotion regulation skills group as
needed or “graduating” to the interpersonal skills group.
As expected, Group STAIR does not include a Narrative Therapy component, due to
the highly individualized nature of this kind of intervention and the risk of distress resulting from exposure to other group members trauma accounts. We recommend individual
therapy for the narrative work, which can occur concurrently with or after the group work,
depending on each client’s interests and abilities.
Three published studies have reported good outcomes associated with Group STAIR.
The first study was a comparative trial of Group STAIR with a treatment-as-usual (TAU;
supportive therapy) comparison group in an adult inpatient unit for individuals with
treatment-resistant schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders (Trappler & Newville,
2007). The participants in the study had diagnoses of both a psychotic disorder and PTSD.

[PAGE 449]

432 27. New Developments for STAIR Narrative Therapy


Results indicated that compared to those in the supportive group, participants who received
Group STAIR showed greater improvements in symptoms of PTSD and psychosis alongside
increases in various outcomes related to emotion regulation, including fewer angry outbursts and less behavioral overactivation.
MacIntosh, Cloitre, Kortis, Peck, and Weiss (2018) completed an open trial evaluating both the implementation satisfaction and symptom outcome of Group STAIR in a
community-based outpatient setting treating adult survivors of childhood sexual trauma.
Of note, this trial included relatively limited training in STAIR delivery for study therapists—one workshop followed by weekly supervision of a local leader who had access to the
trainer. The aim of the study was to evaluate the ease of integration of a structured, manualized treatment in a community setting. Pre—post treatment analyses indicated significant
reductions in PTSD symptoms, emotion dysregulation, and interpersonal difficulties. Standardized interviews with study therapists indicated that they viewed the treatment as easy
to deliver and relevant to their clients needs; both of these views resolved their concerns
about using a manualized treatment approach. Clients in the group expressed high satisfaction with the approach and a strong sense of validation in seeing how trauma had played a
“huge role” in their day-to-day life functioning (MacIntosh et al., 2018, p. 599).
Similar findings emerged from a recent open-trial study in a Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) outpatient PTSD clinic serving veterans with various types of trauma, including military sexual trauma (Jackson, Weiss, & Cloitre, 2019). This study provided group
treatment in a mixed-gender format, and to our knowledge was the first study to do so
within the VA system. Results indicated significant decreases for veterans in PTSD symptoms. However, while both male and female veterans showed declines in general distress
symptoms, these findings were significant only for the men in the group. This result may
reflect the impact of being in a mixed-gender group, especially given the high incidence
of military sexual trauma among women veterans. Despite the significant barriers women
veterans face in the male-dominant VA health care setting, these results were encouraging
about the option of offering mixed-gender STAIR groups.


STAIR for Adolescents

Because STAIR is a developmentally informed treatment, adapting it for the treatment of
trauma-exposed adolescents has been a natural extension of the program. In a case—control
study, STAIR for Adolescents (STAIR-A) was delivered to girls in a public high school serving a low-socioeconomic-status catchment area. The STAIR-A treatment group was compared to a control group that received assessments only and was matched by age, trauma
exposure, and baseline symptoms (Gudiño, Leonard, & Cloitre, 2016). Results indicated
that girls in STAIR-A experienced greater improvements in depression and management of
social stress than did those in the assessment-only group. There was little change in PTSD
scores across both groups. Baseline PTSD scores were relatively low, however, which may
have resulted in “floor effects.”
A second study evaluated the implementation of a weekly three-session STAIR-A
program in an inpatient setting. To our knowledge, STAIR-A is the only trauma-informed

[PAGE 450]

27. New Developments for STAIR Narrative Therapy 433


treatment to be delivered and tested in an adolescent inpatient setting (Gudiño et al., 2014).
Results indicated that at discharge the adolescents experienced a reduction in PTSD and
depression symptoms, as well as greater self-efficacy in coping with life stressors.


STAIR for Primary Care

Over the years, models of mental health care have shifted away from ones focused on specialty care clinics separated from general medical care settings. These specialty clinics still
have a place in larger models of care delivery, but the emphasis on primary care integration
has expanded greatly. In response to this updated model, we have created a five-session
version of STAIR for Primary Care (STAIR-PC), which focuses on emotion regulation skills
development individualized to client’s specific needs (Cloitre, Ortigo, & Gupta, 2018c). A
randomized controlled trial (RCT) evaluated STAIR-PC as compared to TAU among veterans with a positive screen for PTSD or depression in a VA primary care clinic (Cloitre,
Gimeno, Ortigo, Weiss, & Jain, 2018a). The treatment was delivered in person and by a
mix of providers, including psychology technicians (including trained peers), mental health
trainees, and professionals (social workers and psychologists).
On the first visit, guided by a worksheet, therapists and veterans collaborated in identifying the symptoms or problems that would be the focus of the treatment (e.g., depression,
posttraumatic stress, anxiety, insomnia, panic attacks, social isolation) and then matching
skills to address these problems via STAIR’s three channels of emotion. Sessions 2, 3, and
4 explored the body, thought, and behavior channels of emotion, with relevant skills chosen collaboratively by the therapist and the client. Session 4 also included optional behavioral skills related to interpersonal communication to expand the focus to relationships, if
this was appropriate to the client's goals. The final session summarized skills learned and
introduced the role of compassion as the client prepared for either independent practice or
moving to a more intense treatment. A clinical psychologist (Dr. Kile M. Ortigo) provided
weekly group supervision to study therapists, focused on succinct case conceptualization to
aid the brief, efficient model of care and skills acquisition. Results indicated that compared
to TAU, STAIR-PC provided greater reductions in PTSD symptoms, depression symptoms,
emotion dysregulation, and social engagement problems; all gains were maintained at a
3-month follow-up. These study results suggest that a brief version of STAIR in coordination
with good case conceptualization and an individualized treatment plan can have a positive
impact on patients in settings where mental health issues are frequently seen, yet often
insufficiently addressed.


STAIR for Refugees

Refugees experience substantial and chronic psychosocial stressors, many related to separation from family members and uncertain legal status, alongside high rates of trauma
exposure. STAIR has accordingly been adapted for refugees and asylum seekers. In STAIR
for Refugees (STAIR-R), the treatment focuses predominantly on emotion regulation skills
to manage daily stressors, and on the development of social and communication skills to

[PAGE 451]

434 27. New Developments for STAIR Narrative Therapy


facilitate the resolution of challenging daily life difficulties and the expansion of social
support networks. Typical problems refugees experience include (but are not limited to)
uncertainty about asylum status, interactions with the local government, long-distance
communication with family members remaining in their countries of origin, and challenges
in finding employment and developing new occupational skills. The treatment has been
adapted to and is respectful of specific cultural idioms and concepts, via a client narrative
describing the ways in which clients can use STAIR in meaningful ways that are relevant
and meaningful in their individual situations.
STAIR-R is currently being tested in a government-funded RCT in Australia, where
STAIR-R plus Narrative Exposure Therapy (NET; Schauer, Neuner, & Elbert, 2011) is
being compared to general problem-solving therapy with NET (Nickerson et al., 2016; Nickerson, Cloitre, & O'Donnell, 2018-2022).


Parenting STAIR

Parenting STAIR is designed specifically for survivors of trauma who have completed STAIR
in some other format, but are still struggling with difficulties in their parent-child relationships (Cloitre & Makin-Byrd, 2018). Because parenting presents a unique set of challenges
beyond caring for oneself, survivors who are also parents may feel overwhelmed by the
responsibilities and emotional experiences inherent in nurturing and raising a child. Parenting can be especially problematic for survivors whose social competencies feel limited
because of early life trauma or abuse. Bowlby (1969, 1984) identified attachment and caregiving as two separate but related behavioral systems, and the interventions in Parenting
STAIR attend to concerns related to both the attachment and caregiving or skills training
aspects of parenting. Parenting STAIR thus focuses on improving both the clients’ parent—
child relationships and their parenting skills in teaching children good emotion regulation
via instruction, role modeling, and bonding activities with the children. The intervention is
geared toward STAIR completers, because it builds upon on an earlier-established foundation of key concepts and tools learned through the core STAIR intervention. In addition,
because the parenting role may be occupied by biological parents, adoptive parents, stepparents, or grandparents, the intervention deems any person in a parenting role as potentially appropriate. The program was developed with the support of the VA Women's Mental
Health, Military Sexual Trauma Support, and Family Services teams, but it is applicable to
parents in the general community as well.


TECHNOLOGICAL ADAPTATIONS


Alongside adaptations of the STAIR intervention to different formats, populations, and settings, efforts to utilize technology in the service of further broadening care delivery options
for the intervention have shown great promise. Below, we describe a few recent examples
of these efforts.

[PAGE 452]

27. New Developments for STAIR Narrative Therapy 435


Telehealth Delivery

Delivery of treatment via telehealth is gaining new acceptance and use (Backhaus et al.,
2012). An open trial of STAIR delivered to women veterans in their own homes via telehealth
found the treatment both highly satisfactory and effective in reducing PTSD, depression,
social engagement problems, and functional impairment (Weiss, Azevedo, Webb, Gimeno,
& Cloitre, 2018). The study provided strong support for the adaptability of this treatment to
a telehealth delivery model, which would benefit many individuals with various barriers to
getting into in-person care.


STAIR Emotion Coach

Technology offers opportunities beyond traditional psychotherapeutic approaches, and from
a public health standpoint, the creation of applications (“apps”) for smartphones and tablets
is one of the most promising new domains of exploration for mental health care. Apps give
“users” (the field-appropriate term for anyone who downloads and uses apps) on-demand
access to psychoeducation, interactive exercises, skills, and symptom tracking—and at least
in the case of STAIR Emotion Coach, it can be free of charge and completely confidential.
The original app, STAIR Coach, was developed for Apple devices (OS) at the National
Center for PTSD, where two of us (Dr. Marylene Cloitre and Dr. Kile Ortigo) work (Vigil
Dombeck et al., 2017). This center focuses on technology innovations to serve veterans with
PTSD, but because it is a federally funded research think tank, all products are free to the
public regardless of veteran or military status.
STAIR Emotion Coach contains several features that allow individuals to track their
PTSD symptoms, rate their emotional experiences (using a simplified Feelings Monitoring
Form), and read brief psychoeducational materials in line with the STAIR philosophy of
emotions and relationships. In addition, guided practice of skills such as Focused Breathing and “I Messages” provides hands-on experience with key STAIR interventions. The app
is generally most useful for clients undergoing STAIR Narrative Therapy in any of its formats, but it is also available for interested people who want to learn more about the impact
of trauma on emotional and interpersonal functioning. A new revision is currently underway and will be launched alongside an Android version to allow access to both Apple and
Android users. This version will feature a guided learning plan for people to access parts of
the app in small chunks, which aid learning and the systematic building of knowledge and
skills. More information can be found at https://mobile.va.gov/app/stair-coach.


Web-Based STAIR

Resulting from another collaboration with the National Center for PTSD and the Office
of Rural Health, a web-based version of STAIR has been developed and is currently being
evaluated in a national program targeting primarily rural women veterans with a history
of military sexual trauma. The full online program, called webSTAIR, consists of 10 core

[PAGE 453]

436 27. New Developments for STAIR Narrative Therapy


treatment lessons that largely coincide with the STAIR module as described in this book
(see www.webstair.org, developed by Ortigo, Cloitre, Jackson, Weiss, & Schmidt, 2019).
Each lesson is interactive and offers a mix of psychoeducation, guided skills practice, and
tracking of the user's symptoms across time. A dashboard orients the user to unlocked skills
for continued practice, worksheets and other resources, graphs for tracking progress, and
an area for the user to enter messages. The program also incorporates elements of “gamification’ (i.e., the use of behavioral reward models often seen in video games) to increase
independent engagement, more consistent use, and ongoing skills practice. These elements
are reflected visually in the awarding of digital achievements for meeting certain conditions
(e.g., learning about all three channels of emotion) and in the “charging” of skills as the user
practices each one multiple times over a period of time.
In the national webSTAIR evaluation project, trained mental health professionals serve
as “coaches” in helping veterans stay engaged and apply the skills to their lives. The evaluation plan for the program includes quantitative interviews, online self-report measures, web
usage data, and qualitative interviews with both coaches and veterans. Initial findings have
been very promising in demonstrating the program’s feasibility and effectiveness (Ortigo &
Cloitre, 2018). A free version is planned for launching within a year of this book’s publication, and it will feature the core course content for free without tracking user data to protect
privacy.


FUTURE DIRECTIONS


The future is bright for the creative, theory-driven, and evidence-informed expansions of
STAIR Narrative Therapy. Instead of a static or rigid model for treating childhood and relational trauma, STAIR Narrative Therapy's evolution reflects an ever-growing and improving approach to care for survivors of such trauma. Over the years since the first edition
of this book appeared, we ourselves have evolved as trauma specialists, researchers, and
therapists, and our expanding team of collaborators and approaches reflects this evolution.
What will unfold in the next decade-plus of innovation is unknown, but the prospects are
intriguing indeed!

[PAGE 454]

References


Agosti, V., & Stewart, J. W. (1998). Social functioning D. M. (2018). Intergenerational transmission of child
and residual symptomatology among outpatients who abuse: Predictors of child abuse potential among ra-
responded to treatment and recovered from major de- cially diverse women residing in domestic violence
pression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 47, 207-210. shelters. Child Abuse and Neglect, 85, 80-90.
Alaggia, R. (2002). Balancing acts: Reconceptualizing Andrews, B., Brewin, C. R., Rose, S., & Kirk, M. (2000).
support in maternal response to intrafamilial child Predicting post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms
sexual abuse. Clinical Social Work Journal, 30, 41- in victims of violent crime: The role of shame, anger
56. and childhood abuse. Journal of Abnormal PsycholAllen, J. G. (1995). Coping with trauma: A guide to self- ogy, 109, 69-73.
understanding. Washington, DC: American Psychiat- Backhaus, A., Agha, Z., Maglione, M. L., Repp, A., Ross,
ric Press. B., Zuest, D., et al. (2012). Videoconferencing psychoAmerican Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic therapy: A systematic review. Psychological Services,
and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., 9, 111-131.
text rev.). Washington, DC: Author. Baird, K., & Kracen, A. C. (2006). Vicarious traumatiAmerican Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic zation and secondary traumatic stress: A research
and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). synthesis. Counselling Psychology Quarterly, 19,
Arlington, VA: Author. 181-188.
Ammaniti, M., Ferrari, P. (2013). Vitality affects in Baker, E. K. (2003). Caring for ourselves: A therapist's
Daniel Stern's thinking—A psychological and neuro- guide to personal and professional well-being. Wash-
biological perspective. Infant Mental Health Journal, ington, DC: American Psychological Association.
34(5), 367-375. Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & van IJzendoorn, M. H.
Amstadter, A. B., Elwood, L. S., Begle, A. M., Gud- (2009). The first 10,000 Adult Attachment Interviews:
mundsdottir, B., Smith, D. W., Resnick, H. S., et al. Distributions of adult attachment representations
(2011). Predictors of physical assault victimization: in clinical and non-clinical groups. Attachment and
Findings from the National Survey of Adolescents. Human Development, 11, 223-263.
Addictive Behaviors, 36, 814-820. Barkham, M., Hardy, G. E., & Startup, M. (1996). The
Andalibi, N., Haimson, O. L., De Choudhury, M., & IIP-32: A short version of the Inventory of Interper-
Forte, A. (2016, May). Understanding social media sonal Problems. British Journal of Clinical Psychol-
disclosures of sexual abuse through the lenses of sup- ogy, 35, 21-35.
port seeking and anonymity. In Proceedings of the Barlé, N., Wortman, C. B., & Latack, J. A. (2017). Trau-
2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput- matic bereavement: Basic research and clinical impli-
ing Systems (pp. 3906-3918). New York: Association cations. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 27(2),
for Computing Machinery. 127-139.
Anderson, R. E., Edwards, L. J., Silver, K. E., & Johnson, Baumann, B. L., & Kolko, D. J. (2002). A comparison of


437

[PAGE 455]

438 References


abusive and nonabusive mothers of abused children. Bowlby, J. (1984). Violence in the family as a disorder
Child Maltreatment, 7(4), 369-376. of the attachment and caregiving systems. American
Beckham, J. C., Roodman, A. A., Barefoot, J. C., Haney, Journal of Psychoanalysis, 44, 9-27.
T. L., Helms, M. J., Fairbank, J. A., et al. (1996). In- Bowlby, J. (1988). A secure base: Clinical applications
terpersonal and self-reported hostility among combat of attachment theory. London and New York: Rout-
veterans with and without posttraumatic stress disor- ledge.
der. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 9, 335-342. Brewin, C. R. (2003). Posttraumatic stress disorder:
Benjet, C., Bromet, E., Karam, E. G., Kessler, R. C., Malady or myth? New Haven, CT: Yale University
McLaughlin, K. A., Ruscio, A. M., et al. (2016). The Press.
epidemiology of traumatic event exposure worldwide: Brewin, C. R., Cloitre, M., Hyland, P., Shevlin, M.,
Results from the World Mental Health Survey Con- Maercker, A., Bryant, R. A., et al. (2017). A review of
sortium. Psycholological Medicine, 46, 327-343. current evidence regarding the ICD-11 proposals for
Bennett, D. S., Sullivan, M. W., & Lewis, M. (2005). diagnosing PTSD and complex PTSD. Clinical Psy-
Young children’s adjustment as a function of maltreat- chology Review, 58, 1-15.
ment, shame, and anger. Child Maltreatment, 10, Briere, J. (1992). Child abuse trauma: Theory and treat-
311-323. ment of the lasting effects. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE.
Bisson, J. I., Brewin, C. R., Cloitre, M., & Maercker, A. Briere, J., & Rickards, S. (2007). Self-awareness, affect
(2020). PTSD and complex PTSD: Diagnosis, assess- regulation, and relatedness: Differential sequels of
ment and screening. In D. Forbes, D. C. Monson, L. childhood versus adult victimization experiences.
Berliner, & J. I. Bisson (Eds.), Effective treatments Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 195, 497-
for PTSD: Practice guidelines from the International 503.
Society for Traumatic Stress Studies (8rd ed.). New Briere, J., & Runtz, M. (1990). Differential adult symp-
York: Guilford Press. tomology associated with three types of child abuse
Bjureberg, J., Ljótsson, B., Tull, M. T., Hedman, E., histories. Child Abuse and Neglect, 14, 357-364.
Sahlin, H., Lundh, L. G., et al. (2016). Development Brodsky, B., Cloitre, M., & Dulit, R. (1995). The rela-
and validation of a brief version of the Difficulties in tionship of dissociation to self-mutilation and child-
Emotion Regulation Scale: The DERS-16. Journal hood abuse in borderline personality disorder. Ameri-
of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 38, can Journal of Psychiatry, 12, 1788-1792.
284-296. Brown, B. (2010). The gifts of imperfection: Let go of who
Blieberg, K. L. (2000). The disclosure of childhood you think youre supposed to be and embrace who you
sexual abuse and post-traumatic stress disorder and are. Center City, MN: Hazelden.
related symptoms of cognitive and affective impair- Burroughs, A. R. (2003). Dry: A memoir. New York: St.
ment, Garden City, NY: Adelphi University. Martin's Press.
Bloom, S. L., & Reichert, M. (1998). Bearing witness: Carey-Trefzer, C. J. (1949). The results of a clinical study
Violence and collective responsibility. Binghamton, of war-damaged children who attended the Child
NY: Haworth Press. Guidance Clinic, the Hospital for Sick Children,
Bonanno, G., Colak, D., Keltner, D., Shiota, M. N., Great Ormond Street, London. Journal of Mental Sci-
Papa, A., Noll, J. G., et al. (2007). Context matters: ence, 95, 535-559.
The benefits and costs of expressing positive emotion Carliner, H., Gary, D., McLaughlin, K. A., & Keyes, K.
among survivors of childhood sexual abuse. Emotion, M. (2017). Trauma exposure and externalizing disor-
7, 824-837. ders in adolescents: Results from the National CoBoudewyns, P. A., & Hyer, L. A. (1990). Physiological re- morbidity Survey Adolescent Supplement. Journal of
sponse to combat veterans and preliminary treatment the American Academy of Child Adolescent Psychia-
outcome in Vietnam veteran posttraumatic stress dis- try, 56, 755-764.
order patients treated with direct therapeutic expo- Carlson, V., Cicchetti, D., Barnett, D., & Braunwald,
sure. Behavior Therapy, 21, 63-87, K. (1989). Disorganized/disoriented attachment relaBourne, E. J. (1999). The anxiety and phobia workbook. tionships in maltreated infants. Developmental Psy-
Oakland, CA: New Harbinger. chology, 25, 525-531.
Bouton, M. E., & Swartzentruber, D. (1991). Sources of Carson, R. C. (1969). Interaction concepts of personal-
relapse after extinction in Pavlovian and instrumental ity. Chicago: Aldine.
learning. Clinical Psychology Review, 11, 123-140. Chaplin, T. C., Rice, M. E., & Harris, G. T. (1995).
Bowers, M. E., & Yehuda, R. (2016). Intergenerational Salient victim suffering and the sexual responses of
transmission of stress in humans. Neuropsychophar- child molesters. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
macology, 41, 232-244. Psychology, 63, 249-255.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attach- Chauhan, P., Schuck, A. M., & Widom, C. S. (2017).
ment. New York: Basic Books. Child maltreatment, problem behaviors, and neigh-

[PAGE 456]

References 439


borhood attainment. American Journal of Commu- treatment for PTSD related to childhood abuse.
nity Psycholology, 60, 555-567. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70,
Chauhan, P., & Widom, C. S. (2012). Childhood mal- 1067-1074.
treatment and illicit drug use in middle adulthood: Cloitre, M., Levitt, J., Davis, L., & Miranda, R. (2003,
The role of neighborhood characteristics. Develop- November). Bringing a manualized treatment for
mental Psychopathology, 24, 723-738. PTSD to the community. In R. Bryant (Chair), ImChemtob, C. M., Novaco, R. W., Hamada, R. N., & proving treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder.
Gross, D. (1997). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of Symposium conducted at the 19th annual meeting of
severe anger in posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal the International Society for Traumatic Stress Stud-
of Consulting and Cllinical Psychology, 65, 184-189. ies, Chicago, IL.
Cicchetti, D., & Toth, S. L. (2015). Child maltreatment. Cloitre, M., & Makin-Byrd, K. (2018). Parenting Skills
In M. E. Lamb (Vol. Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Series Ed.), Training in Affective and Interpersonal Regulation
Handbook of child psychology and developmental for Primary Care (Parenting STAIR) essentials. Un-
science: Vol. 3. Socioemotional processes (7th ed., published manual, Department of Veterans Affairs.
pp. 513-563). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Cloitre, M., Miranda, R., Stovall-McClough, C., & Han,
licchetti, D., & White, J. (1990). Emotion and develop- H. (2005). Beyond PTSD: Emotion regulation and in-
mental psychopathology. In L. N. L. Stein & T. Tra- terpersonal problems as predictors of functional im-
basso (Eds.), Psychological approaches to emotion pairment in survivors of childhood abuse. Behavior
(pp. 359-382). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Therapy, 36, 119-124.
Cloitre, M. (1998). Sexual revictimization: Risk factors Cloitre, M., Ortigo, K. M., & Gupta, C. (2018c). Skills
and prevention. In V. M. Follette, J. I. Ruzek, & F. Training in Affective and Interpersonal Regulation
R. Abueg (Eds.), Cognitive-behavioral therapies for for Primary Care (STAIR-PC) essentials (Version 1.6).
trauma (pp. 278-304). New York: Guilford Press. Unpublished manual, Department of Veterans AfCloitre, M. (2015). The “one size fits all” approach to fairs.
trauma treatment: should we be satisfied? European Cloitre, M., Scarvalone, P., & Difede, J. A. (1997). Post-
Journal of Psychotraumatology, 6. traumatic stress disorder, self and interpersonal dysCloitre, M., Cohen, L. R., & Scarvalone, P. (2002a). Un- function among sexually retraumatized women. Jour-
derstanding revictimization among childhood sexual nal of Traumatic Stress, 10, 437-452.
abuse survivors: An interpersonal schema approach. Cloitre, M., Shevlin, M., Brewin, C. R., Bisson, J. L., Rob-
Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An International erts, N. P., Maercker, A., et al. (2018d). The Interna-
Quarterly, 16, 91-111. tional Trauma Questionnaire: Development of a selfCloitre, M., Garvert, D. W., Brewin, C. R., Bryant, R. A., report measure of ICD-11 PTSD and complex PTSD.
& Maercker, A. (2013, May). Evidence for proposed Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 138, 536-546.
ICD-11 PTSD and complex PTSD: A latent profile Cloitre, M., Stolbach, B. C., Herman, J. L., van der Kolk,
analysis. European Journal of Psychotraumatology, 4. B., Pynoos, R., Wang, J., & Petkova, E. (2009). A deCloitre, M., Gimeno, J., Ortigo, K. M., Weiss, B., & Jain, velopmental approach to complex PTSD: Childhood
S. (2018a, November). STAIR as a stand-alone treat- and adult cumulative trauma as predictors of symptom
ment: Results from a randomized controlled trial. In complexity. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 22, 399-408.
C. Rosen (Chair), What if we dont talk about trauma?: Cloitre, M., Stovall-McClough, K. C., Miranda, R., &
Evidence-based alternatives to trauma-focused psy- Chemtob, C. M. (2004). Therapeutic alliance, nega-
chotherapy. Symposium conducted at the annual tive mood regulation, and treatment outcome in child
conference of the International Society of Traumatic abuse-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal
Stress Studies, Washington, DC. of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 411-416.
Cloitre, M., Khan, C., Mackintosh, M. A., Garvert, D. Cloitre, M., Stovall-McClough, K. C., Nooner, K., Zor-
W., Henn-Haase, C. M., Falvey, E. C., et al. (2019). bas, P., Cherry, S., Jackson C. L., et al. (2010). Treat-
Emotion regulation mediates the relationship be- ment for PTSD related to childhood abuse: A random-
tween ACES and physical and mental health. Psycho- ized controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry,
logical Trauma, 11, 82-89. 167, 915-924.
Cloitre, M., & Koenen, K. C. (2001). The impact of bor- Cloitre, M., Stovall-McClough, K. C., Zorbas, P., & Cha-
derline personality disorder on process group out- ruvastra, A. (2008). Childhood maltreatment, adult
come among women with posttraumatic stress disor- attachment status, and psychosocial adjustment: At-
der related to childhood abuse. International Journal tachment organization, emotion regulation, and ex-
of Group Psychotherapy, 51, 379-397. pectations of support in a clinical sample of women
Cloitre, M., Koenen, K. C., Cohen, L. R., & Han, H. with childhood abuse histories. Journal of Traumatic
(2002b). Skills training in affective and interpersonal Stress: Official Publication of The International Soci-
regulation followed by exposure: A phase-based ety for Traumatic Stress Studies, 21(3), 282-289.

[PAGE 457]

440 References


Cloitre, M., Tardiff, K., Marzuk, P. M., Leon, A. C., & shame, and symptom development following sexual
Portera, L. (1996). Childhood abuse and subsequent abuse. Child Maltreatment, 7, 25-39.
sexual assault among female inpatients. Journal of Figley, C. R., & Ludick, M. (2017). Secondary trauma-
Traumatic Stress, 9, 473-482. tization and compassion fatigue. In S. Gold (Ed.),
Joid, J., Petruckevitch, A., Feder, G., Chung, W. S., Handbook of trauma psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 573—
Richardson, J., & Moorey, S. (2001). Relation between 593). Washington, DC: American Psychological As-
childhood sexual and physical abuse and risk of revic- sociation.
timisation in women: A cross-sectional survey. The Finkelhor, D. (1980). Sex among siblings: A survey on
Lancet, 358(9280), 450-454. prevalence, variety and effects. Archives of Sexual
Sonte, J., Wolfe, R. R., & Smith, T. (1989). What sexual Behavior, 9, 171-194.
offenders tell us about prevention strategies. Child Finkelhor, D. (1994). Current information on the scope
Abuse and Neglect, 13, 293-301. and nature of child sexual abuse. The Future of ChilCooper, N., & Clum, G. (1989). Imaginal flooding as a dren, 4, 31-53.
supplementary treatment for PTSD in combat vet- Finkelhor, D., Turner, H. A., Shattuck, A., & Hamby,
erans: A controlled study. Behavior Therapy, 10, S. L. (2013). Violence, crime, and abuse exposure in
381-391. a national sample of children and youth: An update.
Coryell, W., Scheftner, W., Keller, M., Endicott, J., JAMA Pediatrics, 167(7), 614-621.
Maser, J., & Klerman, G. (1993). The enduring psy- Foa, E. B., Dancu, C. V., Hembree, E. A., Jaycox, L. H.,
chological consequences of mania and depression. & Meadows, E. A. (1999). A comparison of exposure
American Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 720-726. therapy, stress inoculation training, and their comDavis, M., Eshelman, E. R., & McKay, M. (1995). The bination for reducing posttraumatic stress disorder
relaxation and stress reduction workbook. Oakland, in female assault victims. Journal of Consulting and
CA: New Harbinger. Clinical Psychology, 67, 194-200.
DePrince, A. P., Brown, L. S., Cheit, R. E., Freyd, J. Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. $., Massie, E. D., & Yarczower,
J., Gold, S. N., Pezdek, K., et al. (2012). Motivated M. (1995). The impact of fear activation and anger on
forgetting and misremembering: Perspectives from the efficacy of exposure treatment for posttraumatic
betrayal trauma theory. Nebraska Symposium on Mo- stress disorder. Behavior Therapy, 26, 487-499.
tivation, 58, 193-242. Foa, E. B., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1998). Treating the
Desai, S., Arias, IL, Thompson, M. P., & Basile, K. C. trauma of rape: Cognitive-behavioral therapy for
(2002). Childhood victimization and subsequent PTSD. New York: Guilford Press.
adult revictimization assessed in a nationally repre- Ford, J. D., Fisher, P., & Larson, L. (1997). Object rela-
sentative sample of women and men. Violence and tions as a predictor of treatment outcome with chronic
Victims, 17, 639-653. posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting
Doyle, C., & Cicchetti, D. (2017). From the cradle to the and Clinical Psychology, 65, 547-559.
grave: The effect of adverse caregiving environments Ford, J. D., & Kidd, P. (1998). Early childhood trauma
on attachment and relationships throughout the life- and disorders of extreme stress as predictors of treat-
span. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, ment outcome with chronic posttraumatic stress dis-
240), 203-221. order. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 11, 743-761.
Ehlers, A., & Clark, D. M. (2000). A cognitive model of Fosha, D. (2000). The transforming power of affect: A
posttraumatic stress disorder. Behaviour Research model for accelerated change. New York: Basic Books.
and Therapy, 38, 319-345. Freud, S. (1955). Beyond the pleasure principle. In J.
Ehlers, A., & Wild, J. (2015). Cognitive therapy for Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The standard edition of the
PTSD: Updating memories and meanings of trauma. complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol.
In U. Schnyder & M. Cloitre (Eds.), Evidence-based 18, pp. 3-64). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work
treatments for trauma-related psychological disor- published 1920)
ders (pp. 161-187). Cham, Switzerland: Springer In- Freud, S. (1963). Further recommendations in the tech-
ternational. nique of psychoanalysis: Recollection, repetition
Erickson, M. F., Egeland, B., & Pianta, R. (1989). The and working through. In P. Reiff (Ed.), Therapy and
effects of maltreatment on the development of young technique. New York: Macmillan. (Original work pub-
children. In D. Cicchetti & V. Carlson (Eds.), Child lished 1914)
maltreatment: Theory and research on the causes and Frewen, P. A., Dozois, D. J. A., Neufeld, R. W. J., & La-
consequences of child abuse and neglect (pp. 674- nius, R. A. (2008). Meta-analysis of alexithymia in
684). New York: Cambridge University Press. posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic
Fanning, P., & O'Neill, J. T. (1996). The addiction work- Stress, 21(2), 243-246.
book. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger. Freyd, J. J. (1996). Betrayal trauma: The logic offorgetFeiring, C., Taska, L., & Chen, K. (2002). Trying to un- ting childhood abuse. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
derstand why horrible things happen: Attribution, versity Press.

[PAGE 458]

References 441


Funari, D., Piekarski, A., & Sherwood, R. (1991). Treat- Oral histories of women who survived the Holocaust.
ment outcomes of Vietnam veterans with posttrau- Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.
matic stress disorder. Psychological Reports, 68, Harvey, M. R., Liang, B., Harney, P., & Koenen, K. C.
571-578. (2003). A multidimensional approach to the measureGapen, M., Cross, D., Ortigo, K. M., Graham, A., John- ment of trauma recovery and resiliency. Journal of
son, E., Evces, M., et al. (2011). Perceived neigh- Aggression, Maltreatment and Trauma, 6, 87-109.
borhood disorder, community cohesion, and PTSD Haskett, M. E., Smith Scott, S., & Ward, C. S. (2004).
symptoms among low-income African Americans in Subgroups of physically abusive parents based on
an urban health setting. American Journal of Ortho- cluster analysis of parenting behavior and affect.
psychiatry, 81, 31-37, American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 74, 436-447.
Gergely, G. (2004). The role of contingency detection in Heriot, J. (1996). Maternal protectiveness following the
early affect-regulative interactions and in the devel- disclosure of intrafamilial child sexual abuse. Journal
opment of different types of infant attachment. Social of Interpersonal Violence, 11, 181-194.
Development, 13, 468-478. Herman, J. L. (1992). Trauma and recovery: The afterGergely, G., & Watson, J. (1996). The social biofeedback math of violence from domestic to political terror.
theory of parental affect-mirroring: The development New York: Basic Books.
of emotional self-awareness and self-control in in- Herman, J. L. (2007, March 10). Shattered shame states
fancy. International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 77, and their repair. The John Bowlby Memorial Lecture,
1151-1212. presented in the Department of Psychiatry, Harvard
Giaconia, R. M., Reinherz, H. Z., Silverman, A. B., Medical School, Boston.
Pakiz, B., Frost, A. K., & Cohen, E. (1995). Traumas Hien, D., & Honeyman, T. (2000). A closer look at the
and posttraumatic stress disorder in a community drug abuse-maternal aggression link. Journal of In-
population of older adolescents. Journal of the Ameri- terpersonal Violence, 15, 503-522.
can Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 34, Hill, C. R., & Safran, J. D. (1994). Assessing interper-
1369-1380. sonal schemas: Anticipated responses of significant
Gidyez, C. A., Hanson, K., & Layman, M. J. (1995). A others. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 13,
prospective analysis of the relationships among sex- 366-379.
ual assault experiences. Psychology of Women Quar- Hobfoll, S. E., Mancini, A. D., Hall, B. J., Canetti, D.,
terly, 19, 5-29. & Bonanno, G. A. (2011). The limits of resilience:
Gilbert, P. (2010). Compassion focused therapy. Hove, Distress following chronic political violence among
UK: Routledge. Palestinians. Social Science and Medicine, 72, 1400—
Gilmore, M. (1994). Shot in the heart. New York: Dou- 1408.
bleday. Hollifield, M., Gory, A., Siedjak, J., Nguyen, L., HolGold, S. N. (2000). Not trauma alone: Therapy for child mgreen, L., & Hobfoll, S. (2016). The benefit of con-
abuse survivors in family and social context. Phila- serving and gaining resources after trauma: A system-
delphia: Brunner/Routledge. atic review. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 5(11), 104.
Golden, O. (2000). The federal response to child abuse Holmes, J. (2001). The search for the secure base: At-
and neglect. American Journal of Psychiatry, 55, tachment theory and psychotherapy. Philadelphia:
1050-1053. Brunner/Routledge.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence. New York: Horan, J. M., & Widom, C. S. (2015). Cumulative child-
Bantam Books. hood risk and adult functioning in abused and neGudiño, O. G., Leonard, S., & Cloitre, M. (2016). STAIR- glected children grown up. Developmental Psycho-
A for girls: A pilot study of a skills-based group for pathology, 27(3), 927-941.
traumatized youth in an urban school setting. Journal Horowitz, K., Weine, S., & Jekel, J. (1995). Posttraumatic
of Child and Adolescent Trauma, 9, 67-79. stress disorder symptoms in urban adolescent girls:
Gudiño, O. G., Leonard, S., Stiles, A. A., Havens, J. F., & Compounded community trauma. Journal of the
Cloitre, M. (2017). STAIR Narrative Therapy for ado- American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychia-
lescents. In M. Landolt, M. Cloitre, & U. Schnyder try, 34, 1353-1361.
(Eds.), Evidence-based treatments for trauma-related Horvath, A. O., & Symonds, D. B. (1991). Relation be-
disorders in children and adolescents (pp. 251-272). tween working alliance and outcome in psychother-
Cham, Switzerland: Springer International. apy: A meta-analysis. Journal of Counseling PsycholGudiño, O. G., Weis, J. R., Havens, J. F., Biggs, E. A., Di- ogy, 36, 223-233.
amond, U. N., Marr, M., et al. (2014). Group trauma- How America defines child abuse: National poll reveals
informed treatment for adolescent psychiatric inpa- most who witness child abuse do nothing about it.
tients: A preliminary uncontrolled trial. Journal of (1999, June 3). PRNewswire. Retrieved October 14,
Traumatic Stress, 27, 1-5. 2019, from nospank.net/n-e62.htm.
Gurewitsch, B. (Ed.). (1998). Mothers, sisters, resisters: International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies

[PAGE 459]

442 References


(ISTSS). (2019a). New ISTSS prevention and treat- PTSD in the WHO World Mental Health Surveys.
ment guidelines. Retrieved February 9, 2019, from European Journal of Psychotraumatology, S(Suppl.
www.istss.org/treating-trauma/new-istss-guidelines. 5), 1353383.
aspx. Kiesler, D. J. (1983). The 1982 interpersonal circle: A
International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies taxonomy for complementarity in human transac-
(ISTSS). (2019b). ISTSS guidelines position paper on tions. Psychological Review, 90, 185-214.
complex PTSD in adults. Retrieved February 17, 2019, Kilpatrick, D. G., Ruggiero, K. J., Acierno, R., Saunders,
from www.istss.org/getattachment/treating-trauma/ B. E., Resnick, H. S., & Best, C. L. (2003). Violence
new-istss-prevention-and-treatment-guidelines/ and risk of PTSD, major depression, substance abuse/
istss_cptsd-position-paper-(adults)_fnl.pdf-aspx. dependence, and comorbidity: Results from the NaJackson, C., Weiss, B. J., & Cloitre, M. (2018). STAIR tional Survey of Adolescents. Journal of Consulting
group treatment for veterans with PTSD: Efficacy and Clinical Psychology, 71(4), 692-700.
and impact of gender on outcome. Military Medicine, Kim, K., Mennen, F. E., & Trickett, P. K. (2017). Pat-
184, el43-el47. terns and correlates of co-occurrence among multiple
Jacobs, W. J., & Nadel, L. (1985). Stress induced recov- types of child maltreatment. Child and Family Social
ery of fears and phobias. Psychological Review, 92, Work, 22(1), 492-502.
512-531. Kolko, D. J., Brown, E. J., & Berliner, L. (2002). ChilJaffe, A. E., DiLillo, D., Gratz, K. L., & Messman- dren's perceptions of their abusive experience: Mea-
Moore, T. L. (2019). Risk for revictimization fol- surement and preliminary findings. Child Maltreat-
lowing interpersonal and noninterpersonal trauma: ment, 7, 41-53.
Clarifying the role of posttraumatic stress symptoms Konrath, S. H., Chopik, W. J., Hsing, C. K., & O’Brien,
and trauma-related cognitions. Journal of Traumatic E. (2014). Changes in adult attachment styles in
Stress, 32(1), 42-55. American college students over time: A metaJaffee, S. R. (2017). Child maltreatment and risk for psy- analysis. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
chopathology in childhood and adulthood. Annual 18, 326-348.
Review of Clinical Psychology, 13, 525-531. Krahe, B., Sheinberger-Olwig, R., Waizenhofer, E., &
Janoff-Bulman, R. (1992). Shattered assumptions: To- Koplin, S. (1999). Childhood sexual abuse revictim-
wards a new psychology of trauma. New York: Free ization in adolescence. Child Abuse and Neglect, 4,
Press. 383-394.
Jung, C. G. (1989). Memories, dreams, reflections (A. Krupnick, J. L., Sotsky, S. M., Simmons, S., Moyer, ].,
Jaffe, Ed. & C. Winston, Trans.). New York: Vintage Elkin, L, & Watkins, J. (1996). The role of the thera-
Books. (Original work published 1963) peutic alliance in psychotherapy and pharmacotherKagan, J. (1980). Perspectives on continuity. In O. G. apy outcome: Findings in the NIMH Collaborative
Brin, Jr. & J. Kagan (Eds.), Constancy and change in Research Programme. Journal of Consulting and
human development (pp. 26-74). Cambridge, MA: Clinical Psychology, 64, 532-539.
Harvard University Press. Kubany, E. S., Ownes, J. A., McCaig, M. A., Hill, E. E.,
Kaplan, S. J., Sunday, S. R., Labruna, V., Pelcovitz, D., & Tannce-Spencer, C., & Tremayne, K. J. (2004). Cogni-
Salzinger, S. (2009). Psychiatric disorders of parents tive trauma therapy for battered women with PTSD
of physically abused adolescents. Journal of Family (CTT-BW). Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
Violence, 24, 273-281. chology, 72, 3-18.
Karatzias, T., Murphy, P., Cloitre, M., Bisson, J. I., Rob- Langton, L., Berzofsky, M., Krebs, C., & Smiley-
erts, N. P., Shevlin, M., et al. (2019). Psychological McDonald, H. (2012, August). Victimizations not
interventions for ICD-11 Complex PTSD symptoms: reported to the police 2006-2010. Washington,
Systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychological DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice
Medicine, 49(11), 1761-1775. Statistics. Retrieved from bjs.gov/content/pub.pdf/
Karen, R. (1998). Becoming attached: First relationships onrp0610.pdf.
and how they shape our capacity to love. New York: Larsen, S. E., Stirman, S. W., Smith, B. N., & Resick, P.
Oxford University Press. A. (2016). Symptom exacerbations in trauma-focused
Keane, T. M., Fairbank, J., Caddell, J., & Zimmering, treatments: Associations with treatment outcome and
R. (1989). Implosive (flooding) therapy reduces symp- non-completion. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
toms of PTSD in Vietnam combat veterans. Behavior 77, 68-77.
Therapy, 20, 246-260. Layne, C. M., Kaplow, J. B., Oosterhoff, B., Hill, R. M,,
Keenan, K. (2000). Emotion dysregulation as a risk fac- & Pynoos, R. S. (2018). The interplay between post-
tor for child psychopathology. Clinical Psychology: traumatic stress and grief reactions in traumatically
Science and Practice, 7, 418-434. bereaved adolescents: When trauma, bereavement,
Kessler, R. C., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Alonso, J., Benjet, C., and adolescence converge. Adolescent Psychiatry, 7,
Bromet, E. J., Cardoso, G., et al. (2017). Trauma and 266-285.

[PAGE 460]

References 443


Leary, T. (1957). Interpersonal diagnosis of personality. Lipschitz, D. S., Winegar, R. K., Hartnick, E., Foote, B.,
New York: Ronald Press. & Southwick, S. M. (1999a). Posttraumatic stress disLeDoux, J. E. (1998). The emotional brain. London: order in hospitalized adolescents: Psychiatric comor-
Weidenfeld & Nicolson. bidity and clinical correlates. Journal of the AmeriLeskela, J., Dieperink, M., & Thuras, P. (2002). Shame can Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38,
and posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Trau- 385-392.
matic Stress, 15(3), 223-226. Lipschitz, D. S., Winegar, R. K., Nicolaou, A. L., HartLevitt, J. T., & Cloitre, M. (2005). A clinician's guide to nick, E., Wolfson, M., & Southwick, S. M. (1999b).
STAIR/MPE: Treatment for PTSD related to child- Perceived abuse and neglect as risk factors for sui-
hood abuse. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 12, cidal behavior in adolescent inpatients. Journal of
40-52. Nervous and Mental Disease, 187, 29-32.
Levitt, J. T., Malta, L. S., Martin, A., Davis, L., & Cloitre, Litz, B. T., & Gray, M. J. (2002). Emotional numbing of
M. (2007). The flexible application of a manualized posttraumatic stress disorder: Current and future re-
treatment for PTSD symptoms and functional impair- search directions. Australian and New Zealand Jour-
ment related to the 9/11 World Trade Center attack. nal of Psychiatry, 36, 198-204.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45(7), 1419-1433. Liu, J., Fang, Y., Gong, J., Cui, X., Meng, T., Xiao, B., et
Lee, J. L., Nader, K., & Schiller, D. (2017). An update on al. (2017). Associations between suicidal behavior and
memory reconsolidation updating. Trends in Cogni- childhood abuse and neglect: A meta-analysis. Jour-
tive Sciences, 21, 331-545. nal of Affective Disorders, 220, 147-155.
Li, M., D'Arcy, C., & Meng, X. (2016). Maltreatment in Lorde, A. (1984). Sister outsider: Essays and speeches.
childhood substantially increases the risk of adult Trumansburg, NY: Crossing Press.
depression and anxiety in prospective cohort studies: Lyons-Ruth, K., Alpern, L., & Repacholi, B. (1993). Dis-
Systematic review, meta-analysis, and proportional organized infant attachment classification and mater-
attributable fractions. Psychological Medicine, 46, nal psychosocial problems as predictors of hostile—
717-730. aggressive behavior in the preschool classroom. Child
Lieberman, A. F., & Amaya-Jackson, L. (2005). Recipro- Development, 63, 572-585.
cal influences of attachment and trauma: Using a dual MacIntosh, H. B., Cloitre, M., Kortis, K., Peck, A., &
lens in the assessment and treatment of infants, tod- Weiss, B. J. (2018). Implementation and evaluation
dlers, and preschoolers. In L. Berlin, Y. Ziv, L. Amaya- of the Skills Training in Affective and Interpersonal
Jackson, & M. T. Greenberg (Eds.), Enhancing early Regulation (STAIR) in a community setting in the
attachments: Theory, research, intervention, and context of childhood sexual abuse. Research on Social
policy (pp. 100-124). New York: Guilford Press. Work Practice, 28(5), 595-602.
Lifton, R. J. (1993). The protean self: Human resilience MacKinnon, C. A. (2005, April 16). Who was afraid of
in an age offragmentation. New York: Basic Books. Andrea Dworkin? The New York Times, p. 13.
Lindy, J. (1996). Psychoanalytic psychotherapy of post- Maercker, A., Brewin, C. R., Bryant, R. A., Cloitre, M.,
traumatic stress disorder: The nature of the therapeu- van Ommeren, M., Jones, L. M., et al. (2013). Diag-
tic relationship. In B. van der Kolk, A. C. McFarlane, nosis and classification of disorders specifically asso-
& I. Weisaeth (Eds.), Traumatic stress: The effects of ciated with stress: Proposals for ICD-11. World Psy-
overwhelming experience on mind, body, and society chiatry, 12(3), 198-206.
(pp. 525-536). New York: Guilford Press. Main, M., Kaplan, N., & Cassidy, J. (1985). Security in
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment infancy, childhood, and adulthood: A move to the
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guil- level of representation. In I. Bretherton & E. Waters
ford Press. (Eds.), Growing points of attachment theory and reLinehan, M. M. (2015). DBT skills training manual (2nd search. Monographs of the Society for Research in
ed.). New York: Guilford Press. Child Development, 50(1-2, Serial No. 209), 66-104.
Linehan, M. M., Korslund, K. E., Harned, M. S., Gallop, Malatesta, C. Z., & Haviland, J. M. (1982). Learning dis-
R. J., Lungu, A., Neacsiu, A. D., et al. (2015). Dialec- play rules: The socialization of emotion expression in
tical behavior therapy for high suicide risk in indi- infancy. Child Development, 53, 991-1003.
viduals with borderline personality disorder: A ran- Malmgquist, C. P. (1986). Children who witness parental
domized clinical trial and component analysis. JAMA murder: Posttraumatic aspects. Journal of the Ameri-
Psychiatry, 72, 475-482. can Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 25,
Lipschitz, D. S., Rasmusson, A. M., Anyan, W., Comwell, 320-325.
P., & Southwick, S. M. (2000). Clinical and functional Maniglio, R. (2009). The impact of child sexual abuse on
correlates of posttraumatic stress disorder in urban health: A systematic review of reviews. Clinical Psy-
adolescent girls at a primary care clinic. Journal of chology Review, 29(7), 647-657.
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psy- March, J. (1999). Assessment of pediatric posttraumatic
chiatry, 39, 1104-1111. stress disorder. In P. A. Saigh & J. D. Bremner (Eds.),

[PAGE 461]

444 References


Postttraumatic stress disorder: A comprehensive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
text (pp. 199-218). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & ogy, 62, 185-190.
Bacon. Nader, K., Schafe, G. E., & LeDoux, J. E. (2000).
Martin, D. J., Garske, J. P., & Davis, M. K. (2000). Re- Reply—Reconsolidation: The labile nature of consoli-
lation of the therapeutic alliance with outcome and dation theory. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 1, 216.
other variables: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Nash, M. R., Hulsey, T. L., Sexton, M. C., Harralson, T.
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58, 438—450. L., & Lambert, W. (1993). Perceived family environMathieu, F. (2012). The compassion fatigue workbook: ment, psychopathology, and dissociation. Journal of
Creative tools for transforming compassion fatigue Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 276-283.
and vicarious traumatization. New York: Routledge. Naughton, A. M., Maguire, S. A., Mann, M. K., Lumb, R.
May, R. (1975). The courage to create. New York: Norton. C., Tempest, V., Gracias, S., et al. (2013). Emotional,
McCarthy, G., & Maughan, B. (2010). Negative child- behavioral, and developmental features indicative of
hood experiences and adult love relationships: The neglect or emotional abuse in preschool children: A
role of internal working models of attachment. At- systematic review. JAMA Pediatrics, 167, 769-775.
tachment and Human Development, 12(5), 445-461. Nichols, K., Gergely, G., & Fonagy, P. (2001). ExperiMcDonagh, A., Friedman, M., McHugo, G., Ford, J., mental protocols for investigating relationships among
Sengupta, A., Mueser, K., et al. (2005). Randomized mother-infant interaction, affect regulation, physi-
trial of cognitive behavioral therapy for chronic post- ological markers of stress responsiveness, and attach-
traumatic stress disorder in adult female survivors of ment. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 65(3), 371-379.
childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Consulting and Nickerson, A., Cloitre, M., Bryant, R. A., Schnyder, U.,
Clinical Psychology, 73, 515-524. Morina, N., & Schick, M. (2016). The factor structure
McFall, M. E., Marburg, M. M., Ko, G. N., & Veith, R., of complex posttraumatic stress disorder in trauma-
C. (1990). Autonomic responses to stress in Vietnam tized refugees. European Journal of Psychotrauma-
combat veterans with PTSD. Biological Psychiatry, tology, 7, 33253.
27, 1165-1175. Nickerson, A., Cloitre, M., & O'Donnell, M. (2018McLaughlin, K. A., Greif Green, J., Gruber, M. J., Samp- 2022). Phase-based treatment for PTSD in trauma-
son, N. A., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Kessler, R. C. (2012). tized refugees. Grant from the Australian National
Childhood adversities and first onset of psychiatric Health and Medical Research Council.
disorders in a national sample of US adolescents. Ar- Norman, R. E., Byambaa, M., De, R., Butchart, A.,
chives of General Psychiatry, 69, 1151-1160. Scott, J., & Vos, T. (2012). The long-term health conMessman, T. L., & Long, P. J. (1996). Child sexual sequences of child physical abuse, emotional abuse,
abuse and its relationship to revictimization in adult and neglect: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
women: A review. Clinical Psychology Review, 5, PLOS Medicine, 9, el001349.
397-420. O'Dougherty Wright, M., Crawford, E., & Del Castillo,
Messman-Moore, T. L., & Long, P. J. (2000). Child sexual D. (2009). Childhood emotional maltreatment and
abuse and revictimization in the form of adult sexual later psychological distress among college students:
abuse, adult physical abuse, and adult psychological The mediating role of maladaptive schemas. Child
maltreatment. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 15, Abuse and Neglect, 33, 59-68.
489-502. Orth, U., Robins, R. W., & Soto, C. J. (2010). Tracking
Messman-Moore, T. L., Ward, R. M., & Zerubavel, N. the trajectory of shame, guilt, and pride across the life
(2013). The role of substance use and emotion dys- span. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
regulation in predicting risk for incapacitated sexual 99, 1061-1071.
revictimization in women: Results of a prospective Ortigo, K. M., & Cloitre, M. (2018, November 17). web-
investigation. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 27, STAIR VA enterprise-wide initiative: A skills-based
125-132. web program with coaching support targeting MST
Miron, L. R., & Orcutt, H. K. (2014). Pathways from for rural veterans. In A. Edwards Stewart (Chair),
childhood abuse to prospective revictimization: De- Technology for mental health in military and veteran
pression, sex to reduce negative affect, and forecasted populations. Symposium conducted at the 52nd an-
sexual behavior. Child Abuse and Neglect, 38, 1848— nual convention of the Association for Behavioral and
1859. Cognitive Therapies, Washington, DC.
Monson, C. M., & Fredman, S. J. (2012). Cognitive- Ortigo, K. M., Cloitre, M., Jackson, C., Weiss, B., &
behavioral conjoint therapy for PTSD: Harnessing Schmidt, J. (2019). webSTAIR: Skills Training in Af-
the healing power of relationships. New York: Guil- fective and Interpersonal Regulation [Online web-
ford Press. site]. Retrieved from www.webSTAIR.org.
Muran, J. C., Segal, Z. V., Samstag, L. W., & Crawford, Ortigo, K. M., Westen, D., DeFife, J. A., & Bradley, B.
C. E. (1994). Patient pretreatment interpersonal prob- (2013). Attachment, social cognition, and posttrau-
lems in therapeutic alliance in short-term cognitive matic stress symptoms in a traumatized, urban popu-

[PAGE 462]

References 445


lation: Evidence for the mediating role of object rela- Quindlen, A. (1992). Object lessons. Branson, MO: Ivy
tions. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 26, 361-368. Books.
Papa, A., & Bonanno, G. A. (2008). Smiling in the face of Rapaport, M. H., Endicott, J., & Clary, C. M. (2002).
adversity: The interpersonal and intrapersonal func- Post-traumatic stress disorder and quality of life: Re-
tions of smiling. Emotion, 8, 1-12. sults across 64 weeks of sertraline treatment. Journal
Parke, R. D., McDowell, D. J., Cladis, M., & Leidy, M. of Clinical Psychiatry, 63, 59-65.
S. (2006). Family and peer relationships: The role of Ray, K. C., Jackson, J. L., & Townsley, R. M. (1991).
emotion regulatory processes. In D. K. Snyder, J. E. Family environments of victims of intrafamilial and
Simpson, & J. N. Hughes (Eds.), Emotion regulation extrafamilial child sexual abuse. Journal of Family
in couples and families: Pathways to dysfunction and Violence, 6, 365-374.
health (pp. 143-162). Washington, DC: American Riggs, S. A., Cusimano, A. M., & Benson, K. M. (2011).
Psychological Association. Childhood emotional abuse and attachment processes
Pearlman, L. A., & Saakvitne, K. W. (1995). Trauma and in the dyadic adjustment of dating couples. Journal of
the therapist. New York: Norton. Counseling Psychology, 58(1), 126-138.
Pearlman, L. A., Wortman, C. B., Feuer, C. A., Farber, Roberts, N., Cloitre, M., Bisson, J. IL, & Brewin, C.
C. H., & Rando, T. A. (2014). Treating traumatic be- (2018). The International Trauma Interview for ICD-
reavement: A practitioners guide. New York: Guil- 11 PTSD. Unpublished interview.
ford Press. Rogers, C. R. (1951). Client-centered therapy. Boston:
Perepletchikova, F., & Kaufman, J. (2010). Emotional Houghton Mifflin.
and behavioral sequelae of childhood maltreatment. Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-
Current Opinion in Pediatrics, 22, 610-615. image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Perry, R. E., Blair, C., & Sullivan, R. M. (2017). Neu- Rothbaum, B. O., & Foa, E. B. (1999). Reclaiming your
robiology of infant attachment: Attachment despite life after rape: Cognitive behavioral therapy for post-
adversity and parental programming of emotionality. traumatic stress disorder. New York: Oxford Univer-
Current Opinion in Psychology, 17, 1-6. sity Press.
Pitman, R. K., Orr, S. P., Forgue, D. F., de Jong, J. B., & Rothschild, B. (2006). Help for the helper: The psy-
Claiborn, J. M. (1987). Psychophysiologic assessment chophysiology of compassion fatigue and vicarious
of post-traumatic stress disorder imagery in Vietnam trauma. New York: Norton.
combat veterans. Archives of General Psychiatry, 44, Safran, J. D. (1990a). Towards a refinement of cognitive
970-975. therapy in light of interpersonal theory: I. Theory.
Platt, M. G., & Freyd, J. J. (2012). Trauma and negative Clinical Psychology Review, 10, 87-105.
underlying assumptions in feelings of shame: An ex- Safran, J. D. (1990b). Towards a refinement of cognitive
ploratory study. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Re- therapy in light of interpersonal theory: II. Practice.
search, Practice, and Policy, 4, 370-378. Clinical Psychology Review, 10, 107-121.
Platt, M. G., & Freyd, J. J. (2015). Betray my trust, shame Safran, J. D., & Segal, Z. V. (1990). Interpersonal process
on me: Shame, dissociation, fear, and betrayal trauma. in cognitive therapy. New York: Basic Books.
Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, Santiago, A., Aoki, C., & Sullivan, R. M. (2017). From at-
and Policy, 7, 398. tachment to independence: Stress hormone control of
Platt, M. G., Luoma, J. B., & Freyd, J. J. (2017). Shame ecologically relevant emergence of infants’ responses
and dissociation in survivors of high and low betrayal to threat. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences,
trauma. Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment and 14, 78-85.
Trauma, 26(1), 34-49. Saraiya, T., & Lopez-Castro, T. (2016). Ashamed and
Polusny, M., & Follette, V. (1995). Long-term correlates afraid: A scoping review of the role of shame in post-
of child sexual abuse: Theory and review of the em- traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Journal of Clinical
pirical literature. Applied and Preventive Psychology: Medicine, 5(11), 94.
Current Scientific Perspectives, 4, 143-166. Schaef, A. W. (2000). Meditations for living in balance:
Pope, K. S., & Vasquez, M. J. T. (1998). Ethics in psycho- Daily solutions for people who do too much. New
therapy and counseling: A practical guide (2nd ed.). York: HarperCollins.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Schauer, M., Neuner, F., & Elbert, T. (2011). Narrative
Putnam, F. W. (2004). The costs and consequences of exposure therapy: A short-term treatment for trau-
child abuse. Paper presented at the annual meeting matic stress disorders. Boston: Hogrefe.
of the American Association for the Advancement of Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1985). Optimism, cop-
Science, Seattle, WA. ing and health: Assessment and implications of genPynoos, B., Frederick, C. J., Nader, K., Arroyo, W., eralized outcome expectancies. Health Psychology, 4,
Steinberg, A., Nunez, F., et al. (1987). Life threat and 219-247,
posttraumatic stress in school age children. Archives Schwartz, D., & Proctor, L. J. (2000). Community vio-
of General Psychiatry, 44, 1057-1063. lence exposure and children’s social adjustment in the

[PAGE 463]

446 References


school peer groups: The mediating roles of emotion maltreatment: A meta-analytic review of the litera-
regulation and social cognition. Journal of Consulting ture. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 14, 13-29.
and Clinical Psychology, 68, 670-683. Stuewig, J., Tangney, J. P., Kendall, S., Folk, J. B., Meyer,
Scott, M. J., & Stradling, S. G. (1997). Client compliance C. R., & Dearing, R. L. (2015). Children’s proneness
with exposure treatments for posttraumatic stress to shame and guilt predict risky and illegal behaviors
disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 10, 523-526. in young adulthood. Child Psychiatry and Human
Serretti, A., Cavallino, M. C., Macciardi, F., Namia, C., Development, 46, 217-227,
Franchni, L., Souery, D., et al. (1999). Social adjust- Suglia, S. F., Koenen, K. C., Boynton-Jarrett, R., Chan,
ment and self-esteem in remitted patients with mood P. S., Clark, C. J., Danese, A., et al. (2018). Child-
disorders. European Psychiatry, 14, 137-142. hood and adolescent adversity and cardiometabolic
Shalev, A. Y. (1997). Discussion: Treatment of prolonged outcomes: A scientific statement from the American
posttraumatic stress disorder—learning from experi- Heart Association. Circulation, 137(5), el5—e28.
ence. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 10, 415-423. Tarrier, N., Pilgrim, H., Sommerfield, C., Faragher, B.,
Shapiro, D. N., Kaplow, J. B., Amaya-Jackson, L., & Reynolds, M., Graham, E., et al. (1999). A random-
Dodge, K. A. (2012). Behavioral markers of coping ized trial of cognitive therapy and imaginal exposure
and psychiatric symptoms among sexually abused in the treatment of chronic posttraumatic stress dis-
children. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 25, 157-163. order. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
Shear, K., Frank, E., Houck, P., & Reynolds, C. F. 67, 13-18.
(2005). Treatment of complicated grief: A randomized Teicher, M. H., & Samson, J. A. (2013). Childhood mal-
controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical As- treatment and psychopathology: A case for ecophe-
sociation, 293(21), 2601-2608. notypic variants as clinically and neurobiologically
Sheridan, M. J. (1995). A proposed intergenerational distinct subtypes. American Journal of Psychiatry,
model of substance abuse, family functioning, and 170, 1114-1133.
abuse/neglect. Child Abuse and Neglect, 19, 519- Tener, D., & Murphy, S. B. (2015). Adult disclosure of
530. child sexual abuse: A literature review. Trauma, VioShields, A. M., & Cicchetti, D. (1998). Reactive aggres- lence, and Abuse, 16, 391-400.
sion among maltreated children: The contributions of Tilghman-Osborne, C., Cole, D. A., Felton, J. W., &
attention and emotion dysregulation. Journal of Clini- Ciesla, J. A. (2008). Relation of guilt, shame, behav-
cal Child Psychology, 27, 381-395. ioral and characterological self-blame to depressive
Shipman, K. L., & Zeman, J. (2001). Socialization of chil- symptoms in adolescents over time. Journal of Social
dren's emotion regulation in mother-child dyads: A and Clinical Psychology, 27, 809-842.
developmental psychopathology perspective. Devel- Trappler, B., & Newville, H. (2007). Trauma healing via
opmental Psychopathology, 13, 317-336. cognitive behavior therapy in chronically hospitalShipman, K. L., Zeman, J., Penza, S., & Champion, K. ized patients. Psychiatric Quarterly, 78, 317-325.
(2000). Emotion management skills in sexually mal- Turner, S. W., McFarlane, A. C., & van der Kolk, B.
treated and nonmaltreated girls: A developmental (1996). The therapeutic environment and new ex-
psychopathology perspective. Developmental Psy- plorations in the treatment of posttraumatic stress
chopathology, 12, 47-62. disorder. In B. A. van der Kolk, A. C. McFarlane, &
Solomon, J., George, C., & DeJong, A. (1995). Children L. Weisaeth (Eds.), Traumatic stress: The effects of
classified as controlling at age six: Evidence of dis- overwhelming experience on mind, body, and society
organized representational strategies and aggression (pp. 537-596). New York: Guilford Press.
at home and at school. Developmental Psychopathol- van der Kolk, B. (1996). The complexity of adaptation
ogy, 73, 447-463. to trauma: Self-regulation, stimulus discrimination,
Stedman's medical dictionary (27th ed.). (2000). Phila- and characterological development. In B. A. van der
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Kolk, A. C. McFarlane, & I. Weisaeth (Eds.), TrauSteinem, G. (1992). Revolution from within: A book of matic stress: The effects of overwhelming experience
self-esteem. Boston: Little, Brown. on mind, body, and society (pp. 182-213). New York:
Stern, D. N. (1985). The interpersonal world of the in- Guilford Press.
fant. New York: Basic Books. van der Kolk, B., Roth, S., Pelcovitz, D., & Mandel, E.
Stiles, W. B., Agnew-Davis, R., Hardy, G. E., Barkman, S. (1993). Complex posttraumatic stress disorder: Re-
M., & Shapiro, D. A. (1998). Relations of the alliance sults of the posttraumatic stress disorder field trials
with psychotherapy outcome: Findings in the second for DSM-IV. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Sheffield psychotherapy project. Journal of Consult- Association.
ing and Clinical Psychology, 67, 13-18. Van Dernoot Lipsky, L. (2009). Trauma stewardship: An
Stith, S. M., Liu, T., Davies, L. C., Boykin, E. L., Alder, everyday guide to caring for self while caring for oth-
M. C., Harris, J. M., et al. (2009). Risk factors in child ers. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.

[PAGE 464]

References 447


van IJzendoorn, M. H., & Kroonenberg, P. M. (1988). health problems (11th rev.). Geneva, Switzerland:
cross-cultural patterns of attachment: A meta- Autthor. Retrieved February 2, 2019, from https://icd.
analysis of the Strange Situation. Child Development, who.int/browsell/l-m/en.
59, 147-156. Wyatt, G. E., Guthrie, D., & Notgrass, C. M. (1992). DifVigil Dombeck, M. J., Hoffman, J. E., Ramsey, K. M., ferential effects of women’s child sexual abuse and
Jaworski, B. K., Ortigo, K. M., Weiss, B., et al. (2017). subsequent sexual revictimization. Journal of Con-
STAIR Coach (Version 1.0, iOS) [Mobile application sulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 167-173.
software]. Retrieved from http://myvaapps.com. Wyatt, G. E., Loeb, T. B., Solis, B., & Carmona, J. V.
Wachtel, P. (1997). Psychoanalysis, behavior therapy, (1999). The prevalence and circumstances of child
and the relational world. Washington, DC: American sexual abuse: Changes across a decade. Child Abuse
Psychological Association. and Neglect, 23, 45-60.
Weathers, F. W., Blake, D. D., Schnurr, P. P., Kaloupek, Yang, Q., Khoury, M. J., Rodriguez, C., Calle, E. E., Ta-
D. G., Marx, B. P., & Keane, T. M. (2013a). Clinician- than, L. M., & Flanders, W. D. (1998). Family his-
Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5 (CAPS-5). Re- tory score as a predictor of breast cancer mortality:
trieved from www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/assess- Prospective data from the Cancer Prevention Study
ment/adult-int/caps.asp. II, United States, 1982-1991. American Journal of
Weathers, F. W., Litz, B. T., Keane, T. M., Palmieri, Epidemiology, 147, 652-659.
P. A., Marx, B. P., & Schnurr, P. P. (2013b). PTSD Yeomans, F. E., Clarkin, J. F., & Kernberg, O. F. (2015).
Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5). Retrieved from www. Transference-focused psychotherapy for borderline
ptsd.va.gov/professional/assessment/adult-sr/ptsd- personality disorder: A clinical guide. Arlington, VA:
checklist.asp. American Psychiatric Publishing.
Weiss, B. J., Azevedo, K., Webb, K., Gimeno, J., & Cloi- Yeomans, F. E., Gutfreund, J., Selzer, M. A., Clarkin,
tre, M. (2018). Telemental health delivery of Skills J. FE, Hull, S. W., & Smith, T. E. (1994). Factors re-
Training in Affective and Interpersonal Regulation lated to drop-outs by borderline patients: Treatment
(STAIR) for rural women veterans who have experi- contract and therapeutic alliance. Journal of Psycho-
enced military sexual trauma. Journal of Traumatic therapy Practice and Research, 3, 16-24.
Stress, 31, 620-625. Young, J. C., & Widom, C. S. (2014). Long-term effects
Westphal, M., Seivert, N. H., & Bonanno, G. A. (2010). of child abuse and neglect on emotion processing in
Expressive flexibility. Emotion, 10, 92-100. adulthood. Child Abuse and Neglect, 38, 1369-1381.
Widom, C. S., Czaja, S. J., & DuMont, K. A. (2015). Zamir, O., Szepsenwol, O., Englund, M. M., & Simpson,
Intergenerational transmission of child abuse and J. A. (2018). The role of dissociation in revictimiza-
neglect: Real or detection bias? Science, 347(6229), tion across the lifespan: A 32-year prospective study.
1480-1485. Child Abuse and Neglect, 79, 144-153.
Wolfe, J., & Kimerling, R. (1997). Gender issues in the Zhu, P. (2016). 100 creativity ingredients: Everyones play-
assessment of posttraumatic stress disorder. In J. P. book to unlock creativity. Pennsauken, NJ: Book Baby.
Wilson & T. M. Keane (Eds.), Assessing psychological Zlotnick, C., Zakriski, A. L., Shea, T. M., Costello, E.,
trauma and PTSD (pp. 192-238). New York: Guilford Begin, A., Pearlstein, T., et al. (1996). The long-term
Press. sequelae of sexual abuse: Support for a complex
World Health Organization (WHO). (2018). Interna- posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic
tional statistical classification of diseases and related Stress, 9, 195-205.

[PAGE 465]

Index


Note. f or t following a page number indicates a figure or a table.


Abuse, physical, 7, 15, 22-29, 86, emotion regulation skills and, Basic Self-Care skill, 183, 191
109. See also Childhood 180--182 Basics of Self-Care (A Body Channel
maltreatment feedback from, 120 Skill) handout, 183, 191
Abuse-related relationship models, initial contact and, 107 Behavior. See also Emotion
16-20. See also Relationship overview, 104-106, 122 Regulation: Focus on Thoughts
models readiness for treatment, 88--89 and Behavior (Session 4)
Acceptance, 235-236 relationship patterns and, 245-246 assertiveness and, 259, 260-261
Accomplishment review, 326, 329, reviewing with clients, 133-134 assessment and, 117-118, 225-226
333-334, 419-422 symptom domains and, 114-118 behavioral problems, 26
Action, emotion-informed, 50, 55, 204 tools for, 112-114 emotion regulation and, 152
Adaptation, 69, 154-158 trauma and, 104-106, 108-111 fear narratives and, 382
Adaptations of STAIR Narrative treatment recommendations and, narrative work and, 353-354
Therapy, 429-436 118-120 overview, 194-195
Additional Assertiveness Skills Assessment of Postnarrative Emotion three channels of emotion model
handout, 271, 278 State handout, 376, 381 and, 153, 154, 201-203
Adolescents, STAIR for, 430, 432-433 Attachment, 8, 9-10, 13-15, 16, trauma assessment and, 105
Affect regulation, 23, 37 302-303 Behavior Channel Skills for Emotion
Agency, 24-25, 49, 394-395 Autonomy, 9-10, 14-15 Regulation handout, 215
Anger, 54, 117, 155-156, 321 Avoidance. See also Numbing; Bereavement, 79-80. See also Loss
Anxiety and anxiety disorders, 10, Symptoms Betrayal trauma, 18-19
69-70, 155, 349-350 assessment and, 106, 114, 115-116 Between-session skills practice. See
Ask for Help/Seek Support technique, case example of, 382-383 individual sessions
202 distress tolerance and, 224-225, Blame, 71-73
Assertiveness, 58, 258-261, 271-272, Body, focus on, 173-174, 182-184.
291-292. See also Changing emotionally engaged living and, See also Emotion regulation;
Relationship Patterns: Focus on 55 Emotion Regulation: Focus on
Assertiveness (Session 7) exposure interventions and, 63 the Body (Session 3)
Assessing Pros and Cons strategy, fear narratives and, 382 Body Channel Coping Skills handout,
227-230, 231-235, 355 overview, 40 182-183, 190
Assessment shame and, 75-76 Borderline personality disorder
beginning the assessment session, (BPD), 87-89
107-108 Basic personal rights. See Personal Boundaries, 298, 300, 315-316. See
case example of, 120-122 rights also Changing Relationship
diagnosis and, 111-114 Basic Personal Rights handout, 260, Patterns: Increasing Closeness
distress tolerance and, 225-226 275, 309 (Session 9)


448

[PAGE 466]

Index 449


Breathing exercises and techniques. between-session skills practice respect for, 149-150
See Focused Breathing skill and, 310-311 sequential treatment and, 42-43
Broken Record technique, 272 summarizing the goals of, 310 treatment recommendations and,
Changing Relationship Patterns: 118-120
Caregivers Managing Power and who may benefit from treatment,
abuse from outside the home and, Maintaining Respect (Session 86-88
27-29 8). See also STATR Building Closeness. See also Changing
attachment bond and, 13-15 Resources (Module 1) Relationship Patterns:
case example of, 180 case example of, 287-292 Increasing Closeness (Session
childhood maltreatment and, 7-8, check-in and review of skills 9); Interpersonal functioning;
18-19 practice, 282 Intimacy
emotion regulation and, 177-180 handouts for, 280, 282, 283, case example of, 307-310
loss and, 9-10, 76, 77 287-289, 292, 293-295 developing and deepening
treating survivors ofchildhood identifying the focus of, 282 relationships, 301-303
abuse and, 97 overview, 51, 280-282 overview, 59-60, 296-297
Certificate of completion, 330, respect and power, 285-286 relationship patterns related to,
425-426 between-session skills practice 298, 300
Changing Relationship Patterns: and, 292 role plays and, 303-306
Focus on Assertiveness (Session summarizing the goals of, 292 between-session skills practice
7). See also STAIR Building types of power balances, 283-285 and, 310-311
Resources (Module I) Childhood maltreatment. See also treating survivors of childhood
additional assertiveness skills to Abuse, physical; Neglect; Sexual abuse and, 99-100
practice, 271-272 abuse: Trauma Common Relationship Beliefs among
assumptions regarding abuse from outside the home and, Survivors of Trauma handout,
assertiveness, 260-261 27-29 246, 253
case example of, 266-271 abuse-generated relationship Comorbidity, 117-118
check-in and review of skills models, 15 Compassion. See also Self-compassion
practice, 58 adaptive function ofemotions, barriers to, 320-323
explaining assertiveness to clients, 154-158 case example of, 323-325
258-261 assumptions regarding handouts for, 331-336
handouts for, 158, 259, 260, 261, assertiveness and, 260-261 introducing to clients, 319-323
266, 267, 270, 271, 273, attachment bond and, 14-15 overview, 315, 320
274-279 caregivers and, 18-19, 27-29 Self-Compassion Meditation skill,
“I Messages,” 261-265 case example of, 396-397, 323
overview, 51, 256-258, 272-273 398-401, 402, 410-416 Compassion: Recovery Is a Journey
between-session skills practice childhood compared to adult handout, 323, 331-332, 425
and, 273 trauma and, 37-39, 38f Completion certificate, 330,
summarizing the goals of, 272-273 development and, 22-27 425-426
Changing Relationship Patterns: emotion regulation and, 147-149, Complex posttraumatic stress
Increasing Closeness (Session 177-180 disorder (CPTSD)
9). See also STATR Building functional impairment and, 35 childhood compared to adult
Resources (Module I) loss and, 76--80 trauma and, 39
additional skill domains to explore, loss narratives and, 410-416 diagnosis and, 111-114
306-307 model analysis, 58 explaining to clients, 133-134
boundaries and emotional distance, narrative work and, 350-352, interpersonal functioning and,
298 380-382 59-60
case example of, 307-310 as a resource loss, 7-12 matching interventions to problems
check-in and review of skills shame narratives and, 392-393, and, 39--41
practice, 297 396-397, 398-401, 402 overview, 4-5, 12
deepening existing relationships, trauma assessment and, 108-111 shame and, 70
301, 302-303 treating survivors of, 94-101 Concurrent treatment, 100-101, 344
developing new relationships, types of power balances and, Conflict, 10, 26, 93-94, 303, 306
301-302 283-285 Connection, 204, 410
handouts for, 297, 298, 300, 301, who may benefit from treatment Control, 93-94. See also Power
302-303, 305-306, 307-308, and, 86-88 Conversations, 304-305
312-314 Clients Coping Orientation to Problems
overview, 52, 296-297, 299-300 functional impairment and, 34-35, Experienced (COPE), 118
relationship patterns related to 36f Coping skills
closeness, 298, 300 reasons for seeking treatment and, assessment and, 118
role plays and, 303-306 34, 348 case example and, 161

[PAGE 467]

450 Index


Coping skills (cont.) misconceptions regarding emotion between-session skills practice
conducting first narrative of a regulation work and, 184--185 and, 188
trauma memory and, 371 narrative work and, 354--355 summarizing the goals of, 187-188
emotion regulation and, 208-209 overview, 221, 223-225 Emotion Regulation: Focus on
explaining to clients, 133 positive emotions and, 203-204 Thoughts and Behavior (Session
Focused Breathing skill, 136-138 Dropping out of treatment, 46, 47f 4). See also STAIR Building
narrative work and, 354-355, Resources (Module I); Three
359-360 Eating behaviors, 117-118. See also channels of emotion model
Corroboration of abuse, 95-97 Behavior behavior channel skills, 201-203
Couple issues, 99-100 Emotion regulation. See also Emotion case example of, 206-208
Covert modeling, 265, 410 Regulation: Focus on the Body check-in and review of skills
Critical regard, 75-76 (Session 3); Emotion Regulation: practice, 195
Cultural factors, 322 Focus on Thoughts and Behavior explore positive emotions and plan
(Session 4) pleasurable activities, 203-206
Daily activities, 55, 183 adaptive function of emotions, goals of, 208-209
Death, 79-80. See also Loss 154-158 handouts for, 197, 198, 200-201,
Dependence, 15, 353 assessment and, 115-116 202, 206, 210-219
Depression, 10, 15, 117, 156-157. See case example of, 180 overview, 51, 194-195, 196-197,
also Sadness childhood compared to adult 208-209
Developmental processes trauma and, 37-39, 38f review patterns ofbehaviors, 201
attachment bond and, 14-15 difficulties with, 147-150 between-session skills practice
childhood maltreatment and, 10 functional impairment and, 35, 36f and, 209
deprivation context and, 21-22 identifying and evaluating, summary of three channels of
emotion regulation and, 177-179 180-182 emotion skills and, 206
emotional development, 22-24, interpersonal functioning and, 30 thought channel skills, 197-201
49-50 misconceptions regarding emotion Emotion Surfing handout, 212
trauma as an interruption to, regulation work, 184-185 Emotion Surfing technique, 198
22-27 narrative work and, 354--355 Emotional awareness, 41, 49--50,
treatment and, 29--30 overview, 36--37, 40, 41, 53-50, 52-53, 144-145. See also
Diagnosis 145, 147-150, 174, 176-180 Resource of Feelings (Session 2)
childhood compared to adult rationale for monitoring and Emotional competencies, 50, 52-55,
trauma and, 39 understanding feelings, 151-152 60. See also STAIR Building
complex posttraumatic stress readiness for narrative work and, 341 Resources (Module I)
disorder (CPTSD) and, 4-5 reflecting on client’s change and Emotional numbing, 40, 115-116
explaining to clients, 133-134 progress and, 420 Emotionally engaged living, 41,
interpersonal functioning and, skills development, 132 55, 152. See also Emotionally
59-60 STAIR Narrative Therapy and, Engaged Living (Session 5)
symptom domains and, 114-118 49-50 Emotionally Engaged Living (Session
trauma assessment and, 110-114 three channels of emotion model, 5). See also STAIR Building
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 152-153, 154 Resources (Module I)
Mental Disorders (DSM-5), 4-5, trauma and, 23 acceptance of negative feelings,
69-70, 111, 113-114 Emotion Regulation: Focus on the 235-236
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Body (Session 3). See also STAIR assessing distress tolerance skills,
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR), Building Resources (Module
4.5 1); Three channels of emotion Assessing Pros and Cons strategy,
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT), model 227-230
53 case example of, 185-187 case example of, 229-230, 231-235
Dissociation, 15, 157-158, 383-385 check-in and review of skills check-in and review of skills
Distress reduction and tolerance. practice, 174 practice, 221
See also Emotionally Engaged emotion regulation and, 174, connecting distress tolerance to
Living (Session 5) 176-180 goals, 226-227
acceptance of negative feelings handouts for, 176, 181, 182-183, goals of, 238
and, 235-236 189-193, 198, 200 handouts for, 223, 239-240
assessment and, 225-226 identifying and evaluating emotion introducing the concept of distress
case example of, 231-235 regulation skills, 180-182 tolerance, 221, 223-225
emotionally engaged living and, 55 introducing skills for the body matching distress reduction
handouts for, 239-240 channel and, 182-184 strategies to distress reduction,
matching distress reduction misconceptions regarding emotion 230-231
strategies to distress reduction, regulation work, 184-185 overview, 51, 220-221, 222-223,
230-231 overview, 51, 173-174, 175-176 238

[PAGE 468]

Index 451


preparing clients for working on Feelings Wheel handout, 172 Healthy Relationships = Healthy
interpersonal problems, 237 Fight-or-flight response, 14 Boundaries handout, 298, 312
role of positive feelings in goal Final Session (Session 18). See also Hierarchies, memory. See Memory
pursuit and, 236-237 Narrative Therapy (Module 11); hierarchies
between-session skills practice Termination History, life. See Life history
and, 238 check-in and review of skills Homework between sessions. See
Engaged living, 41, 55, 152. See also practice, 417, 419 individual sessions
Emotionally Engaged Living completion certificate, 425-426 Hope, 127, 128. See also Resource of
(Session 5) handouts for, 418, 423, 427-428 Hope (Session 1)
Evidence Technique, 198-199 identifying the focus of, 419 How to Complete Patterns
Examples of Emotion Regulation overview, 62, 417, 418 Worksheet-1, 255
Coping Skills for the Three planning for next steps, 422-423 Hypervigilance, 115, 149
Channels of Emotion handout, providing resources for transition
153, 168 and future needs, 425 “T Messages,” 266-272, 282, 286
Examples of Positive Self-Statements reflecting on client’s change and “T Messages” handout, 261, 276
(Affirmations) handout, 200, 213 progress, 419-422 Impact of Childhood Abuse and
Exposure interventions, 39, 61, relapse risk and management, Neglect on Emotion Regulation
62-66, 367 423-424 handout, 147, 164-165
saving good-bye, 426 Impact of Trauma on Managing
Family factors, 27-29, 147-148. See self-compassion, 424-425 Power Balances handout, 283,
also Caregivers skills maintenance, 422--423 294
Fear. See also Narratives of Fear Flashbacks. See Reexperiencing Instructions for Focused Breathing
(Sessions 13-17); Traumatic symptoms handout, 142-143
memories Focused Breathing skill Internal working models, 25-26, 26
emotion regulation and, 54, 149 conducting first narrative of a International Classification of
grounding the client in the present trauma memory and, 371 Diseases and Related Health
and, 370-371, 384-385 handout regarding, 142-143 Problems (ICD-11), 4-5, 39,
memories and, 64—66 introducing skills for the body 111-113
narrative work and, 134-135, channel and, 182--183 International Trauma Interview (ITD,
348--350, 380-382 loss narratives and, 416 113
Feelings. See also Emotion regulation narrative work and, 354--355 International Trauma Questionnaire
agency and, 24-25 overview, 136-138 (ITQ), 112-113
discrimination among kinds of between-session skills practice Interpersonal functioning. See
feelings, 158 and, 139, 163, 273 also Relationships; Social
distress tolerance and, 224 shame narratives and, 404 competencies
functions of, 154 Functional impairment, 34-35, 36f, assessment and, 115-116
overview, 173-174 37-39, 38f childhood compared to adult
three channels of emotion model trauma and, 37-39, 38f
and, 153, 154 Gender spectrum, 86-87 compassion and, 315-316,
Feelings Monitoring Form Goals 320-322
behavior channel skills and, 201, Assessing Pros and Cons strategy, development and, 25-27,
203 227-230 132-133
case example of, 159-162 case example of, 229-230 distress tolerance and, 224
compassion and, 320, 322-323 distress tolerance and, 224, 226-229 feedback regarding, 264-265
complete, 167 emotionally engaged living and, 55 functional impairment and, 35,
distress tolerance and, 223, 238 examples of, 227 36f
emotion regulation and, 181, 206 matching distress reduction intimacy and, 296-297
Evidence Technique and, 198-199 strategies to, 230-231 loss and, 78, 409
overview, 145, 147, 150-151 positive emotions and, 204 overview, 16, 17, 24-25, 26, 30, 36,
patterns of behaviors and, 201 role ofpositive feelings in goal 40, 41
patterns of thinking and, 197, pursuit and, 236-237 positive emotions and, 205-206
200-201 Grief, 76-80, 408-409. See also Loss preparing clients for working on,
practice using with clients, Grounding techniques, 370-371, 237
158-159 384-385 reflecting on client’s change and
rationale for, 151-152 Group STAIR, 430, 431-432 progress and, 420-421
between-session skills practice shame and, 75-76, 394
and, 163 Habituation, 348-349 therapeutic alliance and, 90-94
termination and, 330, 423 Healthy and Unhealthy Ways to Cope Intimacy. See Closeness
thought channel skills and, on the Body Channel handout, Intrafamilial trauma, 15, 22-27, 28.
200-201 181, 189 See also Trauma

[PAGE 469]

452 Index


Introduction to Narrative Therapy Narrative of First Memory (Session treatment recommendations and,
(Session 11). See also Narrative 12). See also Narrative Therapy 118-120
Therapy (Module II) (Module II) who may benefit from, 86-88
check-in and review of skills case example of, 372-373 Narrative Therapy (Module ID.
practice, 347 check-in and review of skills See also Narrative Therapy;
commitment to narrative work, practice, 364, 366 Traumatic memories; individual
355-356 conducting first narrative of a sessions
creating a memory hierarchy, trauma memory, 307-370 explaining to clients, 133-136
356-359 exploring beliefs about self and/or flexibility in the use of, 82-83
emotion regulation skills, others in narrative, 371-372 handouts regarding, 140-141
354-355 focus of the session, 366-367 overview, 61-62
focus of the session, 347-348 grounding the client in the present, treatment recommendations and,
handouts for, 347, 356-357, 359, 370-371 118-120
361-363 handouts for, 365, 366, 369, 372, Narratives of Fear (Sessions 13-17).
overview, 62, 345-346 373, 375-376 See also Fear; Narrative Therapy
overview of Narrative Therapy, listening to first narrative (Module I)
348-354 recording, 371 avoidance behaviors, 382
summarizing the goals of, overview, 62, 364, 365-366 case example of, 382-383,
359-360 practice narrative of a neutral 386-388
memory, 367 check-in and review of skills
Legal issues, 97-98 between-session skills practice practice, 378
Life history, 135-136, 352-354. See and, 373-374 complete narrative of fear memory,
also Narrative Therapy summarizing the goals of, 373 380-382
List of Words You Can Use to Narrative Therapy. See also Narrative conducting narrative analysis, 385
Describe a Feeling handout, 171 Therapy (Module ID; Skills dissociative reactions, 383-385
Loss. See also Narratives of Loss Training in Affective and handouts for, 380, 381, 389
(Sessions 13-17) Interpersonal Regulation identifying the focus of, 380
case example of, 410-416 (STAIR) Narrative Therapy in overview, 62, 377-378, 379-380
overview, 69, 76-80, 405, general; individual sessions between-session skills practice
407-409 assessing readiness for, 88-89 and, 389
reasons to discuss loss and to case example of, 372-373, summarizing the goals of, 389
grieve, 408-409 386-388 Narratives of Loss (Sessions 13-17).
commitment to, 355-356 See also Loss; Narrative Therapy
Making requests, 271-272 concurrent treatments and, (Module I)
Maltreatment, childhood. See 100-101 case example of, 410-416
Childhood maltreatment conducting first narrative of a check-in and review of skills
Managing Power Balances with trauma memory, 367-370 practice, 407
Respect handout, 286, 295 conducting narrative analysis, 385 completing narrative about loss, 409
Mandated reporting, 97-98 couple issues and, 99-100 conducting narrative analysis,
Marital issues, 99-100 explaining to clients, 133-136 409-410
Memories, traumatic. See Traumatic exploring beliefs about self and/or handouts for, 407, 414-415
memories others in narrative, 371-372 identifying the focus of, 407-408
Memory hierarchies, 356-359, 363 fear and, 65-66, 134-135 overview, 62, 405-407
Memory Hierarchy handout, handouts for, 375-376 providing support, 416
356-357, 359, 363, 365 life history and, 135-136 reasons to discuss loss and to
Mindfulness exercises, 136-138, loss and, 76 grieve, 408-409
183-184, 323. See also Focused manualized treatment, 81-85 between-session skills practice
Breathing skill overview, 41, 61-62, 66-67, 67, and, 416
Modeling, covert, 265, 410 68-69, 80, 345, 346, 348-354, summarizing the goals of, 416
Module I (STATR Building 361-362 Narratives of Shame (Sessions 13-17).
Resources). See STAIR Building preparing clients for, 42-43, See also Narrative Therapy
Resources (Module I) 327-329 (Module II); Shame
Module II (Narrative Therapy). See readiness for, 340-344 case example of, 396-397,
Narrative Therapy (Module II) relationship models and, 20, 58 398-401, 402
Motivation, 88, 204, 236-237 Self-Compassion Meditation skill check-in and review of skills
and, 323 practice, 392
Narrative, trauma. See Trauma therapeutic relationship and, completing narrative about shame,
narrative 85-86 395-396
Narrative analysis, 385, 397-398, transitioning to, 60, 339-344 conducting narrative analysis,
409-410 traumatic memories and, 135 397-398

[PAGE 470]

Index 453


disclosure of shaming events, 390, loss and, 79 relationship beliefs among
392 reasons for seeking treatment and, survivors oftrauma, 246
express positive regard, 401, 403 34, 341 self-fulfilling nature of, 16-17
handouts for, 392, 404 shame and, 69--70 shame narratives and, 398-400
identifying the focus of, 392-393 symptom domains and, 114-115 social competencies and, 56-58
overview, 62, 390, 391-392 therapeutic alliance and, 90 treatment and, 19--20
between-session skills practice who may benefit from treatment Relationship Models: Instruction
and, 404 and, 87 Manuals for Relationships
summarizing the goals of, 404 Power. See also Changing handout, 245, 252
value of telling, 393-395 Relationship Patterns: Managing Relationship patterns. See also
Negative and Positive Emotions as Power and Maintaining Respect Changing Relationship Patterns:
Messengers handout, 154, 170 (Session 8) Increasing Closeness (Session
Negative feelings, 54, 235-236 assertiveness and, 58 9); Changing Relationship
Neglect, 7, 29, 110. See also case example of, 287-292 Patterns: Managing Power and
Childhood maltreatment narrative work and, 353 Maintaining Respect (Session
Nightmares. See Reexperiencing overview, 59 8); Resource of Connection:
symptoms respect and, 285-286 Understanding Relationship
No, saying, 272 therapeutic alliance and, 93-94 Patterns (Session 6)
Numbing, 40, 115-116. See also types of power balances, 283-285 case example of, 386-388
Avoidance Power Balances in Relationships closeness and, 298, 300
handout, 293 conducting narrative analysis and,
Opposite Action (A Behavioral Practice between sessions. See 385
Channel Tool) handout, 202, 217 individual sessions explaining to clients, 245
Opposite Action technique, 202, 217 Practicing Assertiveness to Improve exploring and identifying,
Outcomes, 44-46, 45f, 46f, 47f Relationship Patterns handout, 245-246
Overview of Narrative Therapy 273,279 overview, 41
handout, 361-362 Primary care, STAIR for, 430, 433 repetition of, 243
Problem solving, 197-198 shame narratives and, 394
Parenting skills, 27-29, 177-180 Professional development, 85 Relationship Patterns Worksheet-1
Parenting STAIR, 430, 434 Progress. See Accomplishment review handout, 241, 246-250, 254,
Parents, 13-15, 77. See also Progressive Muscle Relaxation (A 255, 322-323
Caregivers Body Channel Skill) handout, Relationship Patterns Worksheet-2
Peer relationships, 10, 26 193 handout
Perpetrators, 74-75, 97, 283-285 Progressive Muscle Relaxation skill, case example of, 266-267, 270,
Personal rights, 260. See also 183-184 287-289, 307-308, 372, 387,
Assertiveness Prolonged exposure techniques, 39, 388, 401, 402, 414-415
Personality disorders, 87-89 367 closeness and, 303, 310-311
Physical abuse. See Abuse, physical Pros and cons, assessing, 227-230, compassion and, 320, 322-323
Planning, emotion-informed, 50, 55 229-230, 231-235, 355 complete, 277
Pleasurable Activities List handout, PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5), fear narratives and, 387, 388, 389
218 113-114 intimacy and, 297
Pleasures and pleasant activities, loss narratives and, 414-415, 416
77-78, 152, 203-206, 273 Reciprocation, 321, 322 narrative work and, 365, 373
Positive emotions, 54-55, 203-206, Reexperiencing symptoms, 40, 63, overview, 247, 256, 266, 273, 280,
224, 236-237 114. See also Symptoms 282
Positive Imagery technique, 200 Refugees, STAIR for, 430, 433-434 self-compassion and, 316
Positive regard, 9-10, 11, 16-17, 401, Relapse risk and management, shame narratives and, 401, 402,
403 423-424 404
Positive Self-Statements technique, Relationship Guidelines to Enhance termination and, 330, 423
200 Intimacy and Closeness Relationships. See also Interpersonal
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) handout, 301, 302-303, functioning; Therapeutic
assessing readiness for treatment 305-306, 314 relationship
and, 88-89 Relationship models. See also Abuse- abuse-generated relationship
childhood compared to adult related relationship models models and, 15
trauma, 37-39, 38f attachment theory and, 16 developing and deepening,
diagnosis and, 111-114 explaining to clients, 245 301-303
explaining to clients, 133-134 exploring and identifying, 245-246 development and, 25-27
exposure interventions and, 63-66 loss narratives and, 411-414 loss and, 78, 409, 410-416
interpersonal functioning and, narrative work and, 352 overview, 296-297
59-60 overview, 19-20 positive emotions and, 205-206

[PAGE 471]

454 Index


Relationships (cont.) handouts for, 145, 147, 148, Saying no, 272
preparing clients for working o1 150-151, 153, 154, 158-162, Self and self related constructs,
237 163, 164-172 71-76, 421-422. See also Self-
role plays and, 303-306 introducing the Feelings compassion
shame and, 75-76 Monitoring Form and, 158-159 awareness and, 161-162, 204,
trauma and, 25-27 overview, 51, 144--145, 146-147 393-394, 421-422
treating survivors of childhood rationale for monitoring and blame and, 322-323, 409-410
abuse and, 99-100 understanding feelings, 151-152 evaluation of, 75-76, 115
types of power balances and, between-session skills practice self-betrayal, 74
283-285 and, 162-163 self-care skills, 183
Relationships with perpetrators, three channels of emotion model, self-concept, 40, 115, 286
74-75 152-153, 154 self-esteem, 10, 11, 115, 205-206,
Reminders/Reframes technique, Resource of Hope (Session 1). See 286
199-200 also STAIR Building Resources self-monitoring, 145, 147, 150-151,
Repeated victimization, 15. See (Module I) 151-152
also Childhood maltreatment; explaining Module I to clients self-respect, 285-286
Victimization during, 132-133, 136 Self-care for therapists, 101-103
Replacement Behaviors technique, explaining Module II to clients Self-compassion. See also Self and
202 during, 133-136 self-related constructs; SelfReporting laws and guidelines, Focused Breathing skill, 136-138 Compassion and Summary of
97-98 goals of, 139 Skills Training (Session 10)
Requests, 271-272 handouts for, 129, 140-143 barriers to, 320-323
Resilience, 118 overview, 51, 127, 128-129 case example of, 323-325
Resource loss, 5-8, 7-12 review of evaluation process, handouts for, 331-336
Resource of Connection: history and symptoms, 129 introducing to clients, 319-323
Understanding Relationship between-session skills practice loss narratives and, 408-409
Patterns (Session 6). See also and, 138-139 overview, 315-316, 320
STAIR Building Resources therapeutic contract and, 129-131 Self-Compassion Meditation skill,
(Module I) treatment plan and, 132 323
case example of, 247-250 Respect, 59, 285-286. See also shame narratives and, 393-394
check-in and review of skills Changing Relationship termination and, 424—425
practice, 244 Patterns: Managing Power and Self-Compassion and Summary of
exploring and identifying client’s Maintaining Respect (Session 8) Skills Training (Session 10). See
relationship patterns, 245-246 Respect Bookends skill, 280, 286, also Self-compassion; STAIR
handouts for, 241, 243, 245, 289-291 Building Resources (Module I)
246-247, 252-255 Revictimization, 110-111 case example of, 323-325
identifying the focus of, 244—245 Reviewing of progress and check-in and review of skills
introducing concept of accomplishments. See practice, 316
relationship models and Accomplishment review the final session, 329-330
patterns, 245-246 Rigbts, personal. See Personal rights handouts for, 316, 318, 320,
overview, 51, 241-244, 251 Risky behaviors, 117-118. See also 322-323, 323, 326, 327, 329,
relationship beliefs among Behavior 331-336
survivors of trauma, 246 Role plays introducing compassion to clients,
between-session skills practice case example of, 266-271, 319-323
and, 251 289-291, 387, 401, 414-416 moving to Narrative Therapy from,
summarizing the goals of, 251 closeness and, 303-306 327-329
Resource of Feelings (Session 2). See fear narratives and, 387 overview, 52, 315-316, 317-318,
also STAIR Building Resources guidelines for conducting, 319
(Module 1) 262-265 preparing client for next steps,
adaptive function of emotions, “I Messages,” 261-265 326-330
154—158 loss narratives and, 410, 414-416 SelfCompassion Meditation skill,
case example of, 159-162 rationale for, 261-262 323
check-in and review of skills respect and, 286 between-session skills practice
practice, 145 shame narratives and, 401 and, 328-329
discrimination among kinds of Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES), summarizing accomplishments,
feelings, 158 116 325-327
emotion regulation and, 145, summarizing the goals of, 328
147-150 Sadness, 156-157, 409-410. See also Self-Compassion Meditation skill,
functions of feelings, 154 Depression 323, 425
goals of, 162 Safety, 7-8, 9-10, 11-12, 14, 149 Self-injurious behaviors, 98-99

[PAGE 472]

Index 455


Sequential treatment, 42-46, 44t, 45f, matching interventions to shame narratives and, 392
46f, 47f problems, 39-41 SUDS rating scale, 358-359
Sessions. See also Narrative overview, 3, 12, 33-34, 41, 48, Subjective Units of Distress (SUDs)
Therapy; Narrative Therapy 49-50, 103, 429 during Trauma Narration
(Module ID); Skills Training in relationship models and, 20 handout, 369, 373, 375, 389, 416
Affective and Interpersonal self-care for therapists and, Substance misuse, 15, 117-118
Regulation (STATR) Narrative 101-103 Suicidality, 117-118. See also
Therapy in general; STAIR sequential treatment rationale, Behavior
Building Resources (Module J); 42-46, 441, 45f, 46f, 47f Summary of Accomplishments
individual sessions technological adaptations of, handout, 427-428
beginning the assessment session, 434-436 Summary of Accomplishments (So
107-108 therapeutic relationship and, Far) handout, 326, 329, 333-334
flexibility in the use of, 83-85 85-86 Summary of Three Channels of
handouts regarding, 140-141 training and continuing education Emotion Skills handout, 206,
number of, 84—85 in, 85 219
preparing clients for Narrative transitioning to narrative work and, Supportive counseling (SC) plus
Therapy and, 327-328 343-344 Narrative Therapy, 44-46, 45f,
Sexual abuse. See also Childhood treatment recommendations and, 46f, 4Tf
maltreatment 118-120 Symptoms. See also Avoidance;
abuse from outside the home and, who may benefit from, 86-88 Reexperiencing symptoms
27-29 Social competencies, 11, 26, 49-50, assessment and, 111-118
caregivers and, 18--19 56-60, 75-76. See also distress tolerance and, 224-225
case example of, 396-397 Interpersonal functioning; domains of, 114-118
development and, 22-27 STAIR Building Resources functional impairment and, 34-35,
as a resource loss, 7 (Module I) 36f
shame and, 70--76, 396-397 Social Influences on Your Emotional loss and, 79, 408
trauma assessment and, 109 Experiences handout, 148, 166 narrative work and, 134-136,
Sexual behaviors, 15, 92--93 Social support, 7-8, 10, 202 348-350
Shame. See also Narratives of Shame Social withdrawal, 55 overview, 40
(Sessions 13-17) Soothing the Senses (A Body Channel readiness for narrative work and,
case example of, 396-397, Skill) handout, 183, 192 341-342
398-401, 402 Soothing the Senses skill, 183, 192 reasons for seeking treatment and,
compassion and, 321, 322-323 STAIR Building Resources (Module 34, 341
narrative work and, 395-396 1). See also Emotional reflecting on client’s change and
overview, 69-76 competencies; Social progress and, 420
therapist's expression ofpositive competencies; individual reviewing with clients, 129
regard and, 401, 403 sessions shame and, 69-70
value of telling and, 393-395 explaining to clients, 132-133, 136 STAIR Narrative Therapy and, 41,
Skills development and training, flexibility in the use of, 82-83 46, 47f
53-54, 88, 225-226, 325-327, handouts regarding, 140-141
343-344 overview, 51-60 Telehealth delivery, 430, 435
Skills practice between sessions. See treatment recommendations and, Termination, 329-330. See also Final
individual sessions 118-120 Session (Session 18)
Skills Training in Affective and STAIR Emotion Coach, 430, 435 Therapeutic contract, 129-131
Interpersonal Regulation STAIR Narrative Therapy. See Therapeutic relationship
(STAIR) Narrative Therapy Narrative Therapy; Skills compassion and, 320-322
in general. See also Narrative Training in Affective and conducting first narrative of a
Therapy; Treatment Interpersonal Regulation trauma memory, 368-369
assessing readiness for, 88-89 (STAIR) Narrative Therapy in loss narratives and, 416
clinical adaptations of, 429-434 general overview, 43, 85-86, 89-94, 131
concurrent treatments and, STAIR Skills for Continued Practice shame narratives and, 390, 392,
100-101 handout, 327, 329, 335-336, 423 401, 403
couple issues and, 99-100 Subjective units of distress (SUDs). transitioning to narrative work and,
development and, 29-30 See also Memory hierarchies 339-340, 342-343
emotion regulation and, 36-37 conducting first narrative of a Therapists
experiential aspects of, 47-48 trauma memory and, 369 sel£ care and, 101-103
explaining to clients, 130-131 fear narratives and, 380-382 training and continuing education
future directions for, 436 handouts for, 369, 373, 375, 389, and, 85
handouts regarding, 140-141 416 Thought Channel Skills for Emotional
manualized treatment, 81-85 overview, 396-3597, 366 Regulation handout, 211

[PAGE 473]

456 Index


Thought Shifting technique, 199 Trauma assessment. See also functional impairment and, 34-35,
Thoughts. See also Emotion Assessment; Trauma 36f
Regulation: Focus on Thoughts beginning the assessment session, manualized treatment, 81-85
and Behavior (Session 4); 107-108 matching interventions to
Feelings Monitoring Form; case example of, 120-122 problems, 39-41
Reexperiencing symptoms diagnosis and, 111-114 narrative work and, 80, 340-344
case example and, 161 overview, 104-106, 122 overview, 48, 81, 103
intrusive thoughts, 40, 63 symptom domains and, 114—118 readiness for, 119, 340-344
overview, 194-195 trauma history and, 108-111 recommendations regarding,
thought channel skills, 197-201 Trauma narrative, 66, 80. See also 118-120
three channels of emotion model Narrative Therapy; Traumatic self-care for therapists and,
and, 153, 154 memories 101-103
Three channels of emotion model, Trauma-related relationship models, sequential treatment rationale,
152-153, 154, 181-184, 206. See 56-58. See also Relationship 42-46, 441, 45f, 46f, 47f
also Emotion Regulation: Focus models therapeutic relationship and, 85-86
on the Body (Session 3); Emotion Traumatic memories. See also training and continuing education
Regulation: Focus on Thoughts Narrative Therapy; Trauma; in, 85
and Behavior (Session 4) Trauma narrative traumatic memories and, 67
Three Channels Skills Graphic conducting first narrative of a treatment plan and, 132
handout, 153, 169 trauma memory, 307-370 what clients want from, 34, 34t
Time Out (A Behavioral Channel creating a memory hierarchy and, who may benefit from, 86-88
Tool) handout, 202, 216 356--359 Treatment Overview: What is STAIR
Time Out/Take a Break technique, exposure interventions and, Narrative Therapy? handout,
201-202 63-66 140-141
Trauma. See also Childhood narrative work and, 135, 380-382 Typical Trauma-Related Behaviors
maltreatment; Trauma organizing in Narrative Therapy, handout, 201, 210, 214
assessment; Traumatic memories 350-352 Typical Trauma-Related Thinking
abuse-generated relationship overview, 61, 62-63 Patterns handout, 197
models, 15 overview of Narrative Therapy and,
childhood compared to adult 348-354 Understanding Assertiveness
trauma, 37-39, 38f preparing clients for Narrative handout, 259, 274
compassion and, 322-323 Therapy and, 327-328 Using Three Channels of Emotion
deprivation context and, 21-22 trauma assessment and, 105-106 Skills to Reach Goals handout,
developing and deepening treating survivors of childhood 234, 240
relationships and, 302-303 abuse and, 94--98
development and, 22-27 Treatment. See also Skills Training Validation, 94-98
distress reduction, 185 in Affective and Interpersonal Vicarious traumatization, 102
emotion regulation and, 148-149 Regulation (STAIR) Narrative Victimization, 15, 283-285,
history of, 99, 107-108, 108-111, 129 Therapy in general; individual 392-393. See also Childhood
loss and, 79-80 sessions maltreatment; Trauma
patterns of behaviors and, 201 abuse-generated relationship Vulnerability, 75-76, 353
psychological trauma, 6-7 models and, 19-20
recovery and, 6 assessing readiness for, 88--89 Web-based STAIR, 430, 435-436
relationship beliefs among childhood maltreatment and, Well-being, 11, 236
survivors of trauma, 246 94-101 What Creates Emotional Distance
resource loss and, 5-8, 12 concurrent treatment, 100-101 and Ruptures in Relationships?
self-care for therapists and, 102 development and, 29-30 handout, 300, 313
shame and, 69-71 emotional and social skills and, 60 What is Distress Tolerance and
types of power balances and, explaining to clients, 130-131 Why Should I Do It? handout,
283-285 flexibility in, 82-85, 86-88 223-224, 239
