[PAGE 001]

Journal of Systemic Therapies, Vol. 35, No. 4, 2016, pp. 58-71


LEARNING HOW TO COUNTER-STORY IN
NARRATIVE THERAPY (WITH DAVID EPSTON
AND WILBUR THE WARRIOR)

KAY M. INGAMELLS
Private Practice, Auckland, New Zealand


This article is designed to be read alongside its companion article: “Wilbur the
Worrier Becomes Wilbur the Warrior: A Teaching Story for Narrative Family
Therapists” (this issue, pp. 43-57), a story from my practice about an 8-year-
old boy with anorexia and anxiety. This article identifies and teaches narrative
family therapy practices illustrated in the companion story. Full unabridged
versions of both this article and the companion article can be found at www.
narrativeapproaches.com and at www. yourstory.org.nz.


There are three stories behind the story of Wilbur the Warrior (see “Wilbur the
Worrier Becomes Wilbur the Warrior: A Teaching Story for Narrative Family Thera-
pists,” this issue, pp. 43-57). The first is the story of my apprenticeship to David
Epston, the inventor of narrative therapy in partnership with Michael White. The
second is the tale of how David Epston invented the practices I bring to bear in my
conversations. Both of these stories will be told elsewhere. This article tells the
third story, the “making of Wilbur the Warrior,” with the theme of one narrative
practice in particular: the practice of counter-storying.!
This article is neither a description of how to do narrative therapy nor a description
of how to practice David Epston's narrative therapy. It offers a behind-the-scenes
view of one version of narrative therapy with one family. The expression of narrative
therapy has taken, and continues to take, many guises, embracing “a range of voices,

My sincere gratitude: To David Epston for his unwavering support and inspiration. To my mother,
Judith Sayer, for her editing and encouragement. To my son Finn for so generously tolerating my
dedication to writing.
My conversations with Wilbur and his parents were only possible because of the guidance I have
received from David Epston throughout my 13-year apprenticeship with him learning the art and craft
of narrative therapy.
Address correspondence to Kay M. Ingamells, c/o IMC, 511 South Titirangi Rd., Auckland, 0604
New Zealand. E-mail: familytherapyandcounselling
@ gmail.com

!Counter-storying is a term that David Epston uses in preference to alterative or preferred stories.
Bamberg (2004) uses the terms counter-narrative and master-narrative. Counter-narratives are de-
scribed as personal narratives carrying identity claims which resist those identity claims that originate
from dominant discourses.


58


G4539.indd 58 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 002]

Learning How to Counter-Story 59


styles and ethics” (Guilfoyle, 2014). All, however, are united by key philosophical
underpinnings and practices which continue to be re-invented, especially by David
Epston. David innovates constantly and has called for the “renewal” of narrative
therapy (Epston, 2011), one which remains true to the dual inventors’ dedication
to the “spirit of adventure” in therapeutic practice (Epston & White, 1992, p. 9).
Wilbur the Warrior gives one window into David Epston’s practice through my
own. The story intends to offer insight into practice in a similar way to videoed
sessions. This, the companion account to the story, distinguishes practices in much
the same waya therapist’s commentary alongside a video might do. The difference
between the two genres is perhaps that this version forces the practitioner-reader
to see the practice in slow motion. Readers can pluck out individual practices to
experiment with or can learn more widely about counter-storying. Either way, I
hope that practitioners reading these stories—the story of Wilbur the Warrior and
the making of the story of Wilbur the Warrior—will find glimpses of how they
might better story counter-stories into being.
The practices? I will be drawing out of Wilbur’s story fall into three categories: (1)
practices that are fundamental to David Epston’s practice and to narrative practice
in general, such as the resurrection of local knowledge’; (2) larger counter-storying
practices, such as “meeting the person rather than the problem” (Freeman, Epston,
& Lobovits, 1997); and (3) smaller counter-storying practices, such as wordplay
and poetics (Epston, 2011).
I have learned these practices and many others through immersion learning? in the
form of what David refers to as “engaged supervision.” Many of these practices have
been absorbed into my own over the years, rather than being deliberately enacted.


SESSION ONE: PREPARING A CANVAS
FOR THE COUNTER-STORY


Problems attempt to take hold of therapy conversations just as they attempt to take
hold of people. When I met Wilbur, Liz, and Doug, the problem was so dominant
that I spent the first session attempting to find a foothold and plotting the means
by which a counter-story could be heard above the problem’s “noise.” It was not


Practices with unfamiliar names are previously unnamed practices that I have named with David
Epston’s permission. Some of these practices are very close to other practices which have been written
about elsewhere, and these have been referenced accordingly.
3“We believe that the real experts on problems are those people who experience them first-hand. It is
these people who have lived through the problem and have the most intimate knowledge of it. These
knowledges have been referred to by various writers and theorists as “local,” “indigenous,” and “expe-
rience-near,” in contrast to “expert” or “professional” knowledges (Maisel, Epston, & Borden, 2004).
‘Immersion learning originated in Canada in the 1960s. Total immersion involves the teaching of a
language through speaking the language for the whole time in class. I, myself, went to a total immersion
French class in kindergarten in Canada in 1971.


G4539.indd 59 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 003]

60 Ingamells


until session two that we loosened the hold of the problem sufficiently to risk
involving Wilbur more.


Wilbur didn’t want to come. He’s saying there’s nothing wrong with him and he doesn’t
want to meet you. (this issue, p. 44)


Thinking on my feet, as all therapists working with families must do, I attempt
to wrong-foot the problem’s off-putting effects by distracting Wilbur with carrying
the glasses of water. Children and young people often become so identified with a
problem by the time they meet a helper that a rescue mission needs to be undertaken
before anything therapeutic has a chance of unfolding (Freeman et al., 1997). My
“I don’t fix kids” speech was designed to renegotiate the rules of engagement with
parents who understandably are seeking a cure for one of the most frightening of
problems, anorexia. The speech is also directed at Wilbur, who is positioned as an
eavesdropper until such time as he is ready to participate overtly. Positioning Wilbur
in this way also allows me to avoid the pressure to pit myself directly against the
problem before gaining enough traction to unseat it.
David Epston has taught me hundreds of “question practices.” A question
practice is a practice within a question that plays a particular role in counter-
storying (Ingamells, 2016). It does not dictate the content of the question, but
it does help the question have a particular effect. One simple question practice
(and an example of a smaller counter-storying practice) is a “prefacing question’
(Ingamells, 2014), which sometimes takes the form of a statement. Prefacing
questions are designed to prepare people for enquiries and to seek their permis-
son to enter into them. My first enquiry with this family, begins with several of
these. In the first question, I am asking Liz and Doug for their permission to
stray from the problem.


Liz and Doug, even though I know we are here to talk about what is worrying you
all, would it be all right with you if we put that to one side for a few minutes? (this
issue, p. 45)


These next two prefacing statements provide a rationale for and begin to set the
scene for an externalized rather than a problem-bound conversation:


I ask this because I find that worries often try to take over my conversations with
people. As if it’s not enough to worry people in their own homes, those same worries
try to gate-crash into this room and try to take over. If it’s okay with you, I would like
to knowa little bit about Wilbur and his life when the worries are not around. I have
a strong feeling that I may be able to discover some things about Wilbur that we can
use together to pit against these worries. (this issue, p. 45)


>Prefacing questions are very similar to David Epston’s description of “prologue questions,” illustrated
as preparation for engagement in his practice of “internalized other questioning” (Epston, 1998).


G4539.indd 60 e 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 004]

Learning How to Counter-Story 61


This question and statement extends the rationale and again asks for permission:


Wilbur, would it be all right with you if I asked your parents some questions about
you for a few moments? (this issue, p. 45)


I not only requested permission from Wilbur to ask him questions, but also his
permission to ask his parents questions, and in this way I am ascribing him impor-
tance and a kind of remote oversight. I am attempting to put Wilbur at ease as well
as to include him, albeit in a minimal way. These prefacing questions attempt to
take care of any concerns that Doug, Liz, or Wilbur may have and to pave the way
for a “wonderfulness enquiry.” Wonderfulness enquiries are a hallmark of David
Epston’s work as they now are a hallmark of mine and others (Marsten, Epston, &
Markham, 2016; McAllum Pilkington, 2016) as well. They are one way of beginning
a narrative therapy conversation with the reclaiming of the person and the terri-
tory of the conversation from the problem. These enquiries express a fundamental
ethic of a narrative practice: to lay downa story of appreciation for the person as
the foundation stone for the therapy conversation. I learned long ago that David
Epston will not begin a therapy conversation until he has found something he can
respect about the person he is speaking with (D. Epston, personal communication,
August 15, 2005). This ethic has inspired me. The question I asked to begin this
wonderfulness enquiry is a particularly short version. It is one version of many and
is not intended to be used as a script.


Liz and Doug, could you please tell me what you think I would come to appreciate
and respect about Wilbur if I were to get to know him? (this issue, p. 46)


All narrative conversations story identity. This is the point of them. A wonderful-
ness enquiry allows the person to become known apart from the problem and for
their identity to be spoken of (storied), possibly for the first time. In being spoken
of, identity is brought into being (Lindemann Nelson, 2001). This enquiry almost
always leads to legacy questions, from which surprising territories open up. These
territories often turned out to offer remarkable openings into counter-stories with
the young people I work with. For instance, the story of Frank, the 10-year-old boy
who believes that his courage and “quiet conviction in overcoming bullying” (the
counter-story), was handed down to him by his mother, who valiantly reclaimed
her life from bipolar. Or 14-year-old New Zealand-born, Aroha, who traced back
her commitment to “justice and standing up for others” (the counter-story) to her
grandfather who stood up against McCarthyism in defense of communist friends
in early 1950’s America.
While legacy questions do not typically follow this wonderfulness enquiry, except
for the later enquiry about the origins of Wilbur’s “fast legs,” I find out about his
remarkable imagination, inventiveness, intelligence, and enthusiasms. These discov-
eries alert me in part to how the problem may have found its way in: Anorexia seems
to particularly attempt to colonize people with a strong and sensitive intelligence.


G4539.indd 61 e 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 005]

62 Ingamells


These discoveries informed me that one way for me to engage Wilbur in our
counter-story would be through inspiring his imagination and drawing upon his
enthusiasm.I begin to find out about Wilbur’s abilities by asking this question:


Could you tell me a story about one of these inventions that Wilbur has thought up?
(this issue, p. 46)


The beginning of this question: “Could you tell me a story about... .” is another
example of a smaller counter-story question practice in the form of a question stem.
This is evidently a question that invites story. It is one of three question beginnings
that David Epston finds the people he meets with typically report appreciating the
most. The other two are: “Could you please help me to understand . . and “Could
you please teach me...”
The last of these question beginnings was invented by Michael White. David re-
members hearing Michael ask it for the first time in 2007 while observing Michael’s
practice on a visit to Adelaide (D. Epston, personal communication, February 23,
2016). These questions all call forth story, and they also reflect the strikingly decen-
tered ethic of Michael and David’s practice. Decentered practice is fundamental to
narrative therapy and refers to the politics of placing local knowledge at the center
of a conversation and professional knowledge on the outskirts. I decenter myself
when I ask Wilbur about his inventions and about rugby, in a way that elevates his
knowledges and relegates my own (quite rightly).


Wilbur, do you mind if I ask you a question about how you would get your hovercraft
out to the people that needed saving? The thing is I know about as much about hover-
crafts as I do about rugby and that’s not much at all. (this issue, p. 46)


Unsurprisingly, Wilbur steps into the expertise that I have illuminated and begins
to take part in the conversation with enthusiasm.


I know lots about rugby. (this issue, p. 46)


In much the same way that Wilbur’s own knowledge is placed center stage, other
“insider knowledges” are brought in to aid our enquiries. Later on, for example,
I introduce the idea that courage exists in the face of fear, rather than in the ab-
sence of fear. This idea is gleaned from conversations with clients, my own life
experience, and reading. David Epston’s practice bursts at the seams with insider
knowledge gleaned from his co-research with clients (Maisel et al., 2004), his
extensive reading of fiction and nonfiction and research in preparation to work
with clients whose experiences he is not well informed about, and his own life
experience (Epston, 1998).
Another practice foundational to David’s practice, my own practice, and that of
narrative therapy in general is the recruitment of allies against the problem (Epston,
1989). Problems tend to isolate people and dismember them (Myerhoff, 1982).


G4539.indd 62 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 006]

Learning How to Counter-Story 63


Conversations often need to begin with the repositioning of family members so they
stand up for and alongside the person identified with the problem, rather than the
position they have been conscripted into by a problem seeking to identify itself with
the person. This often unwittingly positions loved ones against the person or in an
in-between position. Either way, the person with the problem usually experiences
a degree of “aloneness” with the problem. It is the intention of narrative therapy
to mitigate this loneliness, or as David Epston puts it:


So what are the effects of positioning oneself differently in relation to the “problem” and
construing it as external rather than internal? I propose the following effects: Persons/
couples/families are more likely to become agents rather than patients. They do not
appear dulled and stupified as patients often do; rather, they are creative, enlivened,
enthusiastic, and can call upon problem-solving capabilities that are surprising even
to them. (Epston, 1998, p. 51; emphasis in original)


A wonderfulness enquiry is companion practice which endeavors to valorize
rather than denigrate the person and mitigates the problems’ dividing practices
(Foucault, 1965). Historically, family therapy approaches have tended to extend
the pathologization of the person. This often accompanies equating the person with
the problem with a pathologized version of the family or with a specific family
member, usually the mother (Walters, Carter Papp, & Silversteen, 1988, as cited
in Freeman et al., 1997, p. 72). In this conversation, Liz and Doug are invited into
solidarity with Wilbur and with me as the therapist. This is relatively easy with Liz
and Doug because they are very understanding, bright parents who are quick to
recognize my intentions. Doug, especially, is recruited into the role of co-therapist.
The wonderfulness enquiry sets the stage for detailed conversation. Detail is all
important for the elicitation of a counter-story and “restorying requires painstak-
ing work” (Freeman et al., 1997, p. 98). As we proceed, I am listening carefully
for phrases, words, and ideas which might offer us a doorway into a possible
counter-story. This is an exploration in unfamiliar territory. Although I am armed
with knowledge gained from conversations with others with similar problems,
enabling me to see landmarks to help me find my bearings, I have no idea what
the first possible thread of a counter-story may turn out to be. Counter-storying is
a careful process. If the threads I find turn out to be dead-ends, new ones will need
to be found. When Liz says, “It’s a bit like that with all the ideas he has. We have
to try and slow him down or they can run away with him,” I seize upon a possible
experience-near definition of the problem, asking: “Do you think your mum might
be right? Do your ideas try to run away with you a little bit sometimes?”
Aware that such extreme problems as anorexia often seek to root themselves in
“worries that run away with the person,” I glimpse the possibility inherent in this
detailed problem description: The idea of a problem that runs away with people
is less powerful than the description of a problem like anorexia or anxiety. If the
problem is demoted to the almost toddler-like status of “running away with you


G4539.indd 63 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 007]

64 Ingamells


a little bit,” then the possibility of agency arises, as does the possibility of being
able to resist the problem trying to run away with you. The first possible threads
of a counter-story emerge from Wilbur’s response:


Yeah, sometimes they take me the wrong way. They took me in the direction of the
wrong team. (this issue, p. 47)


The idea of a wrong direction implies that there is a right direction. Now, the idea of
the problem being an “idea than runs away with Wilbur and takes him in the wrong
direction” volunteers itself as a possible way of describing the problem. This opens
up the possibility of a counter-story thread of “running away from or outwitting
the problem and running in the right direction rather than the wrong direction.”
This is only one possible thread, and even if it turns out to be helpful, it is in
fledging form. The story of the “clumps of hair clogging up the bathroom sink”
illustrates the power of the problem and the distress it causes. This conversation
is in a precarious state. I offer Wilbur the story of a boy who left his underpants
on for his swimming test in an attempt to wrench back some of the power that the
problem exerts with the identity conclusion of “dumbness.” Again, the power of
“the thoughts” is demoted to taking a person in the wrong direction, and compan-
ionship is offered to Wilbur, who is now not the only young person led astray by
such thoughts. In a bid to extend this idea, I dub the thoughts “dumb,” thus turning
the problem’s propaganda back on itself.


Do you think that maybe the worry tried to run away with hima little bit like those
dumb thoughts tried to run away with you? Do you think that it’s possible that maybe,
that’s what happened to him too? (this issue, p. 48)


I then pusha little further into my enquiry about the problem and its intentions:


And could you please help me to understand what else these dumb thoughts try to tell
you? (this issue, p. 48)


Wilbur was unequivocal:


They tell me to be skinnier. They tell me I will get fat. (this issue, p. 48)


Finally, I attempt to link Wilbur’s response to the thread of the possible counter-
story. This is what I would call a “gathering question.” In a gathering question, the
“story so far” is gathered up and pre-presented to the person in the hope that the
problem and its antidote may be glimpsed more keenly:


Wilbur, is this another way the thoughts try and take you in the wrong direction: do
they try to tell you that you are fat when you are not, and try to get you to stop eating?
(this issue, p. 48)


G4539.indd 64 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 008]

Learning How to Counter-Story 65


The first session ends. We have found something of a foothold, yet as Liz’s
e-mail testifies, we are a long way from rescuing our conversations from the influ-
ence of the problem.


SESSION TWO: DRAMATIZING THE
EMERGING COUNTER-STORY


Aware that I could lose Wilbur altogether if I rushed ahead, I was careful in session
two to invite him once again into the position of an eavesdropper. I intended to tempt
Wilbur into a conversation which would be more captivating to him than the problem.
With this in mind, I brought in the drama and zaniness of “sheep worrying” from the
very start. Concerned that the fledging threads of the counter-story I had introduced
could so easily fall by the wayside if the problem was able to hijack the session, I used
the metaphor of sheep worrying to reintroduce the idea and placed my trust in both
Doug’s co-therapist skills and in Wilbur’s imagination. Luckily, Wilbur took to the
metaphor with zeal. I don’t think that Wilbur initially made the connection between
the sheep worrying and the worries that were plaguing him in the same way Doug
and I did, however, his interest was piqued enough to carry us forward, and he was
able to take a clear position on the effects of the worries on his life.
The idea of “training a problem” is a strong motif in David Epston’s practice
(Epston, 1986; Maisel et al., 2004), and it is also an expression of one of the ways
David has found to turn a problem against itself. A related practice is inviting the
person to feel sorry for the problem (Marsten et al., 2016). Such ideas stand a
chance of taking off when therapists are prepared to throw themselves at them with
abandon. We are, after all, inventing counter-stories, and any story worth reading
is plump with drama. To this story, I brought wordplay to enliven, for example:


Doug, do you think that when the thoughts are running scared like sheep that they can
worry you sick and scare you silly? (this issue, p. 49)


and intrigue to lead the person into fascination with the enquiry and away from the
stupor the problem induces, for example, later on in session three:


Wilbur, I have a hunch about what might be going on here? Would it be all right with
you if I shared my hunch with you? (this issue, p. 52)


and downright silliness to unhinge the problem:


“A sheep dog?” I enquired. “Has your dad had training as a kind of rugby sheep dog
too?” (this issue, p. 51)


Wilbur engages so enthusiastically in the drama that I am able to address him
more directly for the rest of the session, although not without Doug’s help. A


G4539.indd 65 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 009]

66 Ingamells


slightly more full-fledged version of the counter-story to the problem, now dubbed
“wild worries,” which Wilbur can train himself to tame, is put to Wilbur, repeated
within several questions:


Wilbur, do you like the idea of being in charge of all the thoughts so they can’t run
away and become worry thoughts so easily? (this issue, p. 50)


Would you like to round up the wild worries like a trained sheep dog, stopping them
from running all over the place like worried sheep? If you did that maybe could you
go in the right direction and get to do the things you wanted to do? (this issue, p. 50)


I was wondering whether Wilbur could train these worry thoughts like a sheep dog
would train sheep? I am wondering if he could calm them down and make them go
where he wants them to so they can’t run away with him so easily. (this issue, pp. 49-50)


These questions are also gathering questions in that they gather up aspects of the
counter-story so far and present them again. The re-description of the problem as
“wild” now allows for a more nuanced and playful relationship with the problem
which is no longer rendered one-dimensional, in much the same way that the person
is no longer rendered one-dimensional.
The transition from sheep training to rugby training is greatly aided by Wilbur’s
introduction of fast legs. Here is another opportunity for Wilbur to be accompa-
nied, this time by his sister and his ancestors as well as his father. My hope is that
the appeal of these connections will pull him more towards strength and courage
training than it will towards thinness training (anorexia). Later on in session three,
the appeal of wisdom is introduced:


Are you becoming wise like a warrior as well as strong like a warrior? (this issue, p. 53)


None of this storying would have been possible without the attention to detail
mentioned earlier. The story arises out of both the detail of answers and the detail
of questions. Student counselors I have taught almost always fall into the trap
of skipping from one enquiry to another before they have begun to mine all the
possibilities of the existing one. An analogy I use to explain this goes roughly
as follows:


Imagine the conversation is a house. You are walking down a long corridor, and the
farther you walk, the more doorways appear. The corridor represents the territory of
the problem, and each doorway represents a possible entrance to a counter-story. To
find out whether the room behind each door is worth spending time in, you will need to
go in and examine it carefully, being sure to look in all the drawers of all the furniture,
under the furniture, and in all the nooks and crannies. Avoid the temptation to leave
the room prematurely in search of other rooms. Also, be sure to be on the lookout for
trap doors put there by the problem, which might so easily take you back to where
you started or send you out into the street.


G4539.indd 66 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 010]

Learning How to Counter-Story 67


Examples of questions designed to bring forth details that could easily have been
ignored but turned out to lead us in important directions were:


Wilbur, do you have fast legs? (this issue, p. 50)


Doug, are there any other rugby skills that might be helpful for Wilbur in his training
to become faster and stronger? (this issue, p. 51)


Why is it called the ‘Freak-Fall’? (this issue, p. 53)


SESSION THREE: THE BALANCE TIPS IN FAVOR
OF THE COUNTER-STORY


Well aware that the counter-story of Wilbur as a Warrior® was embryonic, I began
this session much as I had begun the last one, by introducing the counter-story im-
mediately so that the warrior rather than the worrier would be at the center of our
conversation. I learned from David Epston (personal communication, August 15,
2011) to avoid the risks of the problem intervening at the beginnings of sessions
and to prevent the counter-story from being diluted by beginning with a question
that brings the counter-story immediately to the fore:


Doug, could you tell me if I imagining things, or is there a little bit more warrior in
Wilbur than there was the last time we met? (this issue, p. 52)


Thankfully, Doug, my very able co-therapist, helped me steer the conversation
towards the warrior from the start:


I think the warrior has been growing in the last week because of the training. Wilbur,
can I tell Kay what I have seen? (this issue, p. 52)


Doug’s unique outcomes led us to what I describe as:


... a gap between the two players in our conversation: the problem story and the
embryonic counter-story. (this issue, p. 52)


While teaching a class of post-graduate students with David Epston in November
2015, I was identifying some of the practices he had drawn upon in a live interview


“Wilbur the Warrior versus Wilbur the Worrier” could be considered a headline for the counter-
story. The counter-story is the sum of its different threads. That is, (1) Worry/freaky thoughts can
run away with you, taking you in the wrong/non-preferred direction, and warrior taking you in
the right direction; (2) Worry thoughts might be better thought of as wild, dumb, or misguided
than powerful and bad; (3) Wild thoughts can be directed to be imaginative thoughts, and dumb or
misguided thoughts (like sheep) can be trained and guided; (4) Fears are not as powerful as they
make themselves out to be; and (5) You can train yourself to be stronger and wiser than the fears.


G4539.indd 67 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 011]

68 Ingamells


and found myself describing how he “embroidered” the counter-story once he had
brought it into being. Thus, once I had shaped the garment of the counter-story,
what remained was to embroider it, using questions that would capture Wilbur’s
imagination and draw him further towards the counter-story. For example, reinforc-
ing the idea of wrong direction/right direction continues the storying of Wilbur’s
bravery and the co-research of further anti-fear knowledge. The counter-story is
also embroidered with the introduction of slightly different threads which lend it
more substance and character, for instance, the idea of becoming “warrior-wise as
well as warrior-strong.”
In this session, Wilbur becomes more engaged with the idea of himself as a
warrior wise and strong and less engaged with the problem, announcing, “Yes, the
warrioooor won against the woooorrier.” The weight of the counter-story is tipped
against the problem story as Wilbur starts to be constituted as a warrior. Wilbur’s
identity is constituted further as he takes on the role of “anti-fear coach” to his
father, thanks to Wilbur’s having given away Doug’s fear of heights.
The e-mail I received from Liz after session three signalled how easily the voice
of anorexia can be re-provoked, but also that the counter-story, used by Liz to tell
Wilbur it was his worrier trying to tell him he was fat, had taken hold with his
parents. Given that the intrusion of anorexia’s voice is thankfully short-lived for
Wilbur in such blatant form, it appears that the counter-story has taken hold with
Wilbur as well. Knowing that such problems rarely go away completely, but are
rather ushered into the background of people’s lives where they may remain for
long stretches of time or even for all time, I knew that allowing myself to become
alarmed could be perilous. The e-mail scare took me further into my own anti-fear
training as a therapist.
I learned from David Epston that scary problems thrive on the fear of those
whose lives they seek to invade; if a therapist joins them in the fear, the way out
may be harder to traverse, if not impossible to find again. I was reminded of when
I trained as a life-saver in my twenties. The chant of my instructor still rings in my
ears from time to time, “Stay calm even if you don’t feel it, and remember, getting
in the water is the very last thing you do. Try anything and everything else you can
think of first. The closer you get to a person in trouble, the more likely you are to
get into trouble yourself.” Instead of allowing anorexia to unseat me, I chose instead
a working hypothesis of “problems often get worse before they get better,” based
on the many experiences I have had over the years that the stronger a problem is,
the harder it fights for life. This has become such a familiar experience for me that
I start to predict something of this sort. Now, I even welcome what might appear
to be backwards steps as the gasps of a problem in its death throes. Of course, this
is not always the case. The more deadly the problem, the more important it is not
to underestimate its cunning—hence, hypothesis rather than certainty.


Fear could have taken me in the direction of doubting the ground we had gained. Instead,
I seized my therapist’s courage and gambled on my hunch that as long as Wilbur’s


G4539.indd 68 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 012]

Learning How to Counter-Story 69


courage continued to outpace fear, and despite its recent reappearance, anorexia’s hold
would continue to slip. (this issue, pp. 54-55)


Had I not forged ahead, I may again have made an error I made in the past, the
error of clutching too eagerly at some premature, false solution in a bid to dispel
the anxieties brought on by such a fearsome problem. Nevertheless, I e-mailed
David Epston, my supervisor, with Liz’s concerns. His response confirmed my own:


Yes, we have a long way to go but with very bright young people, sometimes they
proceed by leaps and bounds rather than centimetre by centimetre. I think we can
anticipate some surprises. (David Epston, personal communication, March 16, 2010)


SESSION FOUR: THE COUNTER-STORY IS RE-EMBROIDERED


In helping his dad climb past his fear, Wilbur performs his anti-fear knowledge. In
doing so, the counter-story becomes more real:


You know, Dad, I think you should have done it sooner. The worries started freaking
you out. (this issue, p. 55)


In eliciting further effects of the problem and the anti-fear knowledge that Doug
has gained, more substance is added to the counter-story, and more power is taken
from the problem:


I guess it’s true that worries can be pretty powerful and can convince you they’re real
when they are not always as real as they seem. (this issue, p. 55)


Hearing his father express how Wilbur had helped him turn himself into a warrior
and then understanding how he might continue to advise his father, Wilbur’s war-
rior identity is further embellished:


Doug, in any way would you say that Wilbur’s taking himself away from a worrier
direction and towards a warrior direction has helped you to do the same? Or am I
making too much of this? (this issue, p. 55)


“Wilbur, do you have any advice for your dad if any other worries start turning into
freaky feelings and try to turn him into a worrier?” Wilbur was ready with his counsel.
“Yep, Dad, you just need to tell yourself that worries are liars and that you can be a
warrior.” (this issue, p. 56)


As explained in the unabridged version of the companion article:


Eighteen months later, at the beginning of August 2012, Wilbur asked his parents if
he could meet me again after a burglary at the family home led to reemergence of the


G4539.indd 69 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 013]

70 Ingamells


anxiety and perfectionism but thankfully not the anorexia. We only needed to meet
one more time.’


I feared that it might only be a matter of time before the effects of the burglary
could give anorexia an opening. Concerned to do all I could to usher the anxieties
and perfectionism out as quickly as they came in, I consulted with Liz prior to the
session, and most probably thanks to her ideas about including stories of her notori-
ous ancestors in the session, anorexia did not rear its ugly head. Our conversation
and our work together ended there. Five and a half years after that last session, I
am delighted to say the anorexia has not returned.
My descriptions of some of David Epston’s foundational practices, larger
counter-storying practices, and smaller counter-storying practices illustrated in this
story from my practice also end here. However, these are only a small selection of
the practices David Epston has taught me over the years, illustrated within this one
example. What will not be evident in the story of Wilbur the Warrior or the making
of the story of Wilbur the Warrior is that my experience of the unfolding of this
story was not as seamless and easy as it might appear on the page. My conversa-
tions with the 8- and later 10-year-old Wilbur who came in with a diagnosis of
anorexia presented me with one of the biggest challenges of my therapy career. On
several occasions, my confidence failed me, and I did not know whether I would
succeed in helping Wilbur and his family escape from these extreme worries.
Knowing that David Epston is always there behind the scenes as my supervisor,
teacher, and mentor lends me confidence at these times. If you read stories from
David Eptson’s own practice, you will notice much that is remarkable. You might
notice ingenuity, playfulness, or the sheer genius of his questions. What you may
not be so quick to name is the courage that such conversations take to enter into
and persist with. David Epston has not only lent me practices and questions, he
has also lent me courage.


REFERENCES


Bamberg, M. (2004). Considering counter narratives. In M. Bamberg & M. Andrews (Eds.),
Considering counter-narratives: Narrating, resisting, making sense (pp. 351-371).
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Epston, D. (1986). Night watching: An approach to night fears. Dulwich Centre Review,
22-39.
Epston, D. (1989). Collected papers. Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.
Epston, D. (1998). “Catching up” with David Epston. Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre
Publications.


"This session describes a second stage of Wilbur’s warrior/courage training in which we drew on an-
cestral stories. It is a story in its own right. The session is included in the unabridged version that can
be read at www.narrativeapproaches.com and at www.yourstory.org.nz.


G4539.indd 70 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM

[PAGE 014]

Learning How to Counter-Story 71


Epston, D. (2011). Introduction. In M. White & D. Denborough (Eds,), Narrative practice:
Continuing the conversations (pp. Xxi-xxxvii). New York, NY: Norton.
Epston, D., & White, M. (1992). Experience, contradiction, narrative and imagination.
Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.
Foucault, M. (1965). Madness and civilization. New York, NY: Pantheon.
Freeman, J., Epston, D., & Lobovits, D. (1997). Playful approaches to serious problems:
Narrative therapy with children and their families. New York, NY: Norton.
Guilfoyle, M. (2014). The person in narrative therapy: A post-structural, Foucauldian ac-
count. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ingamells, K. (2014, June). A young man’s passage through grief: An illustration of nar-
rative questions inside a story of practice. Paper presented at the Using Narrative
Therapy With Youth Conference: The Power of Re-telling Personal Stories, Institute
of Technical Education, Singapore.
Ingamells, K. M. (2016). Mapping the magic of David Epston. Unpublished manuscript.
Lindemann Nelson, H. (2001). Damaged identities, narrative repair. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Maisel, R., Epston, D., & Borden, A. (2004). Biting the hand that starves you: Inspiring
resistance to anorexia/bulimia. New York, NY: Norton.
Marsten, D., Epston, D., & Markham, L. (2016). Narrative therapy in wonderland: Con-
necting with children’s imaginative know-how. New York, NY: Norton.
McAllum Pilkington, S. (2016). Stories of narrative practice in palliative care (unpublished
master’s thesis). University of Auckland.
Myerhoff, B. (1982). Life history among the elderly: Performance, visibility, and remember-
ing. In J. Ruby (Ed.), A crack in the mirror: Reflexive perspectives in anthropology.
Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.


G4539.indd 71 ® 2/1/2017 2:31:30 PM
