[PAGE 001]

Of
narrative
see

[PAGE 002]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page
i +


MAPS
of Narrative Practice

[PAGE 003]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page ii +


A Norton Professional Book

[PAGE 004]

Narr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page iii +


MAPS
of Narrative Practice


Michael White


DT
W. W. Norton & Company

New York e London

[PAGE 005]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page iv er


All cases presented in this book are composite case studies.


Copyright © 2007 by Michael White


All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
First Edition


For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to
Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110


Manufacturing by R. R. Donnelley, Harrisonburg
Book design by Anna Oler
Production Manger: Leeann Graham


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data


White, Michael (Michael Kingsley)
Maps of narrative practice / Michael White. — Ist ed.
p. ; cm.

“A Norton professional book.”
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-393-70516-4 (hardcover)
ISBN-10: 0-393-70516-1 (hardcover)
1. Narrative therapy. I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Psychotherapy—methods. 2. Narration. WM 420 W586m 2007]


RC489.574W45 2007
616.89165—dc22
2006038468
ISBN 13: 978-0-393-70516-4
ISBN 10: 0-393-70516-1


W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
www.wwnorton.com


W. W. Norton & Company Ltd.
Castle House, 75/76 Wells St., London WIT 3QT


1234567890

[PAGE 006]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page
v $


I dedicate this book to my mother, Joan, ever-
loving and generous, and indefatigable in her
intention for her children to have opportunities
in life that were not available to her.

[PAGE 007]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page vi +

[PAGE 008]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page vii $


Contents


Acknowledgments 1X

Introduction


— Externalizing Conversations

PhP Re-Authoring Conversations 61
0
Re-Membering Conversations 129
Eb
Definitional Ceremonies 165

Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 219

Ooo Scaffolding Conversations 263


Conclusion 291

Suggested Reading 293

References 295

Index 00

[PAGE 009]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page viii +

[PAGE 010]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page ix +


Acknowledgments


ome time ago I was approached by W. W. Norton to write a book
that would be an introductory text on narrative practice, and
that would also be informative for readers with a strong famil-
iarity with this subject. I was excited about this idea, and responded
to this invitation in the affirmative. Now, three years later, it’s com-
plete! I would like to acknowledge some of the people whose support
enabled the completion of this project.
First and foremost, thanks to Cheryl White, who believed in the
existence of this book long before I had written a word of it, and
who provided encouragement throughout this writing project.
Second, thanks to David Denborough for his unflagging interest in
the development of this writing project, and for his enthusiastic
response to, and feedback on, early versions of the chapters.
Without these contributions from Cheryl and David, this book
would not be.
Thanks also to Susan Munro who originally proposed this book
project when she was an editor with W. W. Norton, and to Deborah
Malmud, for her general support and for her endorsement of early
drafts of these chapters. Susan's confidence about this proposal,
and Deborah's endorsement of it, confirmed and sustained my
efforts.

[PAGE 011]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page
x er


x Maps of Narrative Practice


And thanks to Casey Ruble for her copyediting efforts. I so appre-
ciated Casey's vital interest in the manuscript, and her suggestions
and thoughtful proposals for the restructuring of sections have made
it a better book that it would have otherwise been.

[PAGE 012]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 1 $


MAPS
of Narrative Practice

[PAGE 013]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page
2 $

[PAGE 014]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 3 er


Introduction


his book is principally about maps of narrative practice. Why
maps? Well, on a personal level, I have always had a fascination
with other worlds. I grew up in a working-class family in a mostly
working-class community, and although access to other worlds of life
was limited, I was always deeply curious about those worlds. When I
was a young boy it was maps that made it possible for me to dream
those other worlds up and imaginatively transport myself to other
places.
Then, on my 10th birthday, I received the gift of a bicycle. To this
day I have never received another gift that meant as much to me as
this bicycle (and to this day I cannot live without access to a bicycle).
I now had means of visiting other worlds. Guided by maps, and in the
company of my younger brother, our friends, and our dog, Prince, I
would ride for whole days into the worlds that neighbored on my com-
munity—worlds that I became fascinated with but was barely able to
touch the surface of. I can still recall my wonder on the occasion of
first riding into a middle-class world that looked like the “American
dream” of the 1950s, one that had become familiar to me through
radio and billboard advertising and through the few magazines I had
managed to get my hands on.
The most significant venture out of my world of origin occurred

[PAGE 015]

MapNarrReprint 7/22/10 2:02 PM Page 4 +


4 Maps of Narrative Practice


when I was 13. My father had purchased a “good” car, and we packed
up and went on a holiday of a lifetime—a camping trip through south-
ern South Australia, into Victoria, a neighboring state to the east, and
all the way to Melbourne, via the Great Ocean Road. I was totally
unprepared for the immensity of the world that I experienced on this
trip. I encountered geographical landscapes and territories of life that
I couldn't have imagined and had adventures that to this day are vivid
in my mind.
Each evening, in the light of a kerosene lamp, I pored over maps.
This contributed significantly to my anticipation of the adventures
ahead and to my acute wakefulness throughout this holiday. I do not
recall our having any specific travel goal at the outset of each day, just
a number of possible destinations. And the routes to these possible
destinations were not predetermined. The principal agenda was to
find the most scenic byways.
These expeditions into the worlds that neighbored on the commu-
nity I grew up in, and the memorable journey from Adelaide to
Melbourne via the south coast, are in my distant past. But even now
I relish the opportunity to pore over maps, both in the course of trav-
eling for my work and during my preparation for the occasional cross-
country journeys I take while piloting Cessna and Piper aircraft. My
lifelong fascination for maps has led me to look at them as a metaphor
for my work with people who consult me about a range of concerns,
dilemmas, and problems. When we sit down together I know that we
are embarking on a journey to a destination that cannot be precisely
specified, and via routes that cannot be predetermined. I know that
we will probably take some extraordinarily scenic routes to these
unknown destinations. I know that as we approach these destinations
we will be stepping into other worlds of experience.
And I know that the adventures to be had on these journeys are not
about the confirmation of what is already known, but about expedi-
tions into what is possible for people to know about their lives. This is
evident in so many ways. For example, in the context of therapeutic
conversations, people invariably modify their goals or embrace objec-
tives that suddenly become important to them making changes that
they could not have foreseen at the outset. At the outset of a thera-


a

[PAGE 016]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page
5 $


Introduction 5


peutic conversation a person may table an agenda to become more
independent, but over the course of the conversation discard this in
favor of a goal to more openly embrace an ethic of partnership in acts
of living. Or a couple might initially present a desire to resolve differ-
ences in their relationship, but then, midstream in the therapeutic
conversation, substitute this with the objective of acknowledging and
celebrating difference in their relationship.
The maps that I review in this book are, like any maps, construc-
tions that can be referred to for guidance on our journeys—in this
case, on our journeys with the people who consult us about the
predicaments and problems of their lives. Like other maps, they can
be employed to assist us in finding our way to destinations that could
not have been specified ahead of the journey, via routes that could not
have been predetermined. And, like other maps, the maps that I pres-
ent in this book contribute to an awareness of the diversity of avenues
that are available to preferred destinations, avenues that can be
charted and rendered familiar. | have formulated these maps over the
years principally in response to requests from others to render more
transparent the therapeutic processes that I have developed. I will
emphasize here that the maps of this book are not the maps of narra-
tive practice or a “true” and “correct” guide to narrative practice, what-
ever narrative practice is taken to be.
As the author of these maps, it is important for me to emphasize
that I do not use them to police my conversations with the people who
consult me. Therapeutic conversations are not ordered, and I make no
effort to determine my response to people’s expressions ahead of these
expressions. | am aware, however, that maps like those presented in
this book help me to respond to people in ways that open opportuni-
ties for them to explore neglected aspects of the territories of their
own lives. This provides people with avenues of possibility for
addressing the predicaments and problems of their lives in ways that
they wouldn't have imagined.
Maps like these shape a therapeutic inquiry in which people sud-
denly find themselves interested in novel understandings of the
events of their lives, curious about aspects of their lives that have been
forsaken, fascinated with neglected territories of their identities, and,


o

[PAGE 017]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 6 er


6 Maps of Narrative Practice


at times, awed by their own responses to the predicaments of their
existence. And I believe that maps like these shape a therapeutic
inquiry that contributes to the rich development of therapists’ stories
about their work and about their lives generally, which can be a source
of inspiration. This has certainly been true for me.
On occasion, in teaching contexts, I have been asked why it is nec-
essary to have maps for therapeutic practice. My response: “It is not
at all necessary.” However, I believe that we all refer to guiding ideas
of some sort in the development of therapeutic conversations,
although very often these guiding ideas have become so taken for
granted and accepted that they are rendered invisible and unavailable
to critical reflection. I believe that this is a hazardous development,
for it has the potential to restrict us to the unquestioned reproduction
of what is familiar in terms of therapeutic practice, regardless of the
consequences on the lives of the people who consult us. Having said
this, I do appreciate the fact that not everyone will relate to the “map”
and “journey” metaphors, and that there is a whole world of metaphors
that can be used to characterize therapeutic practices. I welcome
efforts to translate the practices described in this book into terms
associated with alternative metaphors.
I should also note that therapists who are unfamiliar with the maps
described in this book may initially find them awkward, unnatural, or
unspontaneous to use. This is to be expected: When new territories of
therapeutic conversation are being entered into, it can take consider-
able time to become familiar with such territories and to become pro-
ficient in the skills associated with these explorations. The key is prac-
tice, practice, and more practice.
Interestingly, it is this rigorous practice that enables spontaneity—
the expressions of life that seem most spontaneous to us are those that
we have had the most practice in. As is the case for musicians who
perform skillful improvisation, good improvisation in the context of
therapeutic conversations is founded on meticulous attention to the
development of therapeutic skills. And the possibility for the further
development of our skills is never-ending.
I view my own practice as an apprenticeship without end, knowing
that I will never arrive at a place where I will be wholly satisfied with


a

[PAGE 018]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 7 +


Introduction 7


my contribution to effective therapeutic conversations. To date, there
has not been one occasion on which I could say that I wouldn't
change some aspect of my contribution to a therapeutic conversation
if | had the opportunity to start all over again. This acknowledgement
is not to negatively judge or devalue my part in these conversations,
and it does not subtract from the enjoyment that I experience in them.
Rather, it is about maintaining a reflective perspective on what I do as
a therapist.
For me, taking a journey into the unknown with a map in hand
always fills me with anticipation. I hope that in the writing of this
book I have managed to convey a sense of the delight and fascination
that I routinely experience in journeys undertaken in therapeutic con-
versations. And I hope that the maps that I have presented in this
book will be useful to you, the reader, in your own explorations of
therapeutic practice.

[PAGE 019]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 8 $

[PAGE 020]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 9 +


1
Externalizing
Conversations


any people who seek therapy believe that the problems of
their lives are a reflection of their own identity, or the identity
of others, or a reflection of the identity of their relationships.
This sort of understanding shapes their efforts to resolve problems,
and unfortunately these efforts invariably have the effect of exacerbat-
ing the problems. In turn, this leads people to even more solidly
believe that the problems of their lives are a reflection of certain
“truths” about their nature and their character, about the nature and
character of others, or about the nature and character of their rela-
tionships. In short, people come to believe that their problems are
internal to their self or the selves of others—that they or others are in
fact, the problem. And this belief only sinks them further into the
problems they are attempting to resolve.
Externalizing conversations can provide an antidote to these internal
understandings by objectifying the problem. They employ practices of
objectification of the problem against cultural practices of objectification
of people. This makes it possible for people to experience an identity that
is separate from the problem; the problem becomes the problem, not the
person. In the context of externalizing conversations, the problem ceases
to represent the “truth” about people's identities, and options for success-
ful problem resolution suddenly become visible and accessible.

[PAGE 021]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 10 +


10 Maps of Narrative Practice


Jeffrey


As I walked down the stairs with a couple I'd been meeting with, I
became aware of a commotion in the waiting room. In the midst of
this, I heard the reassuring voice of our receptionist. The commotion
subsided, and I assumed that whatever this had been about, it was
now being taken care of. The couple booked another appointment,
and I consulted my datebook about my next consultation. This was to
be a meeting with a family, Beth, Andrew, and their son Jeffrey. It was
their first visit. I entered the waiting room but found no one present.
I was then aware of the sound of raised voices coming from the
street, and I decided to investigate. As I was about to step out into the
street, | was nearly flattened by a woman rushing in the opposite
direction. “Oh, I’m sorry. I’m sorry!” she blurted out. “Are you Michael
White?” I hesitated for a moment, a fraction concerned about the
potential consequences of acknowledging this, and then answered
that yes, I was. The woman quickly explained that her son, Jeffrey had
taken off down the street with the rocking horse from our waiting
room. Somehow Jeffrey had known that there was a horse-racing track
at the end of this street, and he had obviously wanted to try it out.
Beth, Andrew, and eventually our receptionist had taken off after him,
attempting to convince him that this wasn’t a good time to embark on
an adventure like this. The situation had then deteriorated into a
wrestling match, but Beth assured me that everything was now under
control, and that the rest of the party would be along soon.
Sure enough, we were soon all seated in my interviewing room—
Beth and Andrew on chairs, and Jeffrey on the rocking horse which
had grown an extra pair of legs and that had apparently become short
sighted, for it was crashing into virtually everything there was to crash
into. I found this curious, but managed to turn my attention to
Andrew and Beth to inquire about the purposes of their visit. In
response to my question, Andrew suddenly launched himself out of
his chair and leapt at me—at first I though he'd leapt at me and
missed, assuming that he was perhaps also a bit short-sighted.
Fortunately, it turned out that this maneuver was not one of malice
but rather an attempt to save the whiteboard behind my chair from


Ze

[PAGE 022]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 11 $


Externalizing Conversations 11


crashing onto me. Although feeling a fraction unsettled by this event,
I was grateful for his efforts. After a few minutes Andrew and Beth's
attempts to establish some order in the room were moderately suc-
cessful, and I took this as an opportunity to again inquire as to the
purposes of their visit.


Andrew: | thought that you would quickly figure that out.

M: Not shortsightedness?

Andrew: What?

M: Nothing really. I think it would be best if I had your
words on this.

Andrew: Okay. As I’m sure you've guessed, we've been
having a really hard time with Jeffrey. He’s got ADHD. This
has now been confirmed by two pediatricians and an edu-
cational psychologist.

Beth: Yeah, it has been pretty full-on for most of Jeffrey's
life, and we haven't really known what we were dealing
with until recently. We're only just learning about ADHD.

M: So the diagnosis is pretty recent?

Beth: We've known for sure since the start of this year—
that’s about 8 or 9 months. But we have suspected it for a
long while.

M: What's it been like to have this diagnosis?

Beth: It's been quite a relief, hasn't it Andrew?

Andrew: Yeah, we are both relieved to at least have a name
for it.

M: So, where do | fit in?

Andrew: We've just seen another pediatrician about some
concerns we've had about the medication, and he sug-
gested we make an appointment with you. He said that


a

[PAGE 023]

MapNarrReprint 7/22/10 2:02 PM Page 12 +


12 Maps of Narrative Practice


you'd seen lots of kids like Jeffrey, and that you could have
some things to offer.

M: What are your concerns about the medication?

Beth: It's certainly much easier for us and lots of other
people when he’s on this medication, but there are changes
to his personality that we are both worried about, aren't we
Andrew?

Andrew: Yeah. We were worried that we were losing some-
thing, so we've backed off a bit on this. And the other thing
is that we just felt that we hadn’t exhausted all of the
avenues. So that's why we're here.

M: Does Jeffrey know he has ADHD?

Beth: Yeah. We've told him as much as we know. We think
it's important for him to know because it's about his life.

M: You said that you feel that you haven't exhausted all of
the avenues?

Andrew: We have tried lots of things, including what's
called “behavioral methods.” We've come to see you
because we hoped there'd be something more.

Beth: Or that maybe you could get through to Jeffrey
somehow.

M: Okay.


Jeffrey was now under my chair, bumping the underside of it with
his back, pretending to be a rodeo horse. I was concerned about the
possibility of his injuring his back, and also about my precarious posi-
tion in this scenario. So I took some time out of my conversation with
his parents to encourage Jeffrey to be a camel, which I hoped would
have a more desirable outcome. While I was doing this, I asked Jeffrey
if it was true that he had ADHD. He didn't answer this question, but
he did seem to want to know more about what he would be doing if


—2

[PAGE 024]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 13 E


Externalizing Conversations 13


he were a camel. Then Andrew asked, “So what are we going to do?”


M: (turning back to Beth and Andrew) Right now, I don't
really know what can be done.

Andrew: What else can we tell you that would be of help?
What else do you want to know? We just have to find a way
forward here, and we heard that you see lots of kids like
Jeffrey.

M: Well, for a start, it would be helpful for me to know
what sort of ADHD he has.

Beth: What sort of ADHD he’s got? Do you mean that
there a different sorts of ....

M: Yeah. There are lots of them, and until we figure out
what sort of ADHD Jeffrey has, we won't be able to do
much. We'll just be barking up the wrong tree.

Beth: (turning to Andrew, looking quite indignant) They never
told us this! Not once did anyone say anything about this!

Andrew: Well, maybe Michael can tell us . . .

M: Making diagnoses is not my specialty.

Andrew: But surely you have seen a lot of this, and you'd
be able to...

M: Yes, I have seen a lot of children who have been diag-
nosed with ADHD. But my work with them has not
involved me making this diagnosis.

Andrew: Are you serious? Are you really serious? (turning
to Beth) So just what are we going to do next?

M: I do have an idea about how we might find out what
sort of ADHD is giving you all such a difficult time.

Beth: (with a “this looks promising” expression on her face)
Okay, let's hear it.

[PAGE 025]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 14 +


14 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: (turning to Jeffrey, who has just upended a box of crayons)
Jeffrey, what sort of ADHD have you got?

Jeffrey shrugs his shoulders.

M: All right then Jeffrey, tell me this. Just tell me this one
thing. What color is your ADHD?

Jeffrey: (momentarily bewildered and turning to his parents,
who both shrug; then turning back to me) Dunno.

M: Ah-hah! I knew it! Now I know why Jeffreys ADHD is
just free to run around upsetting everything. How could
Jeffrey do anything to stop this if he doesn’t even know
what his ADHD looks like? Jeffrey, how could you do any-
thing about what your ADHD is up to?

Jeffrey gives me a puzzled look, and Andrew and Beth
exchange glances that register silent questions about whether
they have come to the right place for consultation. Then Beth
shrugs as if to say, “Oh well, we are here now, and we might
as well play along to see where this goes.”

M: Actually, I do think that I recognize something. It's
looking more familiar to me. Yes, I think I do know what
sort of ADHD Jeffrey’s got! I am sure I have seen it before.

Andrew: Good, good. This is encouraging. What is it?

Jeffrey looks expectant.

M: Jeffrey, you have a younger brother, don't you?

Jeffrey nods.

M: What's his name?

Jeffrey: Christian.

M: I haven't met your brother Christian. But just like you
have a brother, I think your ADHD has a brother, and I
have met him. Do you want to know who he is?

[PAGE 026]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 15 +


Externalizing Conversations 15


Jeffrey: Tell me, tell me.

M: Do you know about twins?

Jeffrey: Yup.

M: Well, I think that your ADHD has a twin too, and I’ve
met him. Yes, I met him right here in this room just a few
weeks ago. This twin was doing just what your ADHD's
been doing. Up to exactly the same tricks, crashing into
everything, knocking the whiteboard over, pretending to be
a horse and tipping things all over the place. That's how I
recognized your ADHD. I've seen it before!

Jeffrey is now clearly engaged. Beth and Andrew are both
smiling, looking relieved, and nodding for me to continue.

M: Do you want to see a picture of your ADHD’s twin
brother?

Jeffrey, at a loss for words, nods.

M: Okay. I met a boy who had a name a bit like yours. His
name was Jerry. And Jerry had this ADHD in his life that
was upsetting everyone and making a mess of everything.
Jerry didn’t know what his ADHD looked like either. So he
was really stuck with his ADHD doing whatever it liked.
Anyway, one night Jerry decided to get a picture of his
ADHD. Do you know what he did?

Jeffrey: What?

M: Jerry had this great idea. He woke himself up in the
middle of the night and got a good look at this ADHD. His
ADHD was just lazing around with his feet up smoking a
cigarette, figuring out new tricks to play on Jerry and wait-
ing for Jerry to wake up so he could get going with them.
Anyway, before this ADHD could jump back inside him,
Jerry took a picture of it with his mind. And the next morn-
ing he painted it. I can show you what Jerrys ADHD looks

[PAGE 027]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 16 er


16 Maps of Narrative Practice


like because he also painted a copy for me. Wait here and
I'll go and get it.

Jeffrey: (eyes now open very wide) Show me! Show me!
Show me!

Beth: Wait, wait. Michael will have to go and get it.

M: (exits the interviewing room for his office and returns
with a large painting of Jerry ADHD, which looks awesome)
Look at this, will you!

Jeffrey seizes the painting.

M: Careful! Be careful! Hold onto it tight! Who knows
what would happen if this ADHD got free. If your ADHD
and Jerry's ADHD were on the loose together and teamed
up with each other, who knows what would happen to this
whole building, or to this whole neighborhood!

Andrew: We'd all have to run away.

Beth: So hold onto it tight, Jeffrey. Here, I'll help.

Jeffrey firmly holds the painting while studying it wide-eyed.

M: But Jeffrey, I am not exactly sure that this is your
ADHD's twin brother. And we have to know for sure if we
are going to do anything about it.

Beth: How could we find out?

Jeffrey: (with enthusiasm) Yeah, yeah! How can we find out?

M: I don't know. I was going to ask you and your mum and
dad about this.


Andrew and Beth took the lead in speculating about what might be
done to confirm this twinship. Although Jeffrey flatly rejected all of
their proposals, I was quite drawn to several of them and asked per-
mission to make a note of them for later reference in my work with
other families. Then, suddenly, Jeffrey had an idea of his own:


a

[PAGE 028]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 17 +


Externalizing Conversations 17


Jeffrey: | know! I know!

M: What?

Jeffrey: I will wake myself up in the middle of the night
and take a picture of my AHD before it jumps back into
me! I will. [ll do it. (At this point I discovered that Jeffrey
always dropped a D out of this description. He didn't have
ADHD after all, but AHD.)

Beth: That's a great idea, Jeffrey! And then you could paint
a picture of it in the morning and bring it back here for
Michael to see.

Andrew: Yeah. That's a great idea. When will you do it?

Jeffrey: I'll do it tonight. Wake up all of a sudden and get
a picture of AHD. It doesn't matter how fast AHD is, I’m
going to be faster.

M: Sounds like a good plan.

Andrew: What can we do to help out? Should we remind
Jeffrey about this plan before he goes to sleep tonight?

M: Pd recommend that you say nothing. Don't mention it.
AHD could get wind of this and try to outsmart Jeffrey. We
dont want to give AHD any warning about Jeffrey’s plans.
AHDs can be pretty tricky, can't they Jeffrey?

Jeffrey: Sure can!

Andrew: Well, that's a relief, really. Do you mean we can
just sit back and...

M: What you could do is this. At breakfast you and Beth
could simply say to Jeffrey, “Did you do it?” If Jeffrey says
yes, you could then celebrate this in some way, and help
him to paint his AHD. If he says, “Did I do what?” you could
say, Never mind. It's nothing.” And you could do this each
morning until Jeffrey has followed through with his plan.

[PAGE 029]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 18 er


18 Maps of Narrative Practice


Andrew: That's easy.

M: Not entirely, because it would be good if you and Beth
could harmonize on this. You could even practice before
you leave this room.

Beth and Andrew both laugh.


Three weeks later we met again, this time under very different cir-
cumstances. All was quiet in the waiting room, and I wondered if this
family was late for the appointment. But no, Jeffrey, Andrew, and Beth
were present, all looking rather expectant. Jeffrey was holding some-
thing behind his back that was making a crinkling sound. We walked
up to my interviewing room, Jeffrey holding back slightly. Beth,
Andrew, and I were seated before Jeffrey's entrance. I was facing the
door, and to my horror suddenly there appeared an incredibly grue-
some AHD that at first appeared to be on the loose.


M: (leaping off my chair in surprise) Oh no, what's this?! Help!
Help! Everybody help! There’s an AHD loose in my room!

Beth: Oh no! Jeffrey! Help us!

Jeffrey: (suddenly appearing from behind his painting, a
large grin on his face) Tricked you!

M: Oh, what a relief! It’s you, Jeffrey! You sure did trick
me. But hold onto that thing. Don't let it go.

Jeffrey: I’ve got it. It’s okay, I’ve got it.


Together we studied Jeffrey's AHD, and carefully compared it to
Jerry's ADHD. We all agreed that it was a twin to Jerry's ADHD, but
that Jeffrey’s was a mutated version of Jerrys—a “mutant ninja” ver-
sion, and therefore even more difficult to deal with. Jeffrey was quite
animated during this time, telling stories about some of the tricky
things that his AHD had got up to, and about how he had managed to
intercede in order to save the day. This provided an opportunity for me
to ask questions about some of the consequences of AHD's activities:


oe

[PAGE 030]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 19 er


Externalizing Conversations 19


M: Now we know who your AHD is, let’s figure out what
he’s been doing to your life. Where should we start with
this?

Beth: Well, where do we start is a good question. There's
so much to say about it. In lots of ways AHD has ruled our
lives.

Andrew: AHD has been getting in the way of Jeffrey at
school. It's got Jeffrey into all sorts of trouble. AHD has
been making trouble for you at school, hasn't it Jeffrey?

Jeffrey: (occupied in painting yet another picture of his
AHD) Sure has.

Andrew: It’s also been giving some of his teachers a bit of
a headache, hasn't it Jeffrey?

Jeffrey: Sure has.

Beth: AHD has also been messing things up a bit with
other kids, and getting Jeffrey into some fights, hasn't it
Jeffrey?

Jeffrey: Sure has.

M: Messing things up with other kids in what sort of way,
Jeffrey?

Jeffrey: They just want me to go away by myself.

M: What about your mum and dad, Jeffrey? Has AHD
been getting in between you and your mum and dad? Has
it been giving you and them problems?

Jeffrey: Sure has.

M: What sort of problems?

Jeffrey: It gives you headaches, too, doesn’t it mum?

Beth: Yeah, that’s right. And it tires me out.

[PAGE 031]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 20 er


20 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: What about your dad?

Jeffrey: Ah... well, it gets him all grouchy, doesn't it Dad?

Andrew: That's true. And I don't feel very happy with
myself about this.

M: AHD is messing things up between Jeffrey and his
teachers, and between him and other kids, and between
him and the two of you. What does this tell you about
AHD? What does this say about AHD?

Andrew: Maybe that it’s a bit mean.

M: Jeffrey, do you think that your dad is right, that AHD is
mean?

Jeffrey: Yeah, it's mean. And it’s naughty too.

M: You said that AHD was tricky. Tell me more about its
tricks.


In the ensuing discussion, the tactics and strategies employed by
AHD were described in terms that were relevant to Jeffrey, and some
of the consequences of these tactics and strategies were drawn out in
more detail. This provided a foundation for a closer examination of the
plans that AHD had for Jeffrey's life. I then consulted Jeffrey and his
parents about their position on the consequences of AHD’s actions
and on the plans that AHD had for his life.


M: I am getting a clearer picture about what AHD's been
up to. It’s been messing things up between Jeffrey and his
mum and dad, between Jeffrey and other kids, and
between Jeffrey and his teachers. And about how it’s been
making Jeffrey feel funny in his tummy. And it has also
been upsetting Jeffrey's mum and dad. I’ve also got a
clearer picture of the plans that AHD has for Jeffrey’
future. AHD wants to be Jeffrey’s only play friend, to keep
Jeffrey to himself.

[PAGE 032]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 21 +


Externalizing Conversations 21


Andrew: This is the first time that we've taken stock of all
of the trouble that AHD has been causing us. Jeffrey, isn't
this the first time that we've got a good picture of what
AHD has been up to?

Jeffrey: Sure is.

M: So what's this like for all of you? I mean, is what AHD's
up to okay with everyone?

Beth: No way. I am not at all happy with this.

Andrew: Me neither. We want to get our family back from
AHD, dont we Jeffrey?

Jeffrey: Yeah. We want our family back, don't we dad?

M: And what about the plans that AHD has for Jeffrey's
life? The plans that AHD has to be Jeffreys only play-
friend. Jeffrey, are you happy to go along with these plans?

Jeffrey: No way.

Beth: These plans would give Jeffrey a miserable life, and
he wouldn't want that, would you Jeffrey?

Jeffrey: No way. No way.

M: Okay, so there's no one in this room who's happy about
what AHD has been up to?

Jeffrey: Yes, there is.

M: Who?

Jeffrey: AHD's happy about it. (Jeffrey, Beth, Andrew, and I
all laugh.)

M: All right. I understand that apart from AHD, there's no
one in this room who's happy about what AHD's been up
to, and there is no one who's happy to go along with AHD's
plans.

[PAGE 033]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 22 er


22 Maps of Narrative Practice


Beth: That's right.

Jeffrey: No way.

M: Okay, that's established. Now Id like to know anything
that you can tell me that would help me understand why
what AHD’s been up to isn't okay for you. And about why
AHD’s plans are not okay for you.


As our discussion continued, I learned about the relationships that
Jeffrey and his parents wanted with each other but that AHD was
interfering with; the connections that Jeffrey wanted with other chil-
dren and teachers that AHD was inhibiting; and some of the plans
that Jeffrey had for his own life that didn’t fit with what AHD had
dreamed up for his future. In the course of this conversation, Andrew
and Beth remarked that this was the first time they'd heard Jeffrey put
into words some of the ideas that he had for his own life.
At the end of this second meeting we were engaged in a conversa-
tion about the sort of initiatives that might be available to Jeffrey and
his parents for subverting AHD's activities. These were initiatives that
would fit with some of the intentions they'd defined in this review of
their dissatisfaction with AHD’s influence. Jeffrey contributed seven
proposals for such initiatives, and he was quite clear about his inten-
tion to put AHD in its proper place—he wanted to keep AHD as a
special friend, but he didn’t want to just stand back and let AHD rule
his life.
At the third meeting I learned that Jeffrey had experienced some
success in following through on a couple of the initiatives he had pro-
posed. I interviewed the family about these initiatives, and some of
the knowledges and skills Jeffrey had demonstrated became more vis-
ible to everyone. Jeffrey clearly experienced pride in the identification
of these knowledge and these skills, as well as in how he'd put these
to work in following up on his plans for his own life. Beth and Andrew
had contributed to these initiatives by arranging circumstances that
were favorable to them. They also had experienced some success in
following up on their own proposals for the further development of
the sort of relationships they wanted with each other and with Jeffrey.


oe

[PAGE 034]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 23 +


Externalizing Conversations 23


I met with this family for another six meetings over a 3-month
period, and during this time Jeffrey and his parents further developed
the ability to curtail AHD’s activities. They also became more adept in
shaping their own actions according to what was important to them.
Beth and Andrew had met with Jeffrey’s primary school teacher to
explain their new approach to AHD’s activities, and she played a sig-
nificant role in establishing conditions favorable to the success of this
approach within the school context.
At follow-up I learned that everything was going according to plan.
Although at times AHD could still be a handful, there was good
progress in Jeffrey’s ability to respond to his parents’ efforts to assist
him through these crises, and Jeffrey was better able to foresee the
consequences of his own actions. He was getting along much better
with other children, and his teacher was reporting positive develop-
ments in his capacity to concentrate on educational tasks and in his
cooperation in the class room.


Looking Back: The Genesis of My Research on
Externalizing Conversations


It has now been more than 20 years since I wrote my first piece on
externalising conversations (White, 1984). In the period leading up to
the writing of this piece I had been exploring the relevance of exter-
nalizing conversations in my work with many families of young chil-
dren. These were children who had been referred to me for a range of
problems that were considered chronic and intractable. I had found
these explorations of externalizing conversations enthralling and the
responses of these children and families highly reinforcing and
rewarding. In deciding to commit these explorations to print, I chose
encopresis (soiling) as my first subject, as it routinely sponsors a sense
of failure, shame, hopelessness, and defeat, and because significant
conflict, frustration, and exhaustion invariably surround it. I wanted
to illustrate the potential of externalizing conversations to provide a
context in which family members who had been cut off from each
other could come together to undertake shared and collaborative ini-


ee

[PAGE 035]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 24 er


24 Maps of Narrative Practice


tiatives to address their problems. I wanted to illustrate the potential
of externalizing conversations to contribute to the development of an
interactional definition of and solution to these problems. And I
wanted to illustrate how problems that were not only considered
intractable and chronic but also unpleasant and serious in their social
consequences could be approached in playful, lighthearted, and joy-
ful ways.
I could not have predicted the high level of interest that this article
on encopresis aroused in the professional community. This encour-
aged me to further my explorations of externalizing conversations with
different problems and in a range of contexts, and to commit more of
these explorations to print. At this time, many other therapists also
began to explore externalizing practices in their work with children,
young people, and adults, in individual, couple, family, and group
therapy settings. Before long, numerous practitioners were contribut-
ing to a burgeoning literature on this subject, providing accounts of
wonderful innovations.
In this chapter I have four main purposes. First, I will provide a
summary of some of the ideas that have informed the development of
externalizing conversations. Second, I will discuss the therapist pos-
ture that is usually associated with externalising conversations. Third,
I will review the metaphors that are sponsored in supporting people's
efforts to address the problems of their lives. And fourth, I will pro-
vide a map that represents externalizing conversations in terms of four
categories of inquiry.


Ideas Informing the Development of Externalizing
Conversations


As noted earlier, many of the people who seek therapy believe that the
problems in their lives are a reflection of their own identity or the
identity of others. When this is the case, their efforts to resolve prob-
lems usually have the effect of exacerbating them instead. This leads
people to even more solidly believe that the problems of their lives are
a reflection of certain “truths” about their nature and their character,


Ze

[PAGE 036]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 25 E


Externalizing Conversations 25


or about the nature and character of others—that these problems are
internal to their self or the selves of others.
There is an irony to this, for it is often the case that these very inter-
nalizing understandings (and the actions that are shaped by these
understandings) are principally implicated in the development of
these problems in the first place. Because the habit of thought that
constructs these internal understandings of people’s lives is signifi-
cantly a cultural phenomenon, many of the problems that people con-
sult therapists about are cultural in nature. The history of this cultural
phenomenon has been traced by a number of historians of thought,
including Michel Foucault (1965, 1973). It is not my intention in this
chapter to provide an extended account of Foucault's contribution to
an understanding of the development of this phenomenon, which I
have done elsewhere. Here, just a few comments about his contribu-
tion will have to suffice.
Foucault traced the origin of these internal understandings of life
and identity back to the mid-17th century in Western culture. He pro-
posed that this was, in part, the outcome of developments in:


e “Dividing practices” that separated, through the ascription
or assignment of a spoiled identity, the homeless, poor,
mad, and infirm from the general population
e The objectification of people's bodies through the location
of, and classification of, disorders within these bodies
e “Normalizing judgment” as a mechanism of social control
that incites people to measure their own and each other's
actions and thoughts against norms about life and devel-
opment that are constructed within the professional disci-
plines


The development of these dividing practices, of this scientific clas-
sification, and of this mechanism of normalizing judgment fostered
the objectification of people's identity. In this objectification of iden-
tity, many of the problems that people encounter in life come to rep-
resent the “truth” of their identity. For example, in the context of the
professional disciplines, it is not uncommon for therapists to refer to


m

[PAGE 037]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 26 er


26 Maps of Narrative Practice


a person as “disordered” or “dysfunctional,” and in wider culture it is
not uncommon for people to consider themselves or others “incompe-
tent” or “inadequate” by nature.
Externalizing conversations in which the problem becomes the
problem, not the person, can be considered counter-practices to those
that objectify people’s identities. Externalizing conversations employ
practices of objectification of the problem against cultural practices of
objectification of people.
When the problem becomes an entity that is separate from the per-
son, and when people are not tied to restricting “truths” about their
identity and negative “certainties” about their lives, new options for
taking action to address the predicaments of their lives become avail-
able. This separation of the person’s identity from the identity of the
problem does not relinquish people from a responsibility to address
the problems that they are encountering. Rather, it makes it more pos-
sible for people to assume this responsibility. If the person is the prob-
lem there is very little that can be done outside of taking action that
is self-destructive. But if a person's relationship with the problem
becomes more clearly defined, as it does in externalizing conversa-
tions, a range of possibilities become available to revise this relation-
ship.

Unravelling Negative Identity Conclusions


Externalizing conversations also make it possible for people to unravel
some of the negative conclusions they have usually reached about
their identity under the influence of the problem. For example, I was
consulted by a young woman named Sarah, who had a history of cut-
ting and depression who strongly believed that she was “hateful,” and
who hated herself on account of this. This “self-hate” was a dominant
feature of her experience. We were soon engaged in an inquiry into
what self-hate had persuaded Sarah to believe about her identity (“I
am worthless and useless and I deserve my lot in life”), about what it
required her to do to her body (“treat my body in rejecting and puni-
tive ways”), about its agenda for her relationship with others (“to iso-
late me from others”), and so on.
This opened an opportunity for the further characterization of self-


ee

[PAGE 038]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 27 +


Externalizing Conversations 27


hate: I solicited an account of what self-hate’s activities reflected
about the sort of attitudes it had toward Sarah's life and an account of
the way in which self-hate would speak if it were a voice that was
actually out there in the world. This stronger characterization of self-
hate provided the foundation for an inquiry that traced the echoes of
these attitudes and this voice into Sarah's history. This allowed Sarah
to, for the first time, link her experience of self-hate with the attitudes
and voices of people who had perpetrated tyranny on her during child-
hood. The externalizing conversation that facilitated the unravelling of
these conclusions about hatefulness also created space for the devel-
opment of a re-authoring conversation (see Chapter 2). The develop-
ment of these conversations was associated with a rapid diminution of
the cutting and of the depression that had maintained such a strong
presence in Sarah’s life.
It is quite common for this unravelling process to reveal the history
of the “politics” of the problems that bring people to therapy. This is a
history of the power relations that people have been subject to and
that have shaped their negative conclusions about their life and their
identity. This unravelling deprives these conclusions of a “truth” sta-
tus and calls them into question. As an outcome, people find that
their lives are no longer tied to these negative conclusions and this
puts them in a position to explore other territories of their lives. In
these explorations they invariably arrive at more positive conclusions
about their identity. I have found this sort of unravelling or decon-
struction of people's negative conclusions about life to be a very help-
ful aspect of externalizing conversations.


Therapist Posture


The form of inquiry that is employed during externalizing conversa-
tions can be likened to investigative reporting. The primary goal of
investigative reporting is to develop an exposé on the corruption asso-
ciated with abuses of power and privilege. Although investigative
reporters are not politically neutral, the activities of their inquiry do
not take them into the domains of problem-solving, of enacting


ee

[PAGE 039]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 28 er


28 Maps of Narrative Practice


reform, or of engaging in direct power struggles with those who might
be perpetrating abuses of power and privilege. Investigative reporters
are not usually “hotly” engaged with the subjects of their investiga-
tions. Rather, their actions usually reflect a relatively “cool” engage-
ment.

In response to the investigative questions posed by the therapist,
the people in therapy also assume an investigative-reporter-like posi-
tion. In this way they contribute to building an exposé of the charac-
ter of the problem, its operations and activities, and the purposes that
inform these operations and activities. At this time, people are not
encouraged to focus on efforts to resolve the problem, reform the
problem, or engage in a direct struggle with the problem.
For example, a therapist might be consulted by a person who has a
diagnosis of schizophrenia and is considered to be chronically ill. At
the outset of the first meeting, an account of what is of greatest con-
cern to the person is elicited. Such concerns are usually voiced in
terms of the more pressing experiences of daily life; they are very
rarely stated in terms like “schizophrenia.” These concerns may be
expressed as particular quality of life issues, as a sense of personal fail-
ure and inadequacy, or as experiences of tyranny that are perpetrated
by the “hostile voices” (auditory hallucinations). For example, I met
with Harold, who expressed a primary concern about the harassment
that the hostile voices were subjecting him to. The externalizing con-
versation that developed in relationship to this did not encourage a
hot engagement with these voices. It did not encourage Harold to
confront the voices, discipline them, or wrestle with them in any way.
Rather, Harold was encouraged to characterize these voices by typify-
ing the way that they spoke, by describing the tactics of power they
used to establish dominance, by identifying the strategies that they
employed to establish themselves as an authority on the motives of
others, and by determining the agendas and the purposes that were
expressed in all of this.
Many aspects of this sort of exposé will contribute to the reduction
of the felt influence of such voices. For example, the development of
an account of the tactics and strategies of power employed by the
voices has the effect of reducing their power. And as the highly parti-


ee

[PAGE 040]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 29 er


Externalizing Conversations 29


san nature of their pronouncements becomes more visible, these pro-
nouncements are dispossessed of the previously unquestioned “truth”
status given to them. This exposé also paves the way for people to
identify the other purposes they have for their lives and the things
they hold precious that contradict the agenda of the hostile voices.
There is then space for these other purposes and values to become
more richly known, for the history of the purposes and values to be
drawn out, and for the development of action plans that are in har-
mony with these purposes and values. At times this development also
provides the opportunity for people to identify voices that might be
supportive of these other purposes and values, or voices that have
been nonpartisan and can be recruited as “invisible friends.” It is my
experience that the successful revision of a person’s relationship to
auditory hallucinations invariably has a significantly positive effect on
the person’s quality of life and reduces the vulnerability to psychotic
experience. This was certainly the case for Harold, who considered
the revision of his relationship to the voices of schizophrenia a turn-
ing point in his life.
In emphasizing the importance of a “cool” engagement with the
problems and concerns that people bring to therapy, I am not suggest-
ing that therapeutic conversations should be unemotional or should
disengage people from their experience of these problems and con-
cerns. To the contrary, I find that externalizing conversations routinely
assist people to give expression to a range of experiences of life that
they previously have not had the opportunity to express.
In the “cool” engagement characteristic of the early phases of exter-
nalizing conversations, the person has the opportunity to transcend
the “playing field” of the problem—that is, address the problem in a
territory that is not the home territory of the problem. In so doing,
people usually experience a reduction in their sense of vulnerability to
the problems of their lives and begin to feel less stressed by their cir-
cumstances. This outcome is nowhere more important than in situa-
tions where there is a significant stress element to the problems that
people consult therapists about. For example, with regard to schizo-
phrenia, there is a clearly established correlation between stress and
psychotic episodes. It stands to reason that any therapeutic conversa-



[PAGE 041]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 30 er


30 Maps of Narrative Practice


tion that encourages a “hot” engagement with the voices of schizo-
phrenia—that promotes a direct confrontation with these voices—will
render people with this diagnosis more vulnerable to psychotic expe-
rience.

At a certain point in the development of these externalizing inves-
tigative-reporter conversations—when people are experiencing a
degree of separation from the problem definitions of their identity,
and when they are beginning to give voice to intentions and values
that contradict those associated with the problems—a second posture
in relation to the problem is usually taken up, often in alternation or
conjunction with the investigative-reporter posture. This is a posture
in which people initiate action to diminish the influence of the prob-
lem and to pursue what they have identified as important to them.
This second-phase posture, and the actions that follow from it, are
significantly shaped by the metaphors that are employed to character-
ize the influence of these problems. For example, if people character-
ize this influence as oppressive, the posture assumed will be opposi-
tional and people will take action to “liberate” their lives from the
problem. If people characterize this influence as unjust, the posture
assumed will be a moral one, and the action taken will provide redress
to this injustice. If people characterize this influence to be unin-
formed, a teaching posture will be assumed, and action will be taken
to educate the problem about what is in the best interest of the peo-
ple's lives.
Despite the diversity of metaphors that people employ to represent
the problem's influence in their lives, at times in the literature it is
assumed that these metaphors are principally those that encourage
people to engage in “contests” or “battles” with their problems in order
to “defeat” or “vanquish” them. Critiques of externalizing conversa-
tions are often based on the perception that this is what is proposed
for externalizing conversations; that is the routine employment of
adversarial metaphors. These critiques argue that such metaphors
reproduce patriarchal discourses of life and identity, prompt highly
individual and autonomous accounts of identity to the detriment of
relational understandings of life, foster the development of dualistic,
either/or conceptions of human action, and obscure the context of


aoe

[PAGE 042]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 31 +


Externalizing Conversations 31


people's experiences. Although the concerns raised in critiques like
these are grounded in a misperception of what I have proposed for
externalizing conversation, | believe it is still important to consider
them. As therapists, we are responsible for the consequences of what
we do, say, and think. We have a special responsibility to consider the
ways in which we may have unwittingly reproduced assumptions
about life and identity that are disqualifying of diversity in people’s
acts of living, and the ways in which we may have inadvertently col-
luded with the power relations of local culture. Continually question-
ing the metaphors we support in therapeutic conversations is part of
this special responsibility.
Introducing or prioritizing these “contest” or “battle” metaphors can
also be hazardous for reasons other than those just cited. If metaphors
within externalizing conversations constrict success in terms of van-
quishing or defeating the problem, and then later the person finds
themself experiencing a reemergence of the problem, he or she may
view this reemergence as tantamount to personal failure. This will be
highly discouraging of renewed initiatives to revise one’s relationship
to the problem. Because of the significance of the metaphors selected
in externalizing conversations, I will now explore this subject in more
detail.


Metaphors


The matter of metaphor is highly significant. All metaphors that are
taken up in the development of externalizing conversations are bor-
rowed from particular discourses that invoke specific understandings
of life and identity. These discourses influence the actions people take
to solve their problems, and they are shaping of life in a general sense
as well. In response to a perception that externalising practices rou-
tinely encourage people to engage in a contest or battle with their
problems in order to defeat and vanquish them, I recently reviewed all
of the articles that Id written over the past twenty or so years on this
subject. In this review I discovered that in just one of these articles I
had presented battle and contest metaphors. This was in the first


m

[PAGE 043]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 32 +


32 Maps of Narrative Practice


piece I published on externalising conversations, and it presented
these “contest” and “battle” metaphors along with others that con-
structed the task quite differently. In undertaking this review I listed
an array of metaphors that people had taken up in defining the actions
they had taken in revising their relationships with the problems of
their lives, and also listed the apparent source of these metaphors.
This list included:


e Walking out on the problem (from the concept of agency)
e Eclipsing the problem (from astronomical conceptions of
life)
e Dispelling the problem (from magical conceptions of life)
e Going on strike against the problem (from the idea of civil
action)
e Becoming deacclimated to the problem (from the concept
of climate)
e Setting themselves apart from the problem (from the con-
cepts of separation and individuation)
e Defying the problem’s requirements (from the idea of
resistance)
e Disempowering the problem (from the idea of empower-
ment)
e Dissenting the problem’s influence (from the idea of
protest)
e Educating the problem (from the concept teaching)
e Escaping the problem or freeing their life of the problem
(from the idea of liberation)
e Recovering or reclaiming the territory of their life from the
problem (from geographical conceptions of life)
e Undermining the problem (from geological conceptions of
life)
e Reducing the influence of the problem (from the concept
of personal agency)
e Declining or refusing invitations to cooperate with the
problem (from the concept of a civil society)
e Departing the problem’s sphere (from the journey idea)


Ze

[PAGE 044]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 33 $


Externalizing Conversations 33


e Engaging in acts of redress against the problem (from the
concept ofjustice)
e Coming out of the shadow cast by the problem (from the
idea of light)
e Disproving the problem’s claims about their identity (from
the concept of objectivity)
e Reducing the problem’s grip on their lives (from physiolog-
ical conceptions of life)
e Repossessing their lives from the problem (from commer-
cial understandings of life)
e Taking their lives out of the hands of the problem (from

puppetry)
e Resigning from the problem's service (from the concept of
employment)
e Salvaging their lives from the problem (from the maritime
world)
e Commencing comebacks from problems (from the world
of sports)
e Stealing their lives from the problem (from the idea of
theft)
e Taming the problem (from the concept of training)
e Harnessing the problem (from the equine world)


The diversity in these metaphors is very much due to the fact that
most of them were coined by people who have sought therapy.
However, having said this, it is also true that I routinely play a signif-
icant role in the selection of the metaphor that is most comprehen-
sively taken up in therapeutic conversations. It is my experience that
when people are characterizing the action they aim to take or have
taken in revising their relationship to the problem of their lives, only
very rarely do they use just a single metaphor. It is seldom possible to
pursue all of the metaphors people bring up in the context of thera-
peutic conversations, so some are inevitably favored over others. The
favoring of some metaphors over others is based upon what seems
most viable to me and upon the ethical considerations that have
already been covered in this chapter. For example, a child attempting


o

[PAGE 045]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 34 er


34 Maps of Narrative Practice


to resolve his encopresis might invoke the metaphor of “beating Mr.
Mischief” (competition metaphor) with the intention of “getting my
life back from Mr. Mischief” (reclamation metaphor). In such circum-
stances I would usually give priority to the reclamation metaphor
when inviting the child to draw out and build upon these initiatives.
This is because the reclamation metaphor does not represent the task
as an adversarial one. Another child, attempting to resolve her fears,
might speak in terms of “vanquishing” these fears, and “giving them an
education.” In this circumstance, I would be more likely to focus the
therapeutic inquiry on the program that the child had developed to
educate the fears rather than on her acts of vanquishing the fears.
This selection would be based on my concern about the conse-
quences of routinely reproducing battle and contest metaphors in the
context of therapeutic conversations.
In my conversations with Jeffrey, Beth, and Andrew, when the
focus turned to the sort of action that this family might initiate to
revise their relationship with AHD, several metaphors were employed.
One of these was about “killing off’ AHD. I focused instead, however,
on a “reclaiming” metaphor that was also proposed, and this guided
the further development of proposals for action and reflections on the
consequences of these actions. It was in this context that Jeffrey
became quite clear about his intention to put AHD in its proper place
as a wanted and special friend but not one who would rule his life.
On the few occasions when only a single metaphor for action is
apparent at the outset of the conversation, and when I have ethical
concerns about the extensive employment of this metaphor, my par-
ticipation with it is usually strictly provisional. As the conversation
develops other metaphors for action inevitably surface. I cannot recall
a therapeutic conversation in which the prioritizing of these other
metaphors wasn't possible and in which this wasn't highly effective.


Totalizing


It is important for therapists to be wary of contributing to the totaliz-
ing problems—that is, defining problems in terms that are totally neg-


a

[PAGE 046]

MapNarrReprint 7/22/10 2:02 PM Page 35 er


Externalizing Conversations 35


ative. This totalizing of the problem is founded upon the dualistic,
either/or habits of thought that have become quite pervasive in
Western culture, and it can require special effort on behalf of thera-
pists to remain conscious of such thinking, and its associated hazards.
This consciousness is important because totalizing can obscure the
broader context of the problems that people bring to therapy and can
invalidate what people give value to and what might be sustaining.
The following two examples of therapeutic encounter illustrate the
importance of avoiding totalizing problems.
Jeanine, a single-parent mother with a child who was physically and
intellectually challenged, sought consultation over what had been
determined to be unrealistic hopes that rendered her vulnerable to
considerable frustration and episodes of acute disheartenment.
Jeanine had been advised to seek therapy with the goal of letting go of
these hopes and for the purpose of grieving their loss. However, an
externalizing conversation about these hopes provided her with an
opportunity to fully express her experience of both the positive and
the negative consequences of these hopes. Among other things, these
hopes had sustained Jeanine’s efforts to ameliorate some of the hard-
ships that her son would have otherwise faced. But these hopes had
also been very hard taskmasters for Jeanine to shoulder. As the exter-
nalizing conversation proceeded, Jeanine began to develop a new clar-
ity about the purposes to which she wished to continue to apply these
hopes, including the diversion of some of them to help her develop
neglected aspects of her own life.
At follow-up it was ascertained that this conversation had provided
Jeanine with an opportunity to revise her relationship with these
hopes. In the context of this revision, her hopes were honored but no
longer tied to a singular commitment. Jeanine had become more able
to monitor the allocation of hope to a range of purposes that she
highly valued, and she became less vulnerable to frustration and dis-
heartenment. If, in the context of therapy, these hopes had been total-
ized as a hurdle to overcome, the possibility of such an outcome
would have been lost.
Martin, age 8, and his parents consulted me about his fearful-
ness. This fearfulness had been a feature of Martin’s life since he


a

[PAGE 047]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 36 $


36 Maps of Narrative Practice


was 4, and it was becoming increasingly pervasive in its effects. It
was associated with negative physical phenomena, including
headaches and stomachaches, with profound insecurity in social
contexts, with insomnia, and with a range of highly preoccupying
worries. Martin’s parents hadn't left a stone unturned in their effort
to get to the bottom of this. However, all of their investigations had
been to no avail, and they now risked concluding that he was simply
a fearful boy.
We were quickly underway with an externalizing conversation,
and for the first time Martin openly characterized his worries. I
encouraged him to name each of these worries and to clearly dis-
tinguish them from one another, to graphically describe them, to
develop an exposé of their activities and operations, to provide an
account of the consequences of those activities and operations, and
to reach some conclusions about what this all said about what these
worries had planned for his life. In this way the externalizing con-
versations rendered the intangible tangible; boundaries or borders
were assigned to a problem that had previously had an all-encom-
passing presence in Martin’s life. As we were all becoming more
familiar with the nature of these worries, I found the opportunity to
inquire about the forces that might be supportive of these worries.
As the worries were now richly characterized, Martin had little dif-
ficulty in relating them to the context of his life. I learned from him
that these worries were powerfully supported by global events,
including the 2004 tsunami, the AIDS epidemic in Africa, the war
in Iraq and Afghanistan, and suicide bombings in the Middle East.
How had he come to be so well informed about these events?
Unbeknownst to his parents, he regularly watched news of world
events on television.
Martin now found himself in a conversation with his parents that
validated his worries. These worries were no longer considered irra-
tional. Not only did Martin now feel joined in his worries, but he also
experienced an honoring of what he attributed value to in life, and felt
his parents' pride in him over this. He was now not simply a fearful
boy in their eyes, and their joining with him in conversations about
these concerns and in making plans for addressing them was deeply


o

[PAGE 048]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 37 $


Externalizing Conversations 37


relieving to Martin. The negative physical consequences of these wor-
ries quickly resolved, as did his insomnia and much of his insecurity,
and although he remained highly concerned about world events, this
concern was no longer in the category of preoccupation that made it
impossible for him to proceed with his life. If, in the context of ther-
apy, these worries had been construed in totally negative terms,
Martin and his family might never have addressed his concerns in this
way.


A Final Note About the Metaphors of Action and the Hazards of Totalizing


Although I have raised questions about the employment of adversar-
ial metaphors and metaphors that construct totalizing descriptions of
problems, I do not mean to suggest that these metaphors and totaliz-
ing descriptions are never preferred. At times I am consulted by peo-
ple who have a strong sense that they are fighting for their survival.
For these individuals, metaphors of battle and contest and a totalizing
of the problem best fit their experience of the problem, at least at the
outset of therapy. These people have often been subject to various
forms of abuse and exploitation, and I am always cognizant of the fact
that the development of a fight mindset, and actions that are informed
by this, may have been critical to their survival.
In these circumstances I acknowledge the importance of this mind-
set, honor their understanding about the nature of the actions that
have ensured survival, and join in explorations of further possibilities
for action that are shaped by these metaphors. However, I do not
introduce battle metaphors and do not initiate a totalizing of the prob-
lem. When people embrace a singular fight metaphor, 1 remain alert
to other metaphors that might be employed in describing action or
proposals for action in the revision of the person’s relationship to the
problem. Remaining alert to the emergence of other metaphors allows
for the possibility of gradually focusing on something other than “the
fight.” A sole focus on fight metaphors has hazards that I have already
touched on, and it can contribute to an entrenched “fortress mental-
ity” with regard to life, as well as to an increased experience of vulner-
ability and, over the longer term, a sense of fatigue and reduced per-
sonal agency.

[PAGE 049]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 38 er


38 Maps of Narrative Practice


Other Externalising Conversations


The primary subject of this chapter has been the use of externalizing
conversations to address the problems for which people seek therapy.
However, externalizing conversations can also be used more broadly in
revisioning and redeveloping what is often defined as people's
“strengths” and “resources.” For example, in a piece I recently wrote
on narrative approaches to working with children and their families, I
included an example of a double externalization (White, 2006). Gerry
and his family had consulted me about Gerry’s eating problem. In
therapy, I first supported the externalization of the eating problem as
a “naughty little phobia.” I then encouraged an externalization of the
strength it would take to engage in valued activities that he’d been
excluded from on account of his frailty. This strength was character-
ized as “tiger strength,” and, in the context of the externalizing conver-
sation, a description of this “tiger strength” was developed in ways that
would not have been possible had this phenomenon retained the sta-
tus of an internal quality. The externalization of this strength provided
Gerry and his parents with a foundation to free his life from the
“naughty little phobia.”


The Statement of Position Map: Four Categories of
Inquiry


Ten years or so ago, in response to requests to provide a map for the
development of externalizing conversations, I undertook a videotape
review of a series of externalizing conversations with the intention of
drawing out the specific categories of inquiry that gave shape to these.
As an outcome of this, I developed a “statement of position” map that
I incorporated into workshop notes and began to introduce in teach-
ing contexts. This map provides an account of externalizing conversa-
tions as four principal categories of inquiry. (Examples of this map are
included at the end of this chapter.)
I have been presenting and illustrating this map in teaching con-
texts for many years now, and the participants of these events have


o

[PAGE 050]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 39 +


Externalizing Conversations 39


found this representation helpful in the development of their own
externalizing practices. Drawing out the four categories of inquiry in
this way has served to unpack externalizing practices, rendering them
more transparent and more available to replication, to unique applica-
tions, and to further development.
As with all of the maps described in this book, the statement of
position map can be of assistance in the guiding of therapeutic
inquiry, and it is particularly relevant in situations in which people
present problem-saturated accounts of their lives or have formed
highly negative conclusions about their identities or the identity of
their relationships. The map does not speak for all aspects of external-
izing conversations, and is not essential to the development of thera-
peutic conversations informed by a narrative perspective.
I refer to these four categories of inquiry as a “statement of posi-
tion” map because it establishes a context in which people, including
young children, can be radically consulted about what is important to
their lives. It is in the context of such consultation that people find
opportunity to define a position on the problems of their lives and to
have a stronger voice about the foundation of their concerns. This is
frequently a novel experience for people, as they often have found
themselves subject to the position that others have taken on their
problems and predicaments.
This is also a statement of position map in that it is through this
inquiry that the therapist’s position is clearly defined. This is a decen-
tered position in that the therapist is not the author of people's posi-
tions on the problems and predicaments of their lives. But it is also an
influential position, as it is through the introduction of these cate-
gories of inquiry that the therapist provides people with an opportu-
nity to define their own position in relation to their problems and to
give voice to what underpins this position.
This decentered but influential role can be difficult to achieve, for
we are often meeting with people who are expressing considerable
degrees of frustration and hopelessness, who have exhausted all other
known avenues, and who are desperate to achieve some relief from
pressing concerns. Under these circumstances, therapists are quite sus-
ceptible to taking a position on the people’s problems and to acting on


Ze

[PAGE 051]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 40 $


40 Maps of Narrative Practice


this position unilaterally through recourse to “expert knowledge” and a
range of interventions. This privileges the therapist’s voice in attributing
meaning to people’s problems, imposes the therapist’s own understand-
ing about the consequences of the problems, prompts the therapist to
take a position on these consequences on behalf of the people seeking
consultation, and justifies the therapist's position in terms of what he or
she assumes is important to these people: “I can see that this (problem
as defined by the therapist) is having these (consequences as drawn out by
the therapist) in your life. This is a (position authored by the therapist),
and we will have to do something about this because (justification
founded upon therapist's normative ideas about life). When the therapist
takes authorship in this way, the door closes on collaboration, and ther-
apist is set up to feel burdened and exhausted while the people who are
seeking consultation feel impotent.

Inquiry Category 1. Negotiating a Particular, Experience-Near Definition of

the Problem


In this first stage, the therapist supports people in the negotiation of
the definition of the predicaments and problems for which they are
seeking therapy. In this negotiation, these predicaments and problems
are richly characterized. It is through this characterization that “expe-
rience-distant” and “global” definitions are rendered “experience-near”
and “particular.”
An “experience-near” description of the problem is one that uses
the parlance of the people seeking therapy and that is based on their
understanding of life (developed in the culture of their family or com-
munity and influenced by their immediate history). In using the word
particular, | am acknowledging the fact that no problem or predica-
ment is perceived or received in identical ways by different people, or
in identical ways at different times in a person’s life. No predicament
or problem is a direct replica of any other predicament or problem,
and no predicament or problem of the present is a carbon copy of the
predicament or problem it was in the past. In my work with Jeffrey,
Beth, and Andrew, this experience-near, particular definition of
ADHD was generated in various ways, including through painting.
The distinctive shape of this problem became highly visible—it was


a

[PAGE 052]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 41 +


Externalizing Conversations 41


uniquely characterized to the extent that it was even differentiated
from its identical twin, Jerrys ADHD. Jeffreys ADHD was like no
other ADHD, and what he knew about it was presented in the terms
in which he experienced life.
Quite often, and particularly in work with children, this rich char-
acterization is achieved through the personification of the problem.
Spencer, age 7, was brought to see me by his parents, Sue and Rod,
who defined his problem as “encopresis.” This was a longstanding
problem that had defied many efforts to resolve it. Sue and Rod
spoke of their acute frustration over Spencer's total lack of enthusi-
asm for any initiative that might have the potential to alleviate this
problem. From Spencer's general demeanour I gained the sense that
he felt resigned to the fact that he was the problem and that there
was nothing that he could do to change this. In response to my ques-
tions about his comprehension of encopresis, Spencer confirmed
that he understood this term, but it was clearly apparent that this
global definition of his soiling was one that was experience-distant to
him. I then initiated an inquiry that I hoped would assist the family
in characterizing this phenomenon in ways that were particular and
experience-near:


M: Okay, so tell me, what's it like for all of you to be living
under the reign of this encopresis?

Sue: (smiling in recognition of the pun) It comes down in
torrents at times, and it sure is messy.

Rod: (also amused) Sometimes we are up to our knees in it.
It gets very slippery. We wind up going in all sorts of weird
directions, scooting all over the place. That's a pretty fair
summary, isn't it?

Sue: Yeah. Things sure do get out of control, and it makes
it hard to get things done, doesnt it Spencer?

Spencer: (looking a little less wptight) Yep.

M: What would you say about the nature or the character

[PAGE 053]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 42 $


42 Maps of Narrative Practice


of an encopresis that went around messing up people's lives
when it wasn't invited to do so? What would you say about
an encopresis that caused these sort of slip-ups and made
it difficult to get things done?

Sue: Well, I'd say it was an encopresis who was up to mis-
chief.

Rod: I'd say that too.

M: What would you say, Spencer?

Spencer: Let's see. Yep, I’d say that.

M: What would you say, Spencer?

Spencer: It’s Mr. Mischief.

M: Okay, so it is Mr. Mischief! It is really good to know this!

Spencer: Sure is!


I proceeded to interview Spencer and his parents about their expe-
rience of Mr. Mischief, and this helped them more richly character-
ize the problem. For example, the operations and activities that Mr.
Mischief engaged in when messing up people’s lives, including the
tactics and strategies that he employed, were defined, and what this
said about the plans that Mr. Mischief had for Spencer's life were
drawn out. The more that this problem was defined in particular and
experience-near terms, the more animated and knowledgeable
Spencer became. It turned out that he didn’t know how to treat enco-
presis, but he did know how to out-trick Mr. Mischief. With his par-
ent's assistance, Spencer went on to use this knowledge to “get his life
back” from Mr. Mischief.
In this example, the “professional” description of the problem as
encopresis was displaced by one that was more local to Spencer’s life—
Mr. Mischief. In presenting this example I am not proposing that we
convert all professional diagnoses into descriptions drawn from popu-
lar culture, but I do believe that through rich characterization, any
description can be rendered experience-near and particular. For exam-


m

[PAGE 054]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 43 E


Externalizing Conversations 43


ple, in my externalizing conversation with Jeffrey, Beth, and Andrew, a
version of the professional term ADHD was richly characterized.
It is in the rich characterization of problems that people's unique
knowledges and skills become relevant and central to taking action to
address their concerns. During this process, people become aware of
the fact that they do possess a certain know-how that can be further
developed and used to guide them in their effort to address their prob-
lems and predicaments.

Inquiry Category 2. Mapping the Effects of the Problem


This second stage in the development of externalizing conversations
features an inquiry into the effects/influence of the problem in the
various domains of living in which complications are identified. This
can include:


e Home, workplace, school, peer contexts
e Familial relationships, one's relationship with oneself,
friendships
e Identity, including the effects of the problem on one's pur-
poses, hopes, dreams, aspirations, and values
e Ones future possibilities and life horizons


This inquiry does not have to be exhaustive, but it should include
some account of the principal consequences of the problem's activi-
ties and operations. For example, in my conversations with Jeffrey,
Beth, and Andrew, considerable attention was paid to the conse-
quences of AHD’s activities with regard to familial relationships and
Jeffrey's relationship with his teacher and peers. Attention was also
given to the consequences of the problem in terms of Beth's physical
experience and Andrews moods. With Sarah, the young woman who
had a long history of cutting and depression, my conversations
focused on the consequences of self-hate's activities with regard to
her relationship with her own body and her connections with others.
This inquiry into the effects or influence of the problem places the
externalizing conversation on a firm footing, and at this point the tran-
sition from the more commonplace internalizing conversations is


o

[PAGE 055]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 44 +


44 Maps of Narrative Practice


highly evident. For example, at the outset of my meetings with Sarah,
she informed me that she was, among other things, “worthless” and
“useless” and that she “deserved her lot in life.” She also informed me
that others had tried to talk her out of these conclusions, and that she
took this as a sign of either their insincerity or a lack of understand-
ing. This had an alienating effect in her relationships with others, and
Sarah was open about the fact that she predicted that I would “try the
same stunt.” This I managed to avoid. However, before long, Sarah
was responding to my questions about what the self-hate had been
persuading her to think about herself—that she was “worthless,” “use-
less,” and “deserved her lot in life.” These are the terms that were
strongly featured in Sarah’s internal dialogue and in her internalizing
conversations with others, but now they were being expressed in an
externalizing conversation that was opening a space between Sarah’s
identity and her negative conclusions about her identity. I did not
attempt to challenge these negative conclusions when they were pre-
sented as the “truths” of Sarah’s identity. Rather, the externalizing con-
versation had the effect of dispossessing these conclusions of a truth
status and provided an opportunity for them to be unravelled.

Inquiry Category 3. Evaluating the Effects of the Problem’s Activities


In this third stage, the therapist supports people in evaluating the
operations and activities of the problem, as well as its principal effects
on their lives. This evaluation is usually initiated with questions like:
Are these activities okay with you? How do you feel about these devel-
opments? How are these developments for you? Where do you stand
on these outcomes? What is your position on what is unfolding here?
Is this development positive or negative—or both, or neither, or some-
thing in between? If this were served up to you as a fate in life, would
you have any questions about it?
These questions and others like them invite people to pause and
reflect on specific developments of their lives. For many this is a novel
experience, for it is very often the case that this sort of evaluation has
been mostly undertaken by others. For example, I couldn’t count the
number of young people I’ve met who have not had a voice in the eval-
uation of the consequences of the predicaments of their lives. Instead,


ee

[PAGE 056]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 45 er


Externalizing Conversations 45


this evaluation has been voiced by their parents, schoolteachers, ther-
apists, social service workers, the police, and so on.
Because being consulted about this subject can be such a novel
experience, it is usually important for the therapist to preface these
evaluation questions with a brief summary of some of the principal
effects of the problem that were drawn out in the second stage of the
externalizing conversation. I often refer to these summaries as edito-
rials, and they provide people with a surface upon which to reflect
when responding to the evaluation questions. For example, in my con-
versation with Virginia, age 16, and her parents, Russell and Verity, it
was clear that she had been more or less a passenger in the process of
evaluating some significant complications in her life. In seeking her
position, I first gave a brief summary of what I understood as one of
the principal consequences of these complications:


M: Virginia, I understand that, apart from other things,
your parents concerns about these complications lead
them to be somewhat preoccupied with what is happening
in your life. And that this preoccupation means that they
are attending much more closely to aspects of your life. You
said that this has the effect of closing things down for you.

Virginia: Yes. That's exactly it.

M: Okay. Well, what is this like for you?

Virginia: What's this like for me?

M: Yes. How is this for you? What's your position on this?

Virginia: I dont like it. It feels like I am always being
supervised. I don't like it and it doesn’t help. It’s incredibly
frustrating.

M: You don't like it? You don't like this supervision?

Virginia: No, I don’t like it and it doesn’t help. It makes
things worse, and it’s incredibly frustrating.

M: Say a bit more about your experience of this. What


a

[PAGE 057]

MapNarrReprint 7/22/10 2:02 PM Page 46 +


46 Maps of Narrative Practice


other words would you use to describe this discomfort and
frustration?

Virginia: Well, it's like this . . .


After Virginia had given a fuller account of her experience of this con-
sequence, | interviewed both Russell and Verity about their experience
of this preoccupation with what was happening in Virginia’s life. Until
now, it hadn't been possible for the family to be open to one another's
perceptions about the predicament they'd been struggling with. This
inquiry made it possible for them to develop some mutual understand-
ings about their experiences of the consequences of the predicament.
In my conversation with Jeffrey, Beth, and Andrew, I also prefaced
my evaluation questions with an editorial: “I am getting a clearer pic-
ture about what AHD’s been up to. It’s been messing things up
between Jeffrey and his mum and dad, between Jeffrey and other kids,
and between Jeffrey and his teachers. And about how it’s been mak-
ing Jeffrey feel funny in his tummy. And it has also been upsetting
Jeffrey's mum and dad. I've also got a clearer picture of the plans that
AHD has for Jeffrey's future. AHD wants to be Jeffrey's only play
friend, to keep Jeffrey to himself.” This editorial provided a reflecting
surface that assisted all the family members in speaking about their
experiences of AHD’s activities and about their position on the conse-
quences of these activities.
At this time care is also taken to ensure that people have the oppor-
tunity to articulate all the complexities of their position on the effects
of the problem. Therapists often fall into the trap of assuming that peo-
ple would evaluate the consequences as wholly negative. They then pre-
maturely bring closure to this inquiry and proceed to develop the ther-
apeutic conversation on this assumption. However, people's positions
on the problem and its consequences are often complex and mixed. For
example, one of the principal consequences of the operations of self-
hate in Sarah’s life was cutting, and I was aware of how important it was
for me not to make assumptions about her experience of this:


M: Sarah, I’m just wondering whether it would be okay to


a

[PAGE 058]

MapNarrReprint 7/22/10 2:02 PM Page 47 +


Externalizing Conversations 47


change tack for a bit. I've been getting a pretty good idea of
what self-hate demands of you, and I'd like to ask some
questions about how this is for you.

Sarah: That's fine. Go ahead.

M: Okay. Would it be okay to start with the cutting?

Sarah: Sure, sure. It’s no secret.

M: When we were talking about how the self-hate had you
treating your own body, you said that it required you to cut.
I wanted to know what this was about, and you said that it
was partly about disciplining your body. So my question is,
what's this like for you?

Sarah: Well, it's... I don’t know how to answer your ques-
tion, because it is just how it is. Cutting is just how it is.

M: So it is something that is okay by your

Sarah: Michael, I am really surprised that you are asking
this question.

M: Why?

Sarah: Because most people just try to talk me out of it.

M: That's not on my agenda.

Sarah: Good! Because the truth is that when I see my
blood running, it's about the only time that I feel relief. It’s
probably about the only time that I feel anything at all.

M: So you don't have any questions about it?

Sarah: What? No, I don’t think so.

M: I’m not trying to talk you out of cutting. But if cutting
were a fate that was served up to you at birth—if cutting
were a destiny that was allocated to you, when other des-
tinies were allocated to other infants—you wouldn't have
any questions about it?


3

[PAGE 059]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 48 +


48 Maps of Narrative Practice


Sarah: I didn’t say that.

M: Sorry...

Sarah: I guess if my life started all over again, I suppose
Pd have a question or two about the cutting.

M: Okay. I’m just wanting to get some idea of where you
stand on this cutting. Am I right in understanding that this
is something that you are mostly for, something that brings
relief, but also something that you have a small question
about?

Sarah: That's a pretty good summary of the situation.


The complexity of people's position on these consequences is also
evident in variations in their evaluations. For example, a person might
be favorably disposed toward some of the consequences but not others.

Inquiry Category 4. Justifying the Evaluation


This fourth stage features an inquiry into the “why” of people's evalu-
ations. This inquiry is usually initiated with questions like: Why
is/isn't this okay for you? Why do you feel this way about this devel-
opment? Why are you taking this stand/position on this development?
However, this inquiry can be initiated in other ways, too. At times
it is more appropriate to call for a story that will provide an account of
the “why”: Would you tell me a story about your life that would help
me to understand why you would take this position on this develop-
ment? What stories about your history might your father share to
throw some light on why you are so unhappy about this development?
It was this version of the “why” question that I pursued in my conver-
sation with Jeffrey, Beth, and Andrew: “Okay... now I'd like to know
anything that you can tell me that would help me understand why
what AHD's been up to isn’t okay for you. And about why AHD’s plans
are not okay for you.” As with the evaluation questions, these justifi-
cation questions are usually prefaced by editorials.
Justification (“why”) questions have had a history of bad press in
the counseling and psychotherapy fields. I can recall attending train-


o

[PAGE 060]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 49 $


Externalizing Conversations 49


ing events in the early 1970s where we were counseled never to ask
why questions, but to restrict our inquiries to “how” and “what” ques-
tions. This seemed unacceptable to me. When I asked the leaders of
these events, “Why this discrimination against the mind?” they
responded by throwing up their hands in exasperation. This prejudice
against “why” questions may be partly due to the way in which the
word has been employed in the wider culture. In this context, “why”
questions have often served as a form of moral interrogation, which is
diminishing and demeaning of others: Why did you do this? Why are
you such a problem? Why would you think such a thing?
The class of “why” questions that I am promoting, however, is not
associated with moral judgment of this sort. These “why” questions
play a profoundly significant role in helping people to give voice to and
further develop important conceptions of living, including their inten-
tional understanding about life (for example, understanding their pur-
poses, aspirations, goals, quests, and commitments), their under-
standing about what they value in life, their knowledge about life and
life skills, and their prized learnings and realizations. Over the years |
have continued to ask “why” questions, even in my work with young
children. People's responses to these questions have powerfully rein-
forced this practice.
Another benefit of “why” questions is that they help people develop
more positive identity conclusions that displace those associated with
the problem definitions of their lives. For example, upon encouraging
Sarah to evaluate her cutting as a requirement of self-hate, I learned
that she would have a question about this if her life were beginning
anew and if cutting was a fate that was assigned to her future:


M: I am interested in the fact that you would have a small
question about this. Pd like to know what the question
would be. And I would also like to understand why you
would have a question about cutting as a destiny that was
served up to you.

Sarah: About why I would have a question about this?

M: Yeah.

[PAGE 061]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 50 er


50 Maps of Narrative Practice


Sarah: | cant believe that you are asking me this.

M: Why?

Sarah: Well, everybody else questions the cutting. But
you're asking me why I would question it?

M: Yes, that's what I am asking.

Sarah: Surely you'd know. Of all people, surely you'd
know. Aren't you supposed to be doing something about
this cutting? Isn't that your job?

M: I know the inside of my life, not the inside of your life.
I know what questions I might have, but not the questions
that you might have. So, what’s this question about cutting
all about?

Sarah: Surely you'd think that I was entitled to a little
something in life!

M: Entitled to a little something! So this question has
something to do with what you might be entitled to, even
in some small way?

Sarah: I’m a bit surprised to hear myself saying this, but I
guess so.


M: These are important words. These words about a sense
or an idea of being “entitled to a little something in life.”
Would it be okay if I ask some more questions about this,
as I’m curious about the history of this idea? About the his-
tory of this sense in your life?

Sarah: Yeah, that'd be fine.

M: Okay. Is there any story about your history that you
could tell me that would give me some understanding of
why you can relate to this idea of being entitled to a little
something?

[PAGE 062]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 51 +


Externalizing Conversations 51


During this conversation, Sarah gave voice to a conclusion about
her life that contradicted all of the negative conclusions about her
identity that were associated with self-hate—that she was “useless,”
“worthless,” and “deserved what she got.” I did not point out this con-
tradiction, as it is not my intention to directly challenge these nega-
tive conclusions. To some extent, these negative conclusions had
already been unpacked in the context of the exposé that was devel-
oped in the early part of the externalizing conversation. At this point,
as Sarah gave voice to the conclusion about being entitled to some-
thing in life, I initiated the first of a series of conversations that devel-
oped a relational and historical account of this conclusion. These con-
versations were structured according to the re-authoring conversa-
tions map that is presented in Chapter 2. Among other things, these
re-authoring conversations gave rise to a range of understandings
about what Sarah intended for her life and about what she held pre-
cious.

It is in this way that externalizing conversations open gateways to
rich story development. As in my work with Sarah, it is usually the
case that the intentional understandings—understandings that life is
shaped by specific intentions that people actively and willfully engage
and embrace in their acts of living—and the understandings about
what people give value to, are defined at this point in the development
of externalizing conversations, and provide an excellent point of entry
to re-authoring conversations. This was also clearly illustrated in my
work with Virginia and her parents:


M: Virginia, you said that you didn't like this supervision.
That it doesn’t help. And that it is frustrating.

Virginia: Yeah.

M: Would you say a little about why you don’t like it?

Virginia: Why I dont like it?! It’s not just that I don't like
it. I don't need it!

M: Why don't you need it:

[PAGE 063]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 52 +


52 Maps of Narrative Practice


Virginia: I’m perfectly capable of looking after my own
life.

M: Has this always been true?

Virginia: No, of course not! Not when I was just a kid.

M: Okay. What is it about your life that you are looking
after now that you wouldn't have been so capable of look-
ing after when you were younger?

Virginia: Well, for a start, I know how to look after my own
safety now.

M: All right. This suggests two things to me. First that
there are aspects of your life that you are valuing. Second,
that you have developed some skills in maintaining your
safety. Does this fit?

Virginia: Yeah, that's it. Of course.

M: Could I ask you some questions that would help me to
understand these developments?

Virginia: Sure, go ahead.


As the conversation evolved, with the assistance of further ques-
tions from me, Virginia provided an account of what she was now
valuing about her life and of the skills she had developed in looking
out for her own safety. Her parents, Verity and Russell, were surprised
and reassured to hear this. This account of what Virginia was valuing
about her life, and of her skills in maintaining her own safety, provided
a point of entry to a re-authoring conversation in which these devel-
opments were more richly described. In this re-authoring conversa-
tion some of the themes of Virginia’s life became linked to some of the
significant themes of Verity and Russell’s life. This provided a founda-
tion for Virginia to take further initiatives in caring for her life and to
refine these initiatives in the maintenance of personal safety. This was
an antidote to the preoccupation that had been shaping of Verity and
Russell’s responses to their daughter.


ee

[PAGE 064]

MapNarrReprint 7/22/10 2:02 PM Page 53 er


Externalizing Conversations 53


In making a strong case for the resurrection of the “why” question,
I want to acknowledge that I do not expect an immediate response to
these questions. The internal understandings of human action that
are the vogue of contemporary Western culture have displaced the
intentional understandings that are so important in challenging nega-
tive conclusions people have formed about their lives, in redefining
people's identity, and in rich story development. When human action
is assumed to be a manifestation of some element or essence of a self
that is determined by human nature, or by a distortion of human
nature, it is rare for people to be invited to reflect on their lives in a
way that allows them to determine what certain events might say
about what is important to them. Because of this, “why” questions can
be very unfamiliar to people, and an “I don’t know” response to them
can often be expected. When faced with these responses, therapists
can provide more support to people in their effort to answer so that
they have an experience of being knowledgeable about these matters.
This support can be given in many ways. I have already mentioned
the importance of prefacing “why” questions with an editorial account
of the principal effects of the predicaments and problems of people’s
lives, and of the evaluations that have been made about them.
Another option in responding to an “I don’t know” is to invite people
to extend the review of the principal effects of their problems and
predicaments, and of their evaluation of these effects, so that there is
a more solid foundation for reflection in relation to the “why” ques-
tions that have been introduced.
Yet another option is for the therapist to provide an account of how
others have responded to similar “why” questions: “A couple of weeks
ago I was meeting with a guy who was facing a similar situation, and
who was also very dissatisfied with similar developments in his life.
When I asked why he was so dissatisfied, he said that ____. Would
this fit with any conclusions that you might have, or would your
response be entirely different?” These accounts of the responses of
others usually contribute to a foundation for people to be knowledged
about the “why” of their own position on developments in their lives;
another person's “why” account often makes it possible for people to
distinguish their own position.


e

[PAGE 065]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 54 er


54 Maps of Narrative Practice


When young children give an “I don't know” response to “why”
questions, the introduction of a guessing game can be helpful. A
child’s parents and siblings can be invited to make guesses about why
the child is concerned about certain developments. The therapist can
also contribute to this stock of guesses. The child can then be inter-
viewed about whether any of these guesses came close to the mark,
and if so, about what words the child would use to develop this “why.”
If the child determines that these guesses have not come close, he or
she can be interviewed about how he or she knows this. This usually
helps the child put words to his or her own “why.”


The “statement of position map” provides a foundation for the chart-
ing of externalizing conversations. This map was implicit in my early
work with externalizing conversations, and others have found it help-
ful in the development of their own work. I recommend using the map
to chart externalizing conversations as a skills-development exercise,
and I have provided examples of this on the following pages. Figures
1.1 and 1.2 represent the charting of my first two meetings with
Jeffrey and his parents; Figure 1.3 represents the charting of my first
meeting with Sarah; and Figure 1.4 represents the charting of my ini-
tial consultation with Virginia and her parents.
Although the map presents a linear account of the progression of
these conversations, in actual practice, a strictly linear progression is
rarely seen and clarifications of people’s responses at one level of
inquiry can bring about revisions in, or the embroidering of, responses
at another level of inquiry. For example, at the outset of my conversa-
tion with Spencer and his parents, encopresis was characterized in
terms that were particular and experience-near. Then the effects of
this problem on the lives and relationships of family members were
briefly explored, and this provided a foundation for the further char-
acterization of the problem in terms of what this might say about Mr.
Mischief’s intentions for Spencer’ life and future. This back-and-
forth development is usually evident at all levels of inquiry.

[PAGE 066]



ddraırenden


Figure 1.1 Charting Externalizing Conversations (Jeffrey, First Session)

LO/ET/E


9£:p
Justifying the evaluation

Wd


SBea
Evaluating the effects of
GG
the problem’s activities


Mapping the effects of the
problem’s activities


Negotiating an experiencenear and particular
definition of the problem
extended characterization of AHD via identification of its twinship
Y


10 20 30 40 50 60

Time in minutes


3

[PAGE 067]



ddraı endey
Figure 1.2 Charting Externalizing Conversations (Jeffrey, Second Session)


accounts of what family members want for LO/ET/E

their relationships with one another, of
Justifying the evaluation what Jeffrey wants for his relationship with
peers, and of Jeffrey’s plans for his own life 9£:p

Wd
—expressions of dissat-

Evaluating the effects of etn with cos ebed
the problem’s activities — disapproval of AHD'
9:
plans for Jeffrey's life


—interference in education &
in relationships with par- consequences
Mapping the effects of the P P of tactics &
> ore. ents, teachers, & peers .
problem’s activities a strategies ren-
—precipitates headaches & e
dered visible
grumpy moods


mean, exposé
Negotiating an experience- | mutated version of naughty, & ae
near and particular AHD rendered tricky char- AHD's
definition of the problem | visible in painting acteristics urposes
identified Pumpos


10 20 30 40 50 60

Time in minutes



[PAGE 068]



ddpı enden


Figure 1.3 Charting Externalizing Conversations (Sarah)

LO/ET/E


9€:p
Justifying the evaluation
entitlement to Wd
something in life


ebed
Evaluating the effects of toning th
the problem's activities questions me
LS
rquirements of
self-hate


Mapping the effects of the

problem's activities what self-hate told Sarah about herself &
what it required her to do to her body


Negotiating an experience- self-hate’s agenda for
near and particular Sarah’s life, its attidefinition of the problem identification tudes toward her, &
of self-hate its ways of speaking


10 20 30 50 60

Time in minutes


en

[PAGE 069]


vI PNARN

dd
Figure 1.4 Charting Externalizing Conversations (Virginia)


LO/€T/€


v
Justifying the evaluation —intention to maintain personal safety
—accords value to aspects of own life 9€
—knowledge and skills in maintaining personal safety
Wd


Evaluating the effects of
Sbea
the problem's activities ; f
experience O
gs
frustration with this


Mapping the effects of the
> «eye parental
problem’s activities ;
preoccupation

& supervision


Negotiating an experiencenear and particular problem characterized
definition of the problem as “complications” and
as parental concern


10 20 30 40 50 60

Time in minutes


e

[PAGE 070]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 59 +


Externalizing Conversations 59


Conclusion


This chapter provided an overview of externalizing conversations. It
was not my intention to include all that might be said about external-
izing conversations, for this would take more than a book. Rather, |
wanted to provide a “living” account of some of the possibilities asso-
ciated with these conversations by illustrating all of the ideas dis-
cussed with examples of actual practice.
It has at times been assumed that externalizing conversations are
complicit with a trend toward constructing people as autonomous
units of thought and action. It is my hope that I have given sufficient
illustration of the practices of externalizing conversations to dispel
this assumption. These practices make it possible for people not only
to redefine their relationship with the problems of their lives, but also
to redefine their relationships with each other in ways that acknowl-
edge each other’s voices in the development of their sense of identity.
This type of redefinition fosters a more relational sense of identity.
I do not introduce externalizing conversations in all of my consul-
tations. There are many occasions upon which I meet with people
whose identities are not defined by the problems that they are seek-
ing consultation over, and upon which a point of entry to rich story
development is immediately apparent. However, the option for exter-
nalizing conversations is one that I am ever conscious of and one that
I will continue to develop.
There is a sense in which I regard the practice of externalizing to
be a faithful friend. Over many years, this practice has assisted me to
find ways forward with people who are in situations that were consid-
ered hopeless. In these situations, externalizing conversations have
opened many possibilities for people to redefine their identities, to
experience their lives anew, and to pursue what is precious to them.

[PAGE 071]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 60 $

[PAGE 072]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 61 E


2
Re-Authoring
Conversations


hen people consult therapists they tell stories; they speak
about the history of the problems, predicaments, or dilem-
mas that have brought them to therapy, and they provide an
account of what led to their decision to seek help. In doing this, peo-
ple link the events of their lives in sequences that unfold through time
according to a theme or plot. These themes often reflect loss, failure,
incompetence, hopelessness, or futility. Along with this, people rou-
tinely refer to the figures or protagonists that feature in the story, and
they share with therapists their conclusions both about the identity of
these figures or protagonists and about their motives, intentions, and
personal characteristics. Re-authoring conversations invite people to
continue to develop and tell stories about their lives, but they also
help people to include some of the more neglected but potentially sig-
nificant events and experiences that are “out of phase” with their dom-
inant storylines. These events and experiences can be considered
“unique outcomes” or “exceptions.”
It is these unique outcomes or exceptions that provide a starting
point for re-authoring conversations. They provide a point of entry to
the alternative storylines of people’s lives that, at the outset of these
conversations, are barely visible. The therapist facilitates the develop-
ment of these alternative storylines by introducing questions that

[PAGE 073]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 62 E


62 Maps of Narrative Practice


encourage people to recruit their lived experience, to stretch their
minds, to exercise their imagination, and to employ their meaning-
making resources. People become curious about, and fascinated with,
previously neglected aspects of their lives and relationships, and as
these conversations proceed, these alternative storylines thicken,
become more significantly rooted in history, and provide people with
a foundation for new initiatives in addressing the problems, predica-
ments, and dilemmas of their lives.


Liam and Penny


Penny called for an appointment for her son, Liam, age 15, whom she
was very concerned about. She'd had these concerns for many years,
but they had been significantly exacerbated by events of the last sev-
eral months. Liam had dropped out of school 4 months ago, had
become more withdrawn and rarely emerged from his bedroom, and
was now quite noncommunicative and morose. On the day prior to
calling for an appointment, Penny had happened across his diary. She
initially experienced a dilemma about whether or not to read it, but
the magnitude of her concern for him resolved this dilemma for her.
Upon reading some recent entries, Penny found her worst fears con-
firmed. The diary entries were saturated with the theme of suicide—
in fact, they suggested that Liam had already made two suicide ges-
tures. She also learned that Liam considered himself to be messed-up
and damaged, and that he felt socially and emotionally paralyzed.
Penny was now desperate and had called me on the advice of her
general practitioner. She said that she was losing hope for Liam’s life.
She had hoped that Liam would improve following their escape from
his father, a highly abusive man, some 2 years ago. Liam's father had
subjected both Liam and Penny to regular assault, and he had been very
skilled at controlling both of them and at cutting off any escape routes.
Penny explained that she'd tried many times to free herself and her son
from this situation, but Liam's father had always managed to circum-
vent these efforts through acts of intimidation and threats of retribution.
These threats of retribution were principally against Liam’s life.


ee

[PAGE 074]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 63 er


Re-Authoring Conversations 63


Penny described a little of the nightmare that she and Liam had
endured, and she talked of the guilt that she harbored over what Liam
had gone through during this time. She also spoke of the rising hopes
and expectations that she had experienced upon finally escaping the
violence of this man. However, to her dismay, things did not improve
for Liam as she had expected they would. Liam remained disinter-
ested in life. He had become increasingly isolated and increasingly
convinced that the future held nothing for him. He could now see no
horizons of possibility in his life.
I said that I would clear a space in my schedule to meet with Liam,
and I wondered aloud how Penny might succeed in getting him to see
me. Penny said that this would not be easily achieved, as Liam was
likely to be resentful about her taking this initiative without consult-
ing him and would be furious with her if he sensed that she had read
his diary. When I asked Penny about what she thought the conse-
quences of this fury would be, she predicted that Liam would not sur-
face from his room for a few days, and that even when he did he
would only speak to her grudgingly for several more days. She was
worried that making this appointment without consulting him would
contribute to his negative frame of mind and lessen the chances that
he would agree to talk with me. But she was also sure that if she did
consult Liam about making an appointment, he would veto the idea.
Penny wanted my thoughts about how she might encourage Liam
to attend this appointment. I suggested that she ask him to join her in
this meeting with me for her sake. Penny could honestly tell him that
she had become increasingly preoccupied with worry about recent
developments in his life, and that this preoccupation was now quite
pervasive. She could let him know that it was making it virtually
impossible for her to concentrate on the tasks that were required of
her in her workplace, to engage in any semblance of a social life, and
to feel emotionally present in her connections with others. She could
also explain that it was interfering with her sleep and her appetite, and
that she was now at a crisis point and in desperate need of help.
Penny thought that there was a good chance that Liam would
respond to this request by agreeing to come with her to the appoint-
ment. By the end of our telephone conversation she had decided to


ee

[PAGE 075]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 64 er


64 Maps of Narrative Practice


tell him about reading his diary, explaining that she'd felt driven to do
so by these preoccupying concerns. Penny thought that she’d be able
to weather the storm provoked by this admission, and she requested
an appointment in 4 or 5 days time.
Five days later I met with Penny and Liam. Liam made it clear that
he was attending this meeting for his mother’s sake, and that he would
not have come on his own account. For the present, he'd “agreed to
come along for the ride” and would reserve his judgement about the
value of this exercise. However, he did confirm that he’d concluded
that his life was pointless, that it wasn’t worth trying anything, that he
was messed up, and that he had no future. Following is a transcript of
our conversation, taken from a point about 15 minutes into our first
meeting.


Liam: So my mum’s told you about what we went through.
But it was worse for her than it was for me.

M: It was worse for her than it was for you. In what way?

Liam: He gave me a pretty hard time, but it was more
painful for my mother.

M: Were you concerned about what she was being put
through?

Liam: What do you think?!

M: Sometimes people get a bit desensitised to violence,
and even though it still has a devastating impact on their
lives and on the lives of others they become a bit oblivious
to this.

Liam: Well, I wasn't oblivious to this. Of course I was con-
cerned about what he was doing to her. It was terrible.

M: Tell me, were you more concerned for yourself or your
mother? Or were you concerned about yourself and your
mother equally?

Liam: Mum, of course.

[PAGE 076]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 65 er


Re-Authoring Conversations 65


M: Penny, does it surprise you to hear this?

Penny: Which part?

M: That through all this time Liam was more concerned
for you than he was for himself.

Penny: Well, no. It doesnt surprise me at all.

M: Liam was more concerned for you than he was for him-
self. What did this suggest to you about what was impor-
tant to Liam? Or about what was precious to him?

Penny: Well... I know we've had our ups and downs, and
recently Liam hasn't seemed to want me in his life much.
But I have still always known that I was precious to him.

M: How did you know this?

Penny: A mother just knows these things about her son.
These are just the things that a mother knows.

M: Are there any stories that you can tell me about Liam’s
actions that would be a reflection of what was precious to
him? Of what he held precious? Are there any stories you
can tell me about him that would help me to understand
how you knew this about him?

Penny: There's probably lots of things that I could tell you.
But I don't really know where to start right now.

M: Any starting point would be fine. If you could think of
some story that you could tell me about Liam’s actions that
reflect the extent to which he held your life precious, that
would be helpful to me.

Penny: Okay. Maybe I could start by telling you about
something that happened when he must have been, let's
see, about 8 years old. It was on a Sunday morning. I dis-
tinctly remember that. And his father was hitting me for
some reason or other. I always tried to protect Liam from

[PAGE 077]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 66 $


66 Maps of Narrative Practice


seeing these things, but it wasn't always possible to do this.
Anyway, suddenly I heard glass smashing. This interrupted
his father, and we went into the living room and I saw that
someone had thrown a rock through the front window.
There was broken glass all over the carpet. I looked out the
window, and guess who I saw running off down the street?
It was Liam. His father took off after him and Liam copped
a thrashing for this. I tried to stop it. It was one of those
really terrible situations. I felt torn apart by it.

M: Liam distracted his father when he was hitting you?

Penny: Yes, he distracted his father. He did this even
though he would have known that he was going to cop a
belting for it.

M: Liam, do you remember this?

Liam: Nope.

M: Penny, what sort of step was it that Liam took on that
Sunday all of those years ago? How would you name this
action of Liam’s?

Penny: | dont really know, I haven't thought much about
it. | guess that I even tried to put it out of my mind because
of what happened to Liam. And because I wasn't able to do
anything. It was horrible. I wouldn't be talking about this if
you hadn't asked about it.

M: Did Liam’s action fit with that sense of pointlessness
about life that he was just talking about? Was this an exam-
ple of Liam just accepting what life was serving up to him?

Penny: No, no. Of course not. There’s no way that it fits
with that.

M: Okay, so what does it fit with? What might be a good
way of naming this action that Liam took in throwing a rock
through the window?

[PAGE 078]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 67 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 67


Penny: Well, like I said, I haven't really thought about this.
But I suppose when I think about it, yes, the word that I
would use is that he was “protesting.” He was protesting
what I was being put through.

M: So “protest” might be a good name for this step.

Penny: Yeah. For sure. This would fit.

M: Liam, can you relate to this way of describing what you
did?

Liam: Nope. Not really.

M: Penny, you witnessed Liam protesting what you were
being subject to when he was just 8 years old. What did
this suggest to you about him? What's your guess about
what this reflects in terms of what Liam values?

Penny: It told me that he was a very brave little boy. That
he had lots of courage. Now when I think back, it just
seems even more amazing to me that he did such a thing.

M: It told you that he was a brave little boy. And what did
it say to you about what might be important to him? About
what he values?

Penny: Well, I guess it says a lot to me about what was
important to him about fairness. Which, when I think
about it, is surprising, isn’t it, because he'd seen so much
that was unfair.

M: So it suggested courage and fairness. Can you relate to
what you're hearing, Liam?

Liam: Nope. Not that bit about courage. And not really
that stuff about fairness either.

M: Okay. You don’t relate to this. Can you see how your
mother might have arrived at those conclusions about
courage and fairness?

[PAGE 079]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 68 +


68 Maps of Narrative Practice


Liam: Well, yeah. I guess so. I suppose I can see how she
would get this idea about me.

M: Penny, were you surprised to see that it was Liam run-
ning off down the street? Did the action that Liam took on
the basis of where he might have stood on fairness surprise
your

Penny: No, of course not. I think that I would have always
known this about Liam.

M: How would you have known that?

Penny: It's just another one of the things that a mother
knows, I guess!

M: Is there anything that you could tell me about Liam,
when he was younger still, that would have confirmed what
you knew about him? That would fit with what you under-
stood about how important fairness was to him?

Penny: Okay. Let's see. Well, yes, there is something.
Probably lots of things. Liam must have been about 6 and
he was in his second semester in first grade at school.
There was this development where he started to come
home from school ravenous. He was just so hungry. He'd
raid the pantry and the fridge. So I'd give him some extra
treats for his lunch. This went on for nearly 2 weeks and by
the end of this time he was taking a truckload of food to
school! So I spoke to his teacher about this. She didn't
know what was going on, but she said that she’d put him
under observation. Guess what she discovered? You
remember, Liam. I told you about this before.

Liam: I don't remember hearing this before.

Penny: What the teacher discovered was that Liam was
sitting with three other kids at lunchtime. Two of these
kids were very sad because they were missing their moth-
ers. The other kid was being terribly teased and was also


Ze

[PAGE 080]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 69 er


Re-Authoring Conversations 69


really sad and crying a lot. And what did Liam do? He was
sharing his treats with them to make them all feel better.

Liam: I don’t remember this.

M: What was it like for you as Liam’s mother to hear this
about him?

Penny: Mostly I just felt so proud of him for this. So proud
of my son that he could do this for these other kids despite
all of the heartache we were going through at home.

M: Penny, I'll ask you to paint the scene a bit more for
Liam as you drive home after this meeting. Maybe you
could describe the lunchroom, tell him what you know
about these other kids, remind him about what this teacher
looked like. Anything that might help him to remember
this.

Penny: Okay, I'd be glad to.

M: What sort of step was this? You told me that you
thought Liam felt paralyzed in life. It doesn’t sound like
this fits with paralysis, or with being messed up.

Penny: No, it’s definitely not about that. I’m trying to think
of a good word. Let's see. Perhaps rescuing. Yes, I think you
could say that he was rescuing these boys.

M: Rescuing these other children. Can you relate to that,
Liam?

Liam: | suppose so.

M: Can you think of another name for what you did?

Liam: No. Rescuing will do.

M: Penny, when I asked you about Liam throwing a rock
through the window, about what this said about him, you
said that it told you about his courage and about what was
important to him in terms of fairness. Thinking back on


aoe

[PAGE 081]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 70 er


70 Maps of Narrative Practice


these events when he was 6 years old, how did this act of res-
cuing other children shape your picture of him as a person?

Penny: Let's see. Well, I know it said a lot about where he
stood on injustice, even as a little boy.

M: About where he stood on injustice. Anything else?

Penny: Like what?

M: Just about anything else that might have been impor-
tant to him, or about what life was about for him.

Penny: Maybe about the sort of ideas that Liam had about
what life should be about. Maybe about the dreams of a lit-
tle boy. Yeah, that's it. And about how he wouldn't let those
dreams go.

M: Liam, I keep asking you the same question. Can you
relate to what your mum just said about justice and about
the dreams of a little boy?

Liam: Yeah, I guess. | suppose I can. Yeah, I guess it fits.

M: Let me get this clear. Are you saying that you can relate
to this bit about justice and about what you thought life
should be about? About the dreams of this little boy?

Liam: Yeah. Yeah, I guess so.

M: Just a guess?

Liam: No, not just a guess. It adds up.

M: Pd like to understand how it is that you're able to relate
to what you're hearing from your mum about these stories
of your history, and about the conclusions that she has
reached about who you are in light of these stories.

Liam: Okay.

M: So, the question is: How is it that you are able to relate
to what you are hearing? Is there anything that’s happened


a

[PAGE 082]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 71 $


Re-Authoring Conversations 71


in your life in more recent years that would fit with what
we are learning about you? With what I am hearing about
where you stand on what is fair and just, with what your
mother is telling me about what’s important to you, about
the dreams of this little boy?

Liam: | don't know. What do you think, Mum?

Penny: Maybe when you spoke to your cousin Vanessa.

Liam: Yeah. That's probably it.

M: What?

Liam: Well, just before we got away from my dad I told my
cousin what I was going through because I thought it was
a bit like the same for her. Like, Vanessa’s dad is my dad's
brother, and he’s pretty rough, and I thought that she was
probably having a hard time. Anyway, she did tell me about
some of the bad things that were happening to her, and it
was appalling. She'd never told anybody else.

M: What happened then?

Penny: About 8 months after Liam reached out to her the
child-protection people got involved. And this was all
because of what Liam did.

M: Your mum's words were that you “reached out” to your
cousin. Would this be a good name for this step, or would
some other name fit better?

Penny: No, that works. “Reaching out” works.

M: I’ve learned about actions in rescuing. I’ve learned
about actions that have to do with protest. And I’ve learned
about actions that have to do with reaching out. All of these
are part of your history. Putting these actions together,
what's this all about?

Liam: What do you mean?

[PAGE 083]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 72 +


72 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: If these were all part of a direction in life, or part of a
project in life, or a particular pathway that you have been
taking in life, what might be a good name for this?

Liam: Well, | suppose .. . Do you mean, well, something
like . . . well, like salvaging something. Maybe “salvaging
life” or something?

M: Yeah, yeah. Salvaging life.

Liam: Maybe it's more like . . . No, that will do.

M: Okay. It's about salvaging life. Okay, this says a lot to
me. Penny, what's your guess about what this suggests to
me about what Liam is aspiring to?

Penny: Well, it might be saying something to you about a
young man who's had strong beliefs about what's okay and
what's not. Maybe it would be saying something to you
about a young man who knows something about what
makes life worthwhile.

M: Yeah, that fits with my image. Liam?

Liam: I don't know. It’s a bit hard for me to... . Maybe
you'd be thinking about that stuff about what Mum said
about my dreams and things. You know, what she said.

M: About your dreams about what life should be about?

Liam: Yeah.

M: And about how you held onto those dreams despite
everything?

Liam: Yeah, I guess so. I guess that would be it.

M: That fits too. I have a question. The things that we've
been learning about you, about what’s important to you,
about what you've held onto despite what you've been
through, about dreams about what life should all be about,
about how this is all about salvaging life. If you were able


o

[PAGE 084]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 73 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 73


to keep this knowledge about your life close to you, to draw
support from this, what's your guess about what this would
make possible for you? What is your guess about what this
would make possible for you to do? What steps could you
take that would fit with this?

Liam: Phew! That's a big one.

M: Sure it is. But we've got lots of time.

Penny: Maybe you could try contacting that guy Daniel
who used to be your friend. You haven't seen him for ages.
Daniel's also had some pretty hard times, didn't he?

Liam: Yeah. He's been through a lot.

M: What do you think of Penny's idea about contacting
him?

Liam: I reckon I could do this. I could give him a buzz and
maybe catch up with him.

M: What sort of step would this be if you took it? Would
you say it was a step in rescuing, protesting, or reaching
out? Or something else?

Liam: I dunno. Probably reaching out.

Penny: Yeah, it would be an example of that. I know that
this boy Daniel is still having a pretty hard time.

M: Penny, if you witnessed Liam taking this step to contact
Daniel, what would this suggest to you about his purposes
in doing this?

Penny: Maybe something about him wanting to get more
connected to his hopes. Yeah, something about picking
these hopes up again.

M: How would that be for you, to witness Liam picking up
these hopes again?

[PAGE 085]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 74 +


74 Maps of Narrative Practice


Penny: Brilliant. Just brilliant.

M: Liam?

Liam: Yeah. She's right. It would have to be about picking
up the hopes again.

M: Okay. It would be to pick up the hopes again. I'd like to
ask a few questions about what you've been learning about
yourself as we've been piecing together the steps that
you've been taking in salvaging your life. What do you think
this reflects about your plans for your future?

Liam: Well, I guess...


Liam did contact Daniel. This was the first of many steps that he
subsequently took that were in harmony with the conclusions about
his life and his identity that were developed and redeveloped in my
conversations with him and his mother. Liam became increasingly
engaged in these conversations, and in our fourth meeting he
announced that he'd realized that the depression he'd been struggling
with for so long was “fake depression.” In stating this, he was not
implying that he had been “faking it” or that he still didn't have a sig-
nificant struggle with this depression. Rather, he had reached this
understanding on the basis of a realization that he wasn’t messed up:
“How could you have real depression if you weren't messed up?” Liam
went on to say that “even fake depression is pretty bad, but at least
you know that you are going to recover from it, and that makes a big
difference.”
In the course of our meetings there were many other dimensions to
the development of this storyline of Liam’s life. In one of these, he
experienced his life linked to the stories of his great uncle's life around
shared themes, intentions, and values. This great uncle was a man
who had played a vitally important role in rescuing Penny from the
abuses that she was subject to in her family of birth.
At the eighth and final meeting, I'd been reviewing with Liam many
of the initiatives he’d been taking in recent months. Not all of these

[PAGE 086]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 75 E


Re-Authoring Conversations 75


had been well received by others. For example, some of Liam's initia-
tives in reaching out had been rejected by others. Upon inquiring
about how he had responded to these rejections and about why this
hadn't discouraged further initiatives, Liam said that he was a veteran
of rejection, and that, on account of this, there wasnt much new for
him to experience in terms of rejection. Further, he said that he was
“probably much better equipped to cope with rejection than other
kids who were from more normal families and who might not have
experienced the rejections that I’ve been through.”
When I asked him about the implications of this for his future,
Liam concluded that future rejections were less likely to be a hurdle
to him than they might be for many others. This constituted a new
realization for Liam that was particularly important to him—that he
was uniquely abled on account of all that he had been through, rather
than disabled. Although we would continue to lament the abuses that
he’d been subject to for a good part of his life, we were all able to cel-
ebrate these conclusions about Liam's uniquely abled status.


The Structure of Re-authoring Conversations


This chapter is about a map for narrative practice that I refer to as a
“re-authoring conversations map.” It has been a mainstay of my ther-
apeutic practice for many years. In the original development of this
map I drew significantly from Jerome Bruner's (1986) explorations of
the narrative metaphor, specifically from his analysis of literary texts.
In this analysis it was his goal to develop further understandings of the
meaning-making activities that people engage with in everyday life.
I was drawn to this because I perceived parallels between the activ-
ity of writing literary stories and therapeutic practice. It was my per-
ception that just as “great storytelling . . . is about compelling plights
that . . . must be set forth with sufficient subjunctivity to allow them
to be rewritten by the reader, rewritten so as to allow play for the
reader's imagination” (Bruner, 1986, p. 35), effective therapy is about
engaging people in the re-authoring of the compelling plights of their

[PAGE 087]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 76 $


76 Maps of Narrative Practice


lives in ways that arouse curiosity about human possibility and in ways
that invoke the play of imagination.
In describing the participation of readers in the construction of the
storyline of the text, Bruner referred to the “journey” metaphor and to
the “mapmaking” analogy. This resonated for me strongly. This
metaphor and this analogy seemed clearly pertinent to therapeutic
practice. Bruner (1986) made the following observation about the
readers engagement with texts:


. . as they begin to construct a virtual text of their own, it
is as if they were embarking on a journey without maps—
and yet, they posses a stock of maps that might give hints,
and besides, they know a lot about mapmaking. First
impressions of the new terrain are, of course, based on
older journeys already taken. In time, the new journey
becomes a thing in itself, however much its initial shape
was borrowed from the past. (p. 36)


Similarly, when people first engage in therapeutic conversations in
which they reconstruct the stories of their lives, it often seems that
they are departing from the familiar and embarking on journeys to
new destinations without maps. And yet, as this reconstruction gath-
ers pace, it quickly becomes clear that these people are drawing from
a stock of maps relevant to journeys already taken, and that they know
a lot about mapmaking. In the course of these conversations, the “new
journey” becomes a “thing in itself, however much its initial shape was
borrowed from the past.”
With literary texts, the narrative mode “leads to conclusions not
about certainties in an aboriginal (original and objective) world, but
about the varying perspectives that can be constructed to make expe-
rience comprehensible” (Bruner, 1986, p. 37). Bruner proposed that
this contribution to increasing the options available to the reader to
render experience comprehensible is the great writer’s gift: “The great
writers gift to a reader is to make him a better writer” (Bruner, 1986,
p. 5). In a similar vein, in therapeutic contexts the narrative mode can

[PAGE 088]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 77 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 77


open space for “varying perspectives that can be constructed to make
experience comprehensible,” and skillful practice can assist people to
have a fuller participation and stronger voice of authorship in the con-
struction of the stories of their lives.

Texts and Dramatic Engagement


According to Bruner (1986):


Stories of literary merit, to be sure, are about events in the
real world, but they render that world newly strange, res-
cue it from obviousness, fill it with gaps that call upon the
reader, in Barthes’s sense, to become a writer, a composer
of a virtual text in response to the actual. In the end it is
the reader who must write for himself what he intends to
do with the actual text. (p. 24)


Well-structured novels are highly absorbing of the reader. This is
because the authors of these novels exercise an array of options in
fostering dramatic engagement in the reading of the text. This pro-
vides readers with many invitations to contribute to the development
of the storyline and to live out the drama of it. For example, well-
structured novels have many gaps in the storyline that must be filled
in by the reader. Good writers do not spell everything out, and the
reader is required to participate in putting two and two together to
make four, in bringing together specific events into sequences
unfolding across time in the revealing of the plot, and in reconciling
this with the underlying theme of the story. Thus, the reader is given
the task of developing and reconciling what Frank Kermode (1981)
referred to as sjuzet (the linear events that make up the plot) and fab-
ula (the timeless underlying theme) in the “fusion of scandal and
miracle.”
But it is not just the sjuzet and the fabula that are further developed
and reconciled in the reading of literary texts. Bruner, borrowing sig-
nificantly from the literary theorists Griemas and Courtes (1976), pro-
posed that stories are principally composed of two landscapes—a

[PAGE 089]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 78 er


78 Maps of Narrative Practice


“landscape of action” and a “landscape of consciousness.” The land-
scape of action is the “material” of the story and is composed of the
sequence of events that make up the plot (sjuzet) and the underlying
theme (fabula). The landscape of consciousness is composed of “what
those involved in the action know, think, or feel, or do not know, think
or feel” (Bruner, 1986, p. 14). This landscape features the conscious-
ness of the protagonists of the story and is significantly composed of
their reflections on the events of the landscape of action—of their
attribution of meaning to these events, of their deductions about the
intentions and purposes that are shaping of these events, and of their
conclusions about the character and identity of the other protagonists
in light of these events. Like the development of the plot of the land-
scape of action, the development of the landscape of consciousness
must be reconciled with the fabula, the timeless underlying theme of
the story:


In any case the fabula of a story—its timeless underlying
theme—seems to be a unity that incorporates at least three
constituents. It contains a plight into which characters
have fallen as a result of intentions that have gone awry
either because of circumstances, of the “character of char-
acters,” or most likely of the interaction between the two...
What gives the story its unity is the manner in which
plight, characters, and consciousness interact to yield a
structure that has a start, development, and a “sense of
ending.” (Bruner, 1986, p. 21)


Just as there are gaps in the landscape of action to be filled in by
the reader, there are gaps to be filled in the landscape of conscious-
ness. Although this landscape of consciousness is partially developed
through the author's representation of the consciousness of the pro-
tagonists, and at times through a representation of the authors own
consciousness, the readers contribution to the landscape of con-
sciousness is a significant factor in the unification of the text, and in
its thick or rich development.

[PAGE 090]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 79 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 79


In entering this landscape of consciousness, the reader attributes a
range of intentions and purposes to the actions of the protagonists and
reaches conclusions about their character and identity. The term land-
scape of consciousness is apt, for it not only represents the conscious-
ness of the protagonists and of the author of the story, but also is sig-
nificantly filled out by the reader's consciousness.
Numerous mechanisms are employed by good writers to draw the
attention of readers to these gaps in the landscapes of action and con-
sciousness, and to encourage them to step into these gaps with their
imagination and lived experience. For example, authors rely signifi-
cantly on the triggering of presupposition to achieve this. They also
take care in the arrangement of these gaps: For instance, good writers
ensure the provision of adequate clues and structure the text to invoke
the curiosity and fascination of the reader. Good writers arrange these
gaps to ensure that they are not so large as to exhaust the reader's
meaning-making resources in their efforts to fill them, and not so
insignificant as to lose the interest of the reader. It is mechanisms like
these that provide the reader with a foundation for dramatic engage-
ment with the text, that give readers “a good workout” in the develop-
ment of a virtual text that invariably exceeds the actual in significant
aspects. Bruner quoted Iser (1978), who employed the term indeter-
minacy to describe this characteristic of the literary text:


. . it is the element of indeterminacy that evokes the text
to communicate with the reader, in the sense that they
induce him to participate both in the production and the
comprehension of the work's intention. (p. 61)


In summarizing Iser's understanding of the function of this indeter-
minacy, Bruner (1986) observed that:


It is this “relative indeterminacy of a text” that “allows for a
spectrum of actualizations.” And so, “literary texts initiate
performances of meaning rather than actually formulating
meanings themselves.” (p. 24)

[PAGE 091]

MapNarrReprint 7/22/10 2:02 PM Page 80 E


80 Maps of Narrative Practice


Texts and Life


I was quite drawn to this dual landscape conception of story structure
on account of my interest in the narrative metaphor and in the activ-
ity of meaning-making. My interest in the narrative metaphor is
founded on the assumption that people give meaning to their experi-
ences of the events of life by taking them into frames of intelligibility,
and on the conclusion that it is the structure of narrative that provides
the principal frame of intelligibility for acts of meaning-making in
everyday life. This assumption is associated with a premise that it is
in the trafficking of stories about our own and each others’ lives that
identity is constructed. The concepts of landscape of action and land-
scape of consciousness bring specificity to the understanding of peo-
ple's participation in meaning-making within the context of narrative
frames.
In borrowing this dual-landscape conception from literary theory, it
is not my intention to propose that life is simply a text. But I do
believe, as do many others, parallels can be drawn between the struc-
ture of literary texts and the structure of meaning-making in everyday
life. The concepts of landscape of action and landscape of conscious-
ness seem relevant to an understanding of people's meaning-making
activities in life, of the construction of personal narratives, and of the
constitution of people's identity through everyday acts of life. Further,
these concepts seem particularly relevant to the therapeutic task,
which I believe to be principally about the redevelopment of personal
narratives and the reconstruction of identity.

Implications for Practice


Further parallels can be drawn between the structure of literary texts
and the structure of therapeutic practice. The authors of texts call the
attention of the reader to gaps in the storyline and encourage readers
to fill in these gaps by stretching their minds, by exercising their imag-
ination, and by recruiting their lived experience. Rich story develop-
ment is the outcome. Therapists who prioritize rich story development
in their consultations with people do the same. These therapists draw
people's attention to gaps in the storylines of their lives—usually these


o

[PAGE 092]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 81 er


Re-Authoring Conversations 81


are gaps in what might be called the “subordinate” storylines of peo-
ple’s lives—and encourage them to fill in these gaps by stretching
their minds, exercising their imagination, and recruiting their lived
experience. And just as good writers give considerable thought to the
arrangement of these gaps, so too do therapists who have a focus on
rich story development. These therapists take care in constructing the
scaffolding of these gaps, ensuring that they are not so large as to
exhaust people’s meaning-making resources in their effort to fill in the
gaps and not so insignificant as to lose people’s interest. The outcome
of this is that people experience a good workout in the context of ther-
apeutic conversations and become dramatically engaged with many of
the neglected events of their own lives.
I have found these concepts of landscape of action and landscape
of consciousness to be invaluable in the development of my practice.
They have provided me with a foundation for the refinement and fur-
ther development of therapeutic conversations that contribute to rich
story development, and they have offered a map for the shaping of,
and for the charting of, these therapeutic conversations. These are
conversations that invariably contribute to the rich development of
some of the alternative storylines of people’s lives, the traces of which
are ever-present in people’s expressions of living. In these conversa-
tions, people’s lives become more evidently multistoried as these
traces are identified and thickened. In this chapter I give illustrations
of these conversations and reflect on the significance of the concepts
of landscape of action and landscape of consciousness in the shaping
of them.
In describing the relevance of these concepts to therapeutic prac-
tice, I have substituted the term identity for consciousness. | made this
substitution because of the confusion that arose around my use of this
term. At times, the mention of consciousness was taken to denote an
awareness of injustices. At other times this term was taken to denote
the mechanism of the mind that is engaged when making choices. At
yet other times it was taken to denote actions in life that were con-
scious in contrast to actions that were products of “the unconscious.”
Because of this confusion, I will substitute “landscape of identity” for

[PAGE 093]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 82 +


82 Maps of Narrative Practice


“landscape of consciousness” in this chapter, while acknowledging
that the term identity represents only part of what is intended in the
term consciousness as it is applied to the analysis of literary texts and
as it might be applied to the understanding of rich story development
in therapeutic contexts.
Apart from dispelling this confusion, the term landscape of identity
does have benefit in the emphasis that it gives to the significance of
the therapeutic endeavour—it emphasizes the irreducible fact that
any renegotiation of the stories of people’s lives is also a renegotiation
of identity. Awareness of this encourages a fuller engagement on
behalf of therapists with the sort of professional ethics that are asso-
ciated with an acknowledgment of the life-shaping aspects of thera-
peutic practice and a greater awareness of the responsibility that we
have for what we say and do in the name of therapy.
In drawing parallels between the structure of literary texts and the
structure of therapeutic practice, | am not proposing that the activity
of the author of a literary text and the therapist's role in therapeutic
conversations are synonymous. For one thing, the author of a literary
text invites the reader to enter into a storyline, the fundamental
shape of which is provided by the author. Therapists, on the other
hand, are not the originators of the storyline that is developed in the
therapeutic conversation. Although they may be acquainted with
many possible stories about life (which makes it possible for them to
draw people's attention to significant events that stand outside of the
dominant storylines), they are not the primary author in the sense
that the author of a literary text is. Rather, therapists privilege the
voices of the people consulting them in the attribution of meaning to
selected events of their lives, in their interpretation of the links
between these events and the valued themes of their lives, in their
deduction about what this reflects in terms of what is important to
them, and in their conclusions about what this suggests about their
own and each other’s identities. Whereas the author of a literary text
is quite centered in the development of the storyline, the therapist is
displaced from the center.
To summarize, in therapeutic conversations that are oriented by re-

[PAGE 094]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 83 er


Re-Authoring Conversations 83


authoring conversations, the concepts of landscape of action and
landscape of identity assist the therapist in building a context in
which it becomes possible for people to give meaning to, and draw
together into a storyline, many of the overlooked but significant events
of their lives. These concepts also guide the therapist in supporting
people to derive new conclusions about their lives, many of which will
contradict existing deficit-focus conclusions that are associated with
the dominant storylines and that have been limiting of their lives.


Mapping the Re-Authoring Conversation With Liam and
Penny


The following review of my conversation with Liam and Penny pro-
vides a practical illustration of the therapeutic implications of the con-
cepts of landscape of action and landscape of identity. This review is
accompanied by diagrams that chart the therapeutic conversation
onto the re-authoring conversations map, which consists of two hori-
zontal timelines—a landscape of action and a landscape of identity
(consciousness).

[PAGE 095]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 84 +


Figure 2.1 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)


Landscape of Identity
—intentional understandings
—understanding about what is
accorded value
—internal understandings
—tealizations, learnings,
knowledges


Landscape of Action
—events

—circumstances
—sequence

—time
—plot
Remote History Distant History


M: (Figure 2.1) Liam was more concerned for you than he was
for himself, what did this suggest to you about what was
important to Liam? Or about what was precious to him?
Expressions that in some way contradict dominant themes can pro-
vide clues to the alternative stories of people's lives. Resignation and
the futility of existence were dominant themes in Liam’s account of
his existence, and yet here Liam expressed significant concern for his
mother. I first responded to this contradiction with questions that
facilitated the further expression of this concern. I then asked a ques-
tion that encouraged Penny to reflect on Liam’s concerns and to give
voice to what this suggested was important to him. This was a land-
scape of identity question.


Figure 2.2 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)


Landscape of Identity
—intentional understandings
—understanding about what is
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges


Landscape of Action
—events

—circumstances —
— sequence Account of: pitching
—time rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


Ze

[PAGE 096]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 85 er


Accords value
to: Penny’s life


landscape of identity question
(referenced to developments
in the landscape of action of
the subordinate storyline)


Account of: Liam’s
expression of concern

Recent History Present Near Future


M: (Figure 2.2) Are there any stories that you can tell me
about Liam’s actions that would be a reflection of what was
precious to him? Of what he held precious? Are there any sto-
ries you can tell me about him that would help me to under-
stand how you knew this about him?
Penny asserted that Liam’s expression of concern reflected the high
value that he gave to her life—that he held her precious. This account
of what Liam gave value to can be considered a conclusion about
identity. In response to this, I asked Penny for a story about Liam's
actions that would reflect this conclusion. This was a landscape of
action question, as it triggered an account of specific events of Liam’s
history that exemplified this conclusion about what he gave value to.


Accords value
to: Penny's life

A

landscape of action question
(referenced to developments
in the landscape of identity of

_ the subordinate storyline)


Account of: Liam’s
expression of concern


Recent History Present Near Future


e

[PAGE 097]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 86 +


Figure 2.3 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)


Landscape of Identity
—intentional understandings
—understanding about what is
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges

Initiative characterized as: 1
Landscape of Action act of protest
—events

—circumstances a
—sequence Account of: pitching
—time rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


M: (Figure 2.3) Penny, what sort of step was it that Liam took
on that Sunday all of those years ago? How would you name
this action of Liam’s?
Upon hearing the story about Liam’s distracting his father by pitch-
ing a rock through the window, I asked Penny about what sort of name
she would give to this action. Although this event was available to her
conscious memory, it hadn’t been characterized. My question was the
first of several that provided the context for the naming of this action
as “protest.” This was a landscape of action question about the depic-
tion of a neglected but significant event of Penny and Liam’s history.


Figure 2.4 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)

Landscape of Identity Accords value to: fairness
—intentional understandings Internal understanding: courage
—understanding about what is A
accorded value
—internal understandings landscape of identity
—realizations, learnings, question (referenced to
knowledges developments in the
landscape of action of the
Landscape of Action subordinate storyline)
—events

—circumstances _Luk
— sequence Account of: pitching
—time rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


a

[PAGE 098]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 87 er


Accords value
to: Penny’s life

A


Account of: Liam’s
expression of concern


Recent History Present Near Future


M: (Figure 2.4) Penny, you witnessed Liam protesting what
you were being subject to when he was just 8 years old. What
did this suggest to you about him? What’s your guess about
what this reflects in terms of what Liam values?
Seven years after the event itself, Liam’s act of pitching a rock
through the window is defined as “protest.” Penny led the way with
this naming, and at this time Liam was unable to relate to the mean-
ing that she gave to his action. The question about what this action
may have reflected about his personhood and about what he valued
was one of several landscape of identity questions that provided a
foundation for the verification of his bravery and for the voicing of a
conclusion about the importance of fairness to Liam.


Accords value
to: Penny’s life


Initiative characterized as:
_— act of protest


Account of: Liam’s
expression of concern


Recent History Present Near Future



[PAGE 099]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 88 +


Figure 2.5 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)

Landscape of Identity Accords value to: fairness
—intentional understandings Internal understanding: courage
—understanding about what is Y A
accorded value
—internal understandings landscape of action
—realizations, learnings, question (referenced to
knowledges developments in the
landscape of identity of Initiative characterized as: _—
Landscape of Action the subordinate storyline) act of protest
—events

—circumstances e &
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


M: (Figure 2.5) Is there anything that you could tell me about
Liam, when he was younger still, that would have confirmed
what you knew about him? That would fit with what you
understood about how important fairness was to him?
Liam was now more engaged in the development of the subordi-
nate storyline of his life. This was reflected in his willingness to enter-
tain an understanding of how his mother reached these conclusions
about his bravery and about the value that he gave to fairness. This
question about events in his younger life that might bear out his
mother’s knowledge about his bravery and his valuing of fairness was
a landscape of action question that aroused, in Pennys memory, the
story of the school lunchroom.


Figure 2.6 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)

Landscape of Identity Accords value to: fairness
—intentional understandings Internal understanding: courage
—understanding about what is A
accorded value
— internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges
Initiative characterized as: ae
Landscape of Action act of rescue Initiative characterized as: 7
— events Y act of protest
—circumstances >
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


oe

[PAGE 100]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 89 er


Accords value
to: Penny’s life


Account of: Liam’s
expression of concern


Recent History Present Near Future


M: (Figure 2.6) What sort of step was this? You told me that
you thought Liam felt paralyzed in life. It doesn’t sound like
this fits with paralysis, or with being messed up.
This was a landscape of action question. Penny responded to it by
defining Liam’s support of other children as acts of “rescue.” Liam was
now participating more actively in the development of the subordinate
storyline, on this occasion more immediately relating to this naming
of his 6-year-old actions.


Accords value
to: Penny’s life



Account of: Liam’s
expression of concern

Recent History Present Near Future


o

[PAGE 101]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 90 er


Figure 2.7 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
of what life should be about Accords value to: fairness
Landscape of Identity
—intentional understandings Accords value to: justice Internal understanding: courage

—understanding about what is A A
accorded value
landscape of identity question
—internal understandings
(referenced to developments in
—realizations, learnings,
the landscape of action of the
knowledges
subordinate storyline)

Landscape of Action Initiative characterized as: Initiative characterized as: —
—events act of rescue act of protest

—circumstances E >> al
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


M: (Figure 2.7) Penny, when I asked you about Liam throwing
a rock through the window, about what this said about him,
you said that it told you about his courage and about what was
important to him in terms of fairness. Thinking back on these
events when he was 6 years old, how did this act of rescuing
other children shape your picture of him as a person?
The naming of these 6-year-old actions provided a solid foundation for
this question about how this shaped Penny’s image of her son. This was a
landscape of identity question, and it gave rise to conclusions about
Liam’s position on justice and his dreams about how life should be. These
conclusions were in accord with the emergent storyline and as such were
thickening of it. At this point, Liam not only acknowledged that he could
relate to these conclusions, but he also actually verified them.


Figure 2.8 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
Landscape of Identity of what life should be about Accords value to: fairness
intentional understandings Accords value to: justice Internal understanding: courage
—understanding about what is A
accorded value A landscape of action
— internal understandings L_ question (referenced to
—realizations, learnings, developments in the
knowledges landscape of identity of
Initiative characterized as: the subordinate
Landscape of Action act of rescue storyline)


ae
—events

—circumstances

—sequence
Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


m

[PAGE 102]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 91 E


Accords value
to: Penny’s life

A


Account of: Liam’s
expression of concern


Recent History Present Near Future


M: (Figure 2.8) So, the question is: How is it that you are able to relate to
what you are hearing? Is there anything that’s happened in your life in more
recent years that would fit with what we are learning about you? With what
I am hearing about where you stand on what is fair and just, with what your
mother is telling me about what’s important to you, about the dreams of this
little boy?
As Liam had now verified positive conclusions about his identity that were not on his
map at the outset of the interview, I sensed that the time was ripe to directly consult
him in the further development of the subordinate storyline. This question, which was
addressed to Liam, encouraged him to review events in more recent history that might
exemplify this conclusion about his position on justice. This was a landscape of action
question, and it brought to mind the action he took in talking to his cousin about his
history of abuse by his father. This initiative was an expression of his concern for her.


Accords value
to: Penny’s life

—=A


Initiative characterized as:
act of protest


Account of: disclosure Account of: Liam’s
to cousin expression of concern

Recent History Present Near Future


bo

[PAGE 103]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 92 er


Figure 2.9 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
Landscape of Identity of what life should be about Accords value to: fairness
—-intentional understandings Accords value to: justice Internal understanding: courage
—understanding about what is A A
accorded value
—internal understandings


A
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges
Initiative characterized as:

Landscape of Action
act of rescue Initiative characterized as: —
act of protest
FR
—events

—circumstances
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


M: (Figure 2.9) Your mum’s words were that you “reached out”
to your cousin. Would this be a good name for this step, or
would some other name fit better?
Penny had joined Liam in the recounting of the story about the ini-
tiative he took with his cousin, and in the context of this she had
named it as an act of “reaching out.” This question was a landscape of
action question that encouraged Liam to participate in this naming.


Figure 2.10 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
of what life should be about Accords value to: fairness
Landscape of Identity
Accords value to: justice Internal understanding: courage
—intentional understandings
—understanding about what is A A
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges
Initiative characterized as:
act of rescue
Landscape of Action Initiative characterized as:

a
—events act of protest
—circumstances
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


Counterplot named:
salvaging life


a

[PAGE 104]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 93 er


Accords value
to: Penny’s life

A


Initiative characterized as:
reaching out


Account of: disclosure Account of: Liam's
to cousin expression of concern


Recent History Present Near Future


M: (Figure 2.10) I’ve learned about actions in rescuing. I’ve
learned about actions that have to do with protest. And I’ve
learned about actions that have to do with reaching out. All of
these are part of your history. Putting these actions together,
what this all about?
By this time Penny and Liam had recounted several stories about
his actions that were congruent with these positive conclusions about
his identity. This question was a landscape of action question that
encouraged Penny and Liam to link these stories to a theme and that
called for a naming of this theme. The “salvaging life” theme that
Liam gave voice to constituted a counterplot, as it contrasted signifi-
cantly with the plot of the dominant storyline: paralysis in life.


Accords value
to: Penny’s life


Initiative characterized as:
reaching out


Account of: disclosure Account of: Liam’s
to cousin expression of concern


Recent History Present Near Future


bo

[PAGE 105]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 94 er


Figure 2.11 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
of what life should be about Accords value to: fairness
Landscape of Identity
Accords value to: justice Internal understanding: courage
—-intentional understandings
— understanding about what is A A
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges
Initiative characterized as:
act of rescue
Landscape of Action Initiative characterized as:
—events e act of protest
—circumstances >
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


Counterplot named
calhrersiroey ke


M: (Figure 2.11) Okay. It’s about salvaging life. Okay, this says
a lot to me. Penny, what’s your guess about what this suggests
to me about what Liam is aspiring to?
This was a landscape of identity question that encouraged further
reflection on the counterplot of Liam’s life in the generation of more
of the sort of identity conclusions that were emergent in the subordi-
nate storyline development. The response to this question established
that Liam had strong beliefs about what is not okay that he had a
knowledge about what makes life worthwhile. This allowed his
dreams about what life should be about to become more clearly
defined.


Figure 2.12 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
of what life should be about Accords value to: fairness
Landscape of Identity
—intentional understandings Accords value to: justice Internal understanding: courage

—understanding about what is A
A
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges
Initiative characterized as:
act of rescue
Landscape of Action Initiative characterized as:
—events e act of protest
—circumstances
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


Counterplot named:
salvaging life


a

[PAGE 106]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 95 er


Intentional understanding: dreams
of what life should be about
Accords value to: beliefs about what is okay Accords value
Knowledge of: what makes life worthwhile to: Penny life

A —
landscape of identity question (refer-
enced to developments in the landscape
of action of the subordinate storyline)


Initiative characterized as:
reaching out


Account of: disclosure Account of: Liam’s
to cousin expression of concern


Recent History Present Near Future


M: (Figure 2.12) That fits too. I have a question. The things that we’ve been
learning about you, about what's important to you, about what you've held
onto despite what you've been through, about dreams about what life should
all be about, about how this is all about salvaging life. If you were able to keep
this knowledge about your life close to you, to draw support from this, what's
your guess about what this would make possible for you? What is your guess
about what this would make possible for you to do? What steps could you
take that would fit with this?
In this question I summarized the identity conclusions that had been named in
the course of our conversation, and I invited Liam and Penny to speculate about
possibilities for action in his life that would be in harmony with these conclusions.
This was a landscape of action question that encouraged the sketching of the sub-
ordinate storyline into the near future. In response to this, Liam embraced a pro-
posal to contact Daniel, an old school friend whom he'd not seen for 18 months.

Intentional understanding; dreams
of what life should be about
Accords value to: beliefs about what is okay Accords value
Knowledge of: what makes life worthwhile to: Penny’s life

A A

landscape of action
question (referenced to
~~ developments in the
landscape of identity of
Initiative characterized as: the subordinate
reaching out storyline) >.

Account of: disclosure Account of: Liam’s Account of: proposal
to cousin expression of concern to contact Daniel


Recent History Present Near Future


o

[PAGE 107]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 96 er


Figure 2.13 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
Landscape of Identity of what life should be about Accords value to: fairness
—intentional understandings Accords value to: justice Internal understanding: courage

—understanding about what is A A
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges
Initiative characterized as:
act of rescue
Landscape of Action Initiative characterized as:
—events e act of protest
—circumstances >
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


Counterplot named:
salvaging life


M: (Figure 2.13) What sort of step would this be if you took
it? Would you say it was a step in rescuing, protesting, or
reaching out? Or something else?
This was a landscape of action question that invited Liam to name
the step that Penny had proposed and that he had embraced. This was
distinguished as a further step in reaching out.


Figure 2.14 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
Landscape of Identity of what life should be about Accords value to: fairness
—intentional understandings Accords value to: justice Internal understanding: courage

—understanding about what is A A
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges
© Initiative characterized as:
act of rescue
Landscape of Action Initiative characterized as:
—events u act of protest
—circumstances +
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


Counterplot named:
salvaging life


a

[PAGE 108]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 97 +


Intentional understanding; dreams
of what life should be about
Accords value to: beliefs about what is okay Accords value
Knowledge of: what makes life worthwhile to: Pennys life

A N


Proposd initiative characterized
ea: as reaching out
Initiative characterized as:
reaching out DI.
—|

Account of: disclosure Account of: Liam's Account of: proposal
to cousin expression of concern to contact Daniel

Recent History Present Near Future


M: (Figure 2.14) Penny, if you witnessed Liam taking this step
to contact Daniel, what would this suggest to you about his
purposes in doing this?
This was landscape of identity question that invited reflection on
the reaching-out initiative that had been proposed. This question
engaged Penny in the generation of more of the sort of positive iden-
tity conclusions that characterized the subordinate storyline.


Intentional understanding; dreams Intentional understanding;
of what life should be about —wanting to be more connected
Accords value to: beliefs about what is okay Accords value with hopes
Knowledge of: what makes life worthwhile to: Penny’s life -plans for the future
A | A
landscape of identity question
(referenced to developments in the land-
scape of action of the subordinate storyline)
A


Proposd initiative characterized
Initiative characterized as:
as reaching out
reaching out


Account of: disclosure Account of: Liam’s Account of: proposal
to cousin expression of concern to contact Daniel

Recent History Present Near Future


— ==

[PAGE 109]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 98 er


98 Maps of Narrative Practice


This zigzagging movement through time is characteristic of re-
authoring conversations. In the context of this movement, subordi-
nate storylines become deeply rooted in history and are thickened.
There is a regularity in this example that is not found in all re-
authoring conversations; landscape of action and landscape of identity
questions do not always follow each other in such an orderly fashion.
There were many other options for rich story development in this con-
versation with Liam and Penny, and I believe that at various points it
would have been equally viable for me to ask a series of landscape of
action questions before another landscape of identity question. For
example, I might have asked more questions about precursors to the
rock-throwing incident that might have provided an account of the
foundations of this action. Perhaps this would have provided another
route to the story of the school lunchroom. I might have also initiated
an inquiry into the specific links between the lunchroom, rock-throw-
ing, and reaching-out incidents—for example, about how each inci-
dent was linked to and might have led to the next—before introduc-
ing further landscape of identity questions.
These considerations about some of the other options for rich story
development underscore the fact that the options I chose were not the
correct options, but rather just the ones that seemed most available at
the time of this conversation. I did not prepare any of my questions in
advance; these questions were responses to Penny and Liam's
responses. Had I met with Liam and Penny on a different day, the cir-
cumstances would not have been identical, and I have no doubt that
the route taken in our conversation would have been different.
Regardless of the route taken, the re-authoring conversations map
can be a very helpful guide in the journey of therapeutic conversa-
tions, leading to destinations wherein subordinate storylines are richly
drawn. For Liam, this provided a foundation of knowledge upon
which he could proceed with his life. Liam was now in a position to
speculate about actions that he might take that would be in harmony
with new theme and identity conclusions and that would be congru-
ent with what he gives value to.
Although I have continued to employ the term subordinate storyline
in the context of this discussion, as our conversations continued over


a

[PAGE 110]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 99 er


Re-Authoring Conversations 99


several meetings it was clearly apparent that a shift had occurred in
this subordinate status. What had previously been a subordinate story-
line began to overshadow the initially dominant account of Liam’s life.


The Benefits and Purpose of Landscape of Identity
Questions

As the subordinate storyline in my therapeutic conversation with Liam
and Penny was developed, the landscapes of action and identity sup-
porting it were more richly drawn. With regard to the landscape of
action, this was achieved by encouraging Liam and Penny to bring
together specific events of his life into a sequence that unfolded across
time according to a valued theme. With regard to the landscape of
identity, this was achieved by inviting Liam and Penny to be witness to
these events, to reflect on them, and to give voice to understandings
about Liam’s life and identity that were derived from this reflection. In
this way, the landscape of identity questions I introduced sparked a
heightened state of mental activity in Liam and Penny. Among other
things, these landscape of identity questions encouraged:


e Reflections that were expressions of subjectivity (what Liam
and Penny thought of these events), of attitude (what Liam
and Penny felt about these events), of knowledge (what
Liam and Penny learned as an outcome of this reflection),
of appearance (what Liam and Penny thought these events
showed about each others lives), and of supposition (what
Liam and Penny foresaw with regard to the future)


* These terms describe specific transformations of actions in literary-text storylines. These
actions occur in the landscape of consciousness. These transformations, defined by
Todorov (1977), describe states of mental activity of protagonists, which, according to
Bruner (1986, p. 30), “thicken the connective web that holds a narrative together in its
depiction of both action and consciousness.” In the context of therapeutic practice, ques-
tions about what people think of particular events (“subjectivity”), about how they feel
about particular events (“attitude”), about what they are learning as they reflect on these
events (“knowledge”), about what these events show about each other’s lives (“appear-
ance”), and about what these events foretell (“supposition”) encourage landscape of iden-
tity development and a thickening of the subordinate storyline.


a

[PAGE 111]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 100 E


100 Maps of Narrative Practice


e The derivation of intentional understandings (of a range of
purposes, goals, plans, aspirations, hopes, and so on) and
of understandings that were centred on considerations of
value (of belief, principle, conviction, faith, and so on)
e An account of the manner of engagement with these
intentional understandings and with these considerations
of value (Penny, and, at a later stage, Liam as well,
expressed enthusiasm for some of the intentions reflected
in his actions, and they were passionate about the values
expressed in this)


Another characteristic of landscape of identity questions is the use
of the subjunctive stance (Todorov, 1977). This stance is characterized
by terms like as if, perhaps, maybe, might be, possibly, and so on. For
example: “What conclusions could be arrived at in relation to this?”
“What are some of the possible understandings of this event?” “What
might this say about what it important to you?” In my conversation with
Liam and Penny, this subjunctive stance displaced the mood of cer-
tainty and inevitability that was a pervasive feature of the accounts of
life that were given by them at the outset of our conversation. I believe
that the subjunctive stance of this inquiry had the effect of loosening
the interpretive process in Liam and Penny’s minds.
Of all the responses that are invoked by landscape of identity ques-
tions, it is the intentional understandings and understandings that are
centred on considerations of value that are the most significant with
regard to rich story development. In the following section I refer to
these together as “intentional state understandings” (following
Bruner) and contrast them with the “internal state understandings”
about human action that are more routinely part of contemporary life.


Intentional State Understandings Versus Internal State
Understandings


In my conversation with Liam and Penny, my landscape of identity
questions initially gave rise to internal state understandings of his


ee

[PAGE 112]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 101 E


Re-Authoring Conversations 101


actions. These internal state understandings featured conclusions
about his “bravery,” his “strengths,” and his “needs.” In these under-
standings, Liam's actions were interpreted as surface manifestations
of specific elements or essences that were considered to be the
bedrock of his identity—to be emanating from the center of a “self.”
However, further questions gave rise to intentional state under-
standings. Liam's actions were increasingly understood to be shaped
by a raft of purposes, values, beliefs, aspirations, hopes, goals, and
commitments. These understandings of his actions were not refer-
enced to any concept of an essential self, but instead provided an
account of what he was actively and willfully engaging with and
embracing in his acts of living. Rather than representing his actions as
essences of his identity, these intentional understandings relate to
broader considerations of life. The intentional understandings arrived
at in these conversations were in harmony with particular themes of
life to which Liam and Penny attributed overriding importance. It is
these intentional understandings, and understandings that are cen-
tred on what people give value to, that are highly significant in rich
storyline development.

Internal State Understandings


Internal state understandings portray human action as a surface man-
ifestation of specific elements or essences of a self that is to be
“found” at the center of identity. For example, in the context of inter-
nal state understandings, human expression might be interpreted as a
manifestation of any number of unconscious motives, instincts,
needs, desires, drives, dispositions, personality traits, personal proper-
ties (like strengths and resources), and so on. According to this tradi-
tion of understanding, these elements or essences are universally
present to different degrees in the human condition, and life is
derived from either the direct expression of these elements or
essences or from distortions of these elements and essences. Such
distortions are often called “dysfunctions” or “disorders.”
These internal state understandings are often associated with ideas
about intrapsychic processes that construct an account of the mech-
anisms by which the elements and essences of the self are trans-


ee

[PAGE 113]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 102 er


102 Maps of Narrative Practice


formed into human expression. At the turn of the 20th century, these
conceptions of internal states and intrapsychic mechanisms gave rise
to a specific concept of the “unconscious mind.” This achievement
represented the culmination of a number of “modern” and interlinked
developments of the preceding century or two, which included:


e The development of humanist notions of the presence of
a human “nature” that is considered to be the foundation
of personal existence and that is understood to provide the
source of human expression.
e The evolution of the concept of a “self” as an essence that
is understood to occupy the center of personal identity.
Although this idea of a self is a relatively novel idea in the
history of the world's cultures, it has been a hugely suc-
cessful idea and is today quite taken for granted in the
West.
e The progressive development, from the 17th century on,
of a new system of social control in which “normalizing
judgment” steadily displaced moral judgment.*


Over the past century, these internal state understandings of
human expression have become pervasive in Western culture—so
much so that internal state understanding have achieved a taken-for-
granted status in much of the professional and popular psychology of
this current era. It is now routinely believed that these elements and
essences of the self are ever-present in people’s lives, to be discovered


* Michel Foucault, a historian of systems of thought, provided an account of the rise of
“modern power” over the past several centuries. He asserted that this has become a prin-
cipal system of social control in contemporary Western culture. This system of social con-
trol incites people to enact “normalizing judgment” on themselves and on others in an
effort to reproduce specific norms about life and identity. In other words, people become
accomplices to a system of social control in which they exercise and act upon judgments
about life according to established norms about behavior and identity. According to
Foucault, these norms have been principally constructed by the professional disciplines
(law, medicine, psychology, and so on). This system of social control has significantly dis-
placed a system of social control that subjects people to moral judgment by representatives
of state institutions.

[PAGE 114]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 103 er


Re-Authoring Conversations 103


and revealed in the context of personal development and in the con-
text of addressing the problems of living.

Intentional State Understandings


In contrast to internal state conceptions, intentional state conceptions
of identity are distinguished by the notion of “personal agency.” This
notion casts people as active mediators and negotiators of life’s mean-
ings and predicaments, both individually and in collaboration with
others. It also casts people as the originators of many of the preferred
developments of their own lives: People are living out their lives
according to intentions that they embrace in the pursuit of what they
give value to in life; they are going about the business of actively shap-
ing their existence in their effort to achieve sought-after goals.
According to Bruner (1990), the significance that is assigned to
notions of intention and purpose, the weight that is given to notions
of values, beliefs, and commitments, and the emphasis that is given to
personal agency constitute a theory of mind that is characteristic of a
centuries-old tradition of folk psychology:


All cultures have as one of their most powerful constitutive
instruments a folk psychology, a set of more or less con-
nected, more or less normative descriptions about how
human beings “tick,” what our own and other minds are
like, what one can expect situated action to be like, what
are possible modes of life, how one commits oneself to
them, and so on. . . . Coined in derision by the new cogni-
tive scientists for its hospitality toward such intentional
states as beliefs, desires, and meanings, the expression of
“folk psychology” could not be more appropriate. (pp.
35-36)


According to this definition, people routinely employ folk psychol-
ogy in making their way through everyday life. People put the inten-
tional state notions of folk psychology into service in their effort to
understand their own lives and make sense of the actions of others.
The intentional state notions of folk psychology equip people with a


a

[PAGE 115]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 104 er


104 Maps of Narrative Practice


range of notions about what makes people “tick” and provides a foun-
dation for their responses to the actions of others.
The intentional state notions of folk psychology also come to the
fore in people’s efforts to make out just what it is that is going on in
the world more generally. Bruner (1990) illustrated the way that these
intentional state understandings shape people’s endeavour to come to
terms with the unexpected in life, provide a basis for their effort to
address obstacles and crises, and make it possible for them to come
to terms with a range of predicaments and dilemmas that confront
them in everyday life.
Bruner traced the history of the displacement, in professional and
popular psychology, of these intentional state understandings about
life and identity through the end of the 18th century and the begin-
ning of the 19th century. In this development, the mind of folk psy-
chology significantly gave way to the “unconscious mind” of the inter-
nal state psychologies.


In drawing this distinction between internal state understandings and
intentional state understandings, and in privileging the development
of intentional state understandings in re-authoring conversations, |
am not dismissing internal understandings of life and identity. There
are many cherished internal understandings of life that are quite
beautiful and that can be seen to have positive consequences. In the
context of therapeutic conversations, these understandings can be
honored.
However, these internal understandings are unlikely to yield the
sort of rich story development that is routinely an outcome of the gen-
eration of intentional state understandings. This is because internal
understandings tend to:


e Diminish the sense of personal agency (according to inter-
nal understandings, people's lives are lived by the ele-
ments and essences of the self, not shaped by actions
taken under the influence of the intentions and values that
one is embracing)

[PAGE 116]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 105 er


Re-Authoring Conversations 105


e Be isolating (according to internal understandings, human
expression is conceived as one of a singular self, not as an
expression of life that is the outcome of the story of one’s
life being linked with stories of the lives of others around
shared and valued themes)
e Discourage diversity (internal understandings are shaped
by global norms about life that promote a modern ideal of
the “encapsulated self’—one that valorizes notions of self-
possession, self-containment, self-reliance, and self-actu-
alization)


Re-authoring conversations usually exhibit a drift toward the gen-
eration of identity conclusions associated with intentional state
understandings, irregardless of the starting conditions. In my re-
authoring conversation with Liam and his mother, this drift was
accentuated by the shape of my questions, which were biased toward
soliciting the more intentional understandings of Liam’s actions:
“What did this suggest to you about what was important to Liam? Or
about what was precious to him?” “What’s your guess about what this
reflects in terms of what Liam values?” “Thinking back on these
events when he was 6 years old, how did this act of rescuing other
children shape your picture of him as a person?” “Penny, what's your
guess about what this suggests to me about what Liam is aspiring to?”
“Penny, if you witnessed Liam taking this step to contact Daniel, what
would this suggest to you about his purposes in doing this?” “What do
you think this would reflect about your plans for your future?”
To reiterate, this bias toward intentional state conclusions should
not suggest that internal state conclusions are wrong or invariably
unhelpful. The internal state conclusions that were generated in the
earlier part of my conversations with Liam were positive and validat-
ing of him. However, it was the intentional state understandings that
significantly contributed to a foundation for:


e The development of a sense of his life being joined with
the lives of others around shared themes, which was an
anathema to his prevailing sense of isolation


ee

[PAGE 117]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 106 er


106 Maps of Narrative Practice


e An experience of being knowledged about his own life,
which was an anathema to his sense of being totally lost
when it came to matters of living
e The expression of emotional responses to some of the neg-
lected but significant events of his life, which was an
anathema to the flatness of affect that was characteristic
of his existence
e Speculation about how his life and his identity might
appear to others, which was an anathema to his sense of
invisibility
e Supposition that included speculation about actions that
might be available to him and that would be harmony with
what he gave value to, which was an anathema to his sense
of hopelessness and futility
e The expression of his manner of engagement with these
intentions and values, which was an anathema to his sense
of despondency


Apart from this, the intentional state understandings that were gen-
erated in our conversation provided Liam with a sense of personal
agency, which was an anathema to his prevailing sense of paralysis.
They also provided a foundation for the expansion of a preferred sense
of identity that was continuous through his past, present, and future,
which was an anathema to his conclusions about being messed up
and damaged.


Landscape of Identity: Filing Cabinets of the Mind


Readers might find it helpful to conceive of the landscape of identity
as being composed of “filing cabinets of the mind,” each one repre-
senting a category of identity that is culturally relevant. In Western
culture, this would include internal state categories like unconscious
needs, instincts, desires, drives, dispositions, personality traits, per-
sonal properties, and so on, as well as intentional state categories like
purposes, aspirations, quests, hopes, dreams, visions, values, beliefs,


ee

[PAGE 118]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 107 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 107


and commitments. It is into these filing cabinets of the mind that peo-
ple file a range of conclusions about their own and each other's iden-
tities. These identity conclusions determine what significance is given
to specific events of people’s lives, and they are further developed
through reflection on these events and on the themes that these
events are part of. All of these conclusions, including those of the
internal state categories, significantly influence people's actions; they
are shaping of life. Put another way, it is not actually “things” like
motives and needs that shape life, but socially constructed conclu-
sions about these things.
Re-authoring conversations provide the context for the generation
of many identity conclusions that contradict those associated with the
dominant storylines of people's lives. As these conclusions are entered
into “the filing cabinets of the mind,” they deprive the dominant iden-
tity conclusions of the space that they previously occupied and of the
influence that they have had in shaping people’s existence.


Further Illustrations


Following are two additional accounts of re-authoring conversations. |
have not, however, provided a narrative commentary on them. Rather,
their inclusion is meant to give readers an opportunity to undertake
their own narrative analysis of these therapeutic conversations, and
then to refer to my charting of them.

Vivienne


Vivienne, a woman in her early forties, had been referred to me by her
general practitioner. This was one of the few referrals that Vivienne
had followed through on in recent years, and it had been quite an anx-
iety-provoking step for her to take. She had invited her partner, Adel,
to join her for moral support. At the outset of our first meeting,
Vivienne informed me that she was a “long-term sufferer of agorapho-
bia” and that on account of this she had led a very restricted life. She
had also “endured a struggle with eating disorders for 18 years,” chiefly
with anorexia nervosa and bulimia. I learned that Vivienne had been

[PAGE 119]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 108 er


108 Maps of Narrative Practice


resigned to living a highly circumscribed life, but that recently, with her
partners encouragement, had decided to embark on renewed efforts
“to get her life free” of the forces that “had for so long blighted it.”
By the time of our third interview, Vivienne had developed some
familiarity with aspects of her life that had previously been invisible to
her. Among other things, she had begun to speak of purposes for her
life that contradicted those associated with a reclusive existence, per-
sonal tastes that contradicted austerity, and desires that were quite
discordant with desires incited by anorexia nervosa. It was on this
basis that Vivienne had formulated a relatively bold plan. She had
decided to initiate contact with some relatives with whom she'd had
little to do through her adult life—two aunts, an uncle, and a
cousin—and to invite them to join her and her partner for a picnic.
Vivienne had chosen these relatives because she had fond memories
of her relationship with them in her childhood.
Vivienne had decided on a picnic for three reasons. First, she had
warm memories of picnics as a child. Second, this would be in an
open space and in defiance of the lifestyle that she'd been restricted
to by her agoraphobia. Third, the idea of a picnic was linked to a plan
to publicly take sustenance—Vivienne had not consumed food pub-
licly for over 10 years. It was her hope that the nature of the event, a
picnic, and the presence of these relatives would contribute to new
impetus to recover her life from agoraphobia and anorexia nervosa.
However, she was highly apprehensive about this proposed action and
was not at all sure that she would be able to follow through with it.
At the fourth interview, 3 weeks later, I learned that Vivienne had
followed through on her plan. The picnic had gone ahead, minus the
presence of her cousin, who had been away on vacation. Vivienne
announced that she'd not fled the open environment and had suc-
ceeded in consuming some food. Not only this, but at the end of this
event she had announced that this had been the first occasion in which
she had publicly taken sustenance in 10 years, that she had carefully
chosen the company that she wished to be in for this step, and that she
knew that this would be conducive to her success. Her aunts and uncle
had spoken of the sense of honor they experienced in being selected
for this and about the pleasure they had taken in being present.


ee

[PAGE 120]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 109 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 109


Although this had clearly been an achievement in Vivienne mind,
I was concerned that this might not be sustained against all of the
forces that had been so containing of her life. So I began to interview
her about this initiative with the hope that it might become even more
weighty and be taken into the further development of the subordinate
storyline of her life.


M: This was quite some picnic! Vivienne, I think I’ve got a
good understanding of the significance of this achieve-
ment. Do you have a name for this step that would give it
the recognition it deserves?

Vivienne: | dont think so. I haven't really thought about
this. I don't know what name would work.

M: I guess it wouldn't be a name that fits with what's been
happening around all of that self-doubt? With what you
described as “losing your life”?

Vivienne: No, no. Not in any way. I would say that this
was more about self-belief.

M: Self-belief! Do you have any thoughts about what this
act of self-belief made possible for you?

Vivienne: What do you mean?

M: Do you have any sense of how this act of self-belief
affected your life? Maybe in terms of how you felt about
yourself? Maybe in terms of new realizations about your
life? In terms of your connection with your aunts and
uncle? Anything at all.

Vivienne: Well, I do know one thing, and that is that it
brought me closer to my aunts and my uncle. I definitely
feel reconnected to my two aunts and my uncle. They were
so lovely. Yeah. It brought me closer to them, and closer to
Adel too.

M: Part of the outcome of this act of self-belief is that it

[PAGE 121]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 110 er


110 Maps of Narrative Practice


reconnected you to people who are important to you. How
do you feel about this sort of development?

Vivienne: The only thing I can say is that I’m happy about
it, of course.

M: Could you say a little about why you are happy about
this? Anything at all that would help me understand why
this is important to you?

Vivienne: This might sound a bit strange to you, especially
since I have been so disconnected for such a long time. But
I really believe that I am a people person, I really am.

M: A people person. Tell me, what sort of things are impor-
tant to a people person?

Vivienne: Well, let's, see...


My questions engaged Vivienne in loading with significance the
action she’d taken in organizing the picnic and following through on
her plan. However, I predicted that the status of these steps would be
tenuous if they were not taken into a storyline of her life. For exam-
ple, the step could be judged to be a “one-off” initiative, perhaps for-
tuitous or born of chance, or the outcome of unusual circumstances.
This tenuous status renders such steps vulnerable and unlikely to
provide the foundation of enduring change. Therefore, I began to ask
some questions to encourage Vivienne to take these steps into a sto-
ryline of her life. Initially these were very straightforward landscape of
action questions that encouraged her to bring forth the recent history
of this act of self-belief: “Do you have any idea of what you might have
done to pave the way for this act of self-belief?” “Perhaps you might
be able to think of something that helped you to prepare the ground
for this?” “Would you reflect on events leading up to this step and talk
about any that might have been implicated in this?”
Suddenly we were in a conversation about the events and circum-
stances leading up to the picnic, and this included the steps that
Vivienne had taken to keep her anxiety at bay before calling her rela-

[PAGE 122]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 111 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 111


tives about the picnic invitation. This review of the recent history of
these steps also contributed to a dramatic rendering of the events of
the picnic itself, including the moments of crisis that Vivienne went
through in the act of joining others in eating and the action that she
took to address these moments of crisis. As these steps were being
taken into a sequence of events unfolding through time, I asked
Vivienne what name she would give to this development in her life: “I
am getting a clearer picture of what led up to this act of self-belief.
What are your thoughts about what would be a good overall name for
this development? If these steps are part of a course in your life, what
would you call this course?” In response to these questions, Vivienne
concluded that this was about “reclaiming my life.”
At the next meeting our conversations again turned to the events of
the picnic, and the time seemed ripe to extend our re-authoring con-
versation:


M: Vivienne, I had some questions about what these devel-
opments in reclaiming your life might say about who you
are aS a person.


Vivienne: Well . . . I don’t know. I really don't think that
I've got an answer to that.

M: Perhaps I could ask Adel.

Vivienne: Okay, that’s fine.

M: Adel, I would be interested to have your reflections on
the picnic event. You might have some thoughts about what
Vivienne was drawing upon in taking these steps. Or maybe
some thoughts about what sustained her in following
through on this. Or you might have some ideas about what
this could say about what is important to Vivienne.
Anything like this.

Adel: Yeah, actually, I've got quite a few ideas about this.
But what comes to me first is that this says a lot about
Vivienne's perseverance and willpower.

[PAGE 123]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 112 er


112 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: Perseverance and willpower. Vivienne, can you relate to
Adel's thoughts on this?

Vivienne: Well, I guess so. But these wouldn't be my
words.

M: Do you have some other words?

Vivienne: | can’t think of any. But I guess I can connect to
what Adel is saying.

M: Okay. Perseverance and willpower aren't your words,
but you can connect to them.

Vivienne: Yeah.

M: I’m curious about how it is that you can connect to
these words. Have you witnessed anything else happening
in your life in recent times that might also be a reflection
of perseverance and willpower?

Vivienne: Well... . I’m trying to think of... maybe...
.No, that's not an example.

Adel: [ can think of something. The weekend before last
we were talking about what we would do on Saturday after-
noon. Michael, we nearly always spend Saturday afternoon
together, just the two of us. It’s our time. Anyway, I was
talking about some gardening that needed to be done, and
I remember Vivienne saying something like: “Yes, that is a
good idea, but I am a different person, and I have some
other ideas.” (turning to Vivienne) And I dont recall you
ever saying anything like that before.

Vivienne: No, I haven't. I’m sure I haven't. I mean I am
sure | haven't said anything like that before.

M: This fits with what Adel was saying about perseverance
and willpower?

Vivienne: | think it must.

[PAGE 124]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 113 er


Re-Authoring Conversations 113


M: I wonder what else this “I’m a different person, and |
have other ideas” says about you, or about your relationship
with Adel. Do you have any thoughts about this? About
what this could reflect about what's important to you? Or
about your relationship with Adel?

Vivienne: | guess . . . yeah, I guess that it maybe says that
I am valuing myself a bit. Or beginning to at least. Perhaps
that I’m not just totally nowhere.

M: You gave your opinion, so...

Vivienne: So maybe I am valuing my opinions more, that
my opinion is worth something at least.

M: Like you have a...

Vivienne: Like I have a mind of my own, and I am valuing
this more.

M: Adel?

Adel: I agree with this. It has to be about Vivienne valuing
her opinions more, about valuing her own mind. I think it
is also about where we have got to in our relationship.

M: In what sense?

Adel: The trust, I mean. That Vivienne could trust that she
could say this to me.

M: So it’s also a reflection of trust in your relationship. Of
a relationship of trust?

Vivienne: Yeah, that’s true.

M: And trust has always been . . .

Vivienne: | honestly can’t think of anything that is more
important to me.


M: Apart from Adel, can you think of anyone else who has
recognized this perseverance and willpower in you? Or who


a

[PAGE 125]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 114 +


114 Maps of Narrative Practice


has appreciated you valuing your opinions and your mind?
Or who would be aware of the importance of trust to you?

Vivienne: Helen would have. (Helen was Viviennes older
sister by 4 years. She committed suicide when she was 16
years old. Until that time, she'd done what she could to pro-
tect Vivienne from the abuses that she herself was also being
subjected to.)

Adel: Yeah, Helen for sure. From what I know about her at
least.

M: Would it be okay if I asked some questions about
Helen, and maybe about your relationship with Helen? (I
had already learned a little about Helen in my second meet-
ing with Vivienne and Adel.)

Vivienne: This used to be hard for me to talk about, and
it might still be. But right now I think it would be okay. No,
right now P'd welcome it even if it is hard.

M: If Helen could be here and part of this conversation,
and if I asked her to tell me a story about you when you
were little, a story about your perseverance and willpower,
or about you valuing your opinions, or about the impor-
tance of trust to you, what do you reckon we would be
hearing?

Vivienne: Helen really looked out for me, and she would
probably tell lots of stories.

M: Which one is most present in your mind right now?

Vivienne: She'd probably tell you about some of the trou-
ble I got into at school. I remember that everything was just
too much for me and I wasn't really coping with anything.
All it took to send me over the top was a mean school-
teacher, and I had this really mean teacher in seventh
grade, and one day I just lost it. I went totally wild, and I
can't even remember much about what I did, except that I


ee

[PAGE 126]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 115 $


Re-Authoring Conversations 115


just tore everything up and wrecked the classroom. But I
do remember that I got sent to the principal and had to
stand there for what seemed like hours to think about what
I'd said and done and about how I would fix it. But I would-
n't agree that I was the one in the wrong. And then sud-
denly Helen turned up. How she found out about this I
don’t know, because the senior school was a whole block
away. Anyway, she started going for the principal. You know
what I mean. Telling the principal where to go and how to
manage his teachers, about what a disgrace his school was,
and so on. Then she went to hit him, and wow, before long
it was like a riot. I’d joined in too, and there were people
everywhere all of a sudden and all sorts of things happen-
ing, and it seemed to go on forever. We sure got into a lot
of bother over this, from my father as well.

M: That's a very moving story.

Adel: Yeah. I haven't heard all of these details before.

Vivienne: It hasn't been in my mind. Maybe I haven't
wanted to think about it because things just went from bad
to worse after that.

M: What’s your guess about what Helen appreciated about
you back then?

Vivienne: | don't have to guess. I know that she appreci-
ated how determined I was not to give in.

M: And about your mind?

Vivienne: Yeah. I’m sure she'd say that she appreciated the
fact that I had my own mind.

M: What do you think this event might have told Helen
about what is important to you, or about what you wanted
for your life?

Vivienne: About what I would have wanted? About what's

[PAGE 127]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 116 +


116 Maps of Narrative Practice


important to me? Well, I’m thinking about the trust thing.
It was so strongly there between the two of us. And maybe
the fact that I wouldn't give in. Helen would say that this
meant that I was holding onto some fantasy about what life
could be.

M: Fantasy? Any other word?

Vivienne: Yeah. “Hope” would be better.

M: Could I ask some questions about that hope?

Vivienne: Sure.


The details about the events surrounding the crisis at school, and
about how they might have confirmed some of Helen’s conclusions
about Vivienne's identity, marked the beginning of a deeply moving re-
membering conversation. I will not provide the details of this here, as
the subject of re-membering conversations is covered in the next
chapter of this book.
At the end of this conversation, I asked Vivienne to speculate about
what might be possible for her if what Helen knew about her identity
was more available to her to draw on in taking further steps in the
reclaiming her life. I also consulted both Vivienne and Adel about


Figure 2.15 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Vivienne)
8. Intentional understanding:
—holding onto a fantasy about life
—maintaining relationship with hope
Landscape of Identity 7. Accords value to: one’s own mind

—intentional understandings 6. Internal understanding: determination
—understanding about what is A
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges


Landscape of Action
—-events

—circumstances
—sequence 5. Account of:
—time the school riot
—plot
Remote History Distant History


m

[PAGE 128]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 117 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 117


what circumstances might be arranged that would be favorable to
Vivienne's desire to stay in touch with this knowledge about her iden-
tity. In response to these questions, Vivienne named three steps that
would be congruent with what Helen knew about her, and they both
had some thoughts about what would make it possible for Vivienne to
keep this knowledge about her identity close to her in the coming
weeks. At the next meeting I learned that Vivienne had taken two of
these steps.
Over a period of 18 months we had many more conversations that
contributed to the further development of the landscapes of action
and identity of the subordinate storyline characterized by the
“reclaiming my life” theme. This took in many of Vivienne’s initiatives
in challenging the restrictions of agoraphobia and the dictates of
anorexia nervosa. At the 18-month follow-up I learned that Vivienne
had established a life for herself “out there in the world” from which
she was drawing pleasure, and although she still struggled at times
with insecurity in open spaces and with “discouraging thoughts” about
food and weight, they were no longer preoccupying concerns.
Figure 2.15 shows my charting of the re-authoring conversation
with Vivienne and Adel. The up arrows indicate landscape of iden-
tity questions and the down arrows indicate landscape of action
questions.


4. Accords value to:
—one’s own opinions
—one’s own mind 2. Intentional understanding:
—a relationship of trust perseverence and willpower

A A


AA
EAS
3. Account of: 1. Account of: 9. Account of:
weekend before last the picnic episode proposal of three steps

Recent History Present Near Future


Sa

[PAGE 129]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 118 +


118 Maps of Narrative Practice


David


David, age 11, and his parents, Pauline and Fred, were referred by a
social service agency that had had extensive involvement with this
family. In response to yet another crisis precipitated by David's
actions, Pauline and Fred were close to the conclusion that nothing
more could be done to resolve this situation, and they were seriously
considering “bailing out”—seeking alternative living arrangements for
David, away from the family home. Early in our first meeting there
was an opportunity to engage in an externalizing conversation about
trouble and its effects on the lives and relationships of these family
members. In this conversation Pauline and Fred, and then David as
well, spoke fully of their experience of this trouble.
Once this externalizing conversation was well established—when
“trouble” was not collapsed so solidly onto David's identity—circum-
stances were right for the identification of some of the events of his
life that contradicted trouble’s agenda. In response to my questions
about this, Fred told me a story about a recent family visit to the
beach. Fred had met an old friend there, and they'd been locked in
absorbing reminiscences for some time. Toward the end of this
exchange, Fred suddenly become aware of the circumstances that had
made this possible—he wasn't constantly being called upon to address
the trouble that David usually got into on these occasions.


M: Please say a bit more about why you are telling me
about this?

Fred: Well, I hadn't seen Geoff for nearly 20 years, and
he’d been my best friend when I was young. The only rea-
son we got to have such a good talk about old times was
that David wasn’t so much into trouble. This didn’t really
occur to me until the end.

M: David, do you remember this? This day at the beach?

David: Yep.

M: So, what was going on for you?

[PAGE 130]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 119 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 119


David: Dunno.

M: What do you think, Fred? What’s your guess about
what was going on for David?

Fred: Well, maybe it was just one of those things that
come along once in a while. For some reason David was
just getting along with everyone. It just seemed to come out
of the blue. But it sure was nice.

M: Pauline, what do you think about this?

Pauline: I don't know. I wasn’t there at the time.

M: David, on this day at the beach, were you there for
trouble, or were you there for something else?

David shrugs.

M: (turning to Fred) Do you think that David was there for
trouble, or do you think that he was there for something
else?

Fred: Something else, I guess.

M: Pauline?

Pauline: Yeah. I'd say that. He was there for something
else.

M: (referring to understandings derived in the earlier exter-
nalizing conversation) Let's go back to what we figured out
about trouble, about what trouble was out for. To wreck
friendships with other kids. To paint a negative picture of
David in everybody's eyes, and in his own eyes. ‘To build a
bad reputation for him that puts everyone off. To create
hardship in David's connection with his mum and dad. To
demoralize David's father. To...

Fred: Well, obviously it didn’t succeed this time, so that’s
something. But then, it was only for one day, and then not
even a whole day. Just an hour or two.


ee

[PAGE 131]

MapNarrReprint 7/22/10 2:02 PM Page 120 E


120 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: However long it was, if David wasn’t there for trouble,
what was he doing there?

Fred: Well, I guess what happened is that David just resis-
ted trouble for a while. He must have resisted the trouble.

M: That’s your guess. That this was about resistance?

Fred: On this occasion I would say so. Yes, Pd say it fits.
But I'd sure like to see more of this.

M: David, does this fit for you? Were you resisting trouble
on that day at the beach?

David nods yes.

M: Do you know what your father means by using the word
resistance?

Dawid shakes his head no.

M: Would you define this for David? Would you spell it out
for him?

Fred: Well, its like this, David...


Fred provided David with an account of what he meant by resist-
ance, which included some practical examples of actions that typified
this. It became quickly apparent that David was rather taken with this
description. I then asked him if he thought that “resisting trouble” was
a reasonable characterization of his actions at the beach, and he didn’t
hesitate in confirming this. This response led us into a conversation
about the actual and potential consequences of this expression of resist-
ance in David's life and in his relationship with his parents and others.
As the events of this recent visit to the beach had now been ren-
dered newly significant, I began to ask questions that I hoped would
assist David and his parents in taking these events into a storyline:


M: P'm curious, David. How did you manage to resist trou-
ble at the beach in the way that you did?


o

[PAGE 132]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 121 er


Re-Authoring Conversations 121


David shrugs.

M: Can you think of anything that happened before this
that could have prepared the way for you to resist trouble?
Can you think of anything that might have helped you get
ready to resist trouble?

David shakes his head no.

M: (turning to Pauline and Fred) Did you see anything in
David's life in the lead-up to this that might have paved the
way for him to resist trouble at the beach? Anything that
might have given him a foundation for this, that would have
helped him to get ready for this?

Pauline: Nothing that I can think of. We have had a hell
of a rough ride with David, and it has been even worse over
the last year or so. We haven't seen any real smooth
patches, if that's what you're looking for.

M: Fred?

Fred: I cant think of anything either. Like I said, it’s just
one of those things, I guess.

M: So neither of you saw anything that could have pre-
pared you for what David did at the beach?

Pauline: No, not me.

Fred: Nope.

M: David, if no one saw anything, could it be that you
secretly got ready to resist trouble, and then just surprised
everyone with this?

David shrugs.

M: I am asking you about any secret preparations, because
it was a surprise to everyone, wasn't it?

David now grins and nods yes.

[PAGE 133]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 122 er


122 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: What does that nod mean, David?

David: It was a secret.

M: Well who would have guessed that?!

Fred: We should have! (Pauline laughs.)

M: Okay, David, let us in on the secret. How did you get
ready for this? What did you get up to?

David: Well, I...um...I... Actually it was on the
Sunday before. I’d got into the worst trouble on Saturday,
and Pd got up late.

Pauline: Yeah, that’s right. We'd had the police around and
everything. It was terrible!

M: Sure doesn’t sound good. Back to you, David.

David: It was the Sunday, and I'd got up late, see. And I
looked in the mirror in the bathroom, and there I was look-
ing back, and I sure didn't look too good. So, I looked down
at the sink, and then up at the mirror again, and said to
myself: “Son, you've got to do something about this, your
life is going down the drain.”

Pauline and Fred look at each other quizzically,

M: And that was the start of it!

David: Yep.

M: That’s something! And how did this prepare you for
resisting trouble at the beach?

David: Don’t know. But it must have.

M: (turning to Pauline and Fred) What do you think was the
link between what David did on that Sunday morning and
what he did in resisting trouble at the beach a week later?


In response to this question, Pauline and Fred began to speculate


ee

[PAGE 134]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 123 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 123


about the possible links between these two events. David subsequently
confirmed some of this speculation. It was in this speculation, and in
David's confirmation, that his actions in resisting trouble at the beach
were taken into a sequence of events unfolding across a week's time.
These actions at the beach were no longer singular, but had been incor-
porated into an emergent storyline. With this development, the time
seemed ripe for me to ask David to name the associated theme or plot.


M: All right, we're now all getting a little more clarity on
these events in David's life. David, I know that for you the
word resistance is a good word for what you did at the
beach. But is there another word that would be a good
word for all of this, from what you did on the Sunday morn-
ing right up to resisting trouble at the beach? Maybe there
is another word for what you were doing for your own life.

David shrugs.

M: This wasn't about going along with trouble. It wasn't
about going in trouble’s direction, was it?

David: Nope.

M: Well, if it was a different direction, what would be a
good name for this direction? Just a guess?

David: Um... um... it's about, I think it’s about making
a comeback. That's what Pd say.

M: Making a comeback from trouble. So that's what it is
all about!

David: Yeah.

M: (turning to Fred and Pauline) Did you know this?

Fred: Sure didn't.

Pauline: Neither did I. This is something that I thought
I'd never hear.

[PAGE 135]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 124 +


124 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: So, it’s a surprise, and because of this my next question
might be a bit difficult to answer.

Fred: Okay. Let's have it.

M: What does David's decision to make a comeback say to
you about him? Does it affect your picture of him in any
way? Or does it suggest something to you about what he
really wants for his life?

Pauline: It says something to me about his determination,
which I know he's always had. He's really a pretty gritty kid.
But the difference is that he had this working for him, not so
much against him. Yeah. And not so much against us, either.

M: What are your thoughts on this, Fred?

Fred: Well, I don't know . . . but I'll take a punt on it. It is
about David trying for something. I guess trying to make
something of his life so that he can get ahead, so that he
can have friends, so that he can make something different
happen in his life.

M: David, how’s that? Do you think that your mum and dad
are getting this right about your determination working for
you, not against you and them? And what do you think of
what your father said about making something of your life?

David: Yep. That’s it.

M: What's this like for you? I mean, what's it like for you
that your parents are getting things right about you?

David grins.

M: (turning to Pauline and Fred) What is it like for the two
of you to find that you are getting some things right about
David?

Pauline: This is a surprise too. It'd take us a long time to
get used to this. But it's good, really good. If only there
could be more of it.

[PAGE 136]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 125 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 125


Fred: Yeah, Pd say that.

M: I was just wondering whether the developments we've
been talking about are totally new in David's life, or
whether they can be traced back to other events.

Fred: What are you thinking about?

M: Well, I was wondering whether you could tell me any
stories from David’s younger life that might fit with this
determination and this wish to make something of his life.
Or perhaps other stories about secret preparations, or per-
haps about making an earlier comeback? Anything like this.

Fred: Hearing you ask this makes me think of a time when
he was just a little kid, 5, maybe, or nearly 6 years old. You'd
remember, Pauline. I think it was on a Sunday, around
lunchtime. I was cooking lunch, and we heard David calling
out for us from the street. He was yelling. I thought, what
trouble is he in now? So we ran out there, and what did we
see? David was riding this enormous two-wheeler bike up
the street, swinging all over the place, looking as dangerous
as hell. And then what does he do? He lets go of the handle
bars and calls out, “Look, no hands!” We were petrified.

Pauline: And we were surprised, too, because we didn't
know he could ride a two-wheeler.

M: Secret training?

Pauline: Yeah, secret training again. And a whole lot of
determination for something.

David was grinning and clearly enjoying the recounting of
this story.

Fred: There was something else about that that we won't
go into right now.

M: What’s that?

Fred: (endeavouring to be gracious) We won't talk about


e

[PAGE 137]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 126 E


126 Maps of Narrative Practice


where the bike came from. It wasn’t David's, and he didn't
have any friends with bikes like this.

David now looks sheepish but clearly is still delighted with
the recounting of this story.

M: David, was it your plan to surprise your parents?

David: | think so.

M: And do you agree with them that this shows how you
can get your determination working for you, and that you
can make something of your life?

David grins and nods.

M: Okay, let me ask you some more questions about what
this says about you, and about how you want your life to be.
And [ll ask your mum and dad to help out as we go along.


These questions prompted a conversation that gave rise to several
more identity conclusions that contradicted those shaped by all of the
trouble that had so closely pursued David's life. These conclusions pro-
vided a foundation for questions about more stories of David's life that
were confirming of them. David also began to initiate some of this sto-
rytelling. Before long I was engaging David and his parents in specula-


Figure 2.16 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (David)

9. Intentional understanding;
Landscape of Identity making something of life
8. Internal understanding: determination
—intentional understandings
—understanding about what is A
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges


Landscape of Action
—events

—circumstances
—sequence 7. Account of:
—time bicycle adventure
—plot


Remote History Distant History


ee

[PAGE 138]

MapNarrReprint 7/22/10 2:02 PM Page 127 +


Re-Authoring Conversations 127


tive conversations about the near future of these developments: “David,
if you were going to build on this comeback, if you were going to go fur-
ther with it after leaving here, what do you reckon your next step could
be? And if it is okay with you I will ask your mum and dad to help us
out with their ideas. But in the end, it will really be up to you.”
With his parents' assistance, David came up with a number of ideas
about how to extend his comeback from trouble. He also said that he
had some other ideas, but that these were secret. I asked Pauline and
Fred for their thoughts about what they might do to provide a good cli-
mate for David to get to work on these ideas for extending his come-
back from trouble, and then I checked this out with David. I made it
clear that I had no expectation whatsoever with regard to David's act-
ing on any of these ideas.
Over a series of meetings, David did extend on these initiatives and
succeeded in his comeback from trouble. Along the way, Fred and
Pauline took a turn in surprising him—they undertook some quite
unexpected and positive actions in ensuring that he had a supportive
climate that was favorable to the pursuit of this comeback. At the 6-
and 18-month follow-ups, I learned that, apart from a few hiccups,
things were working out well for David and his parents.
Figure 2.16 shows my charting of the re-authoring conversation
with David and his parents. The up arrows indicate landscape of iden-
tity questions and the down and horizontal arrows indicate landscape
of action questions.

6. Intentional understandings:
—making something of life
—getting ahead
—making something different happen
5. Internal understanding: determination

A


3. Account of:
A
1. Account of: trouble- 10. Account of:
secret preparations free beach incident proposal to extend on
2. Characterization of making a comeback
initiative: resisting from trouble
trouble

4. Counterplot named: making a comeback from trouble

Recent History Present Near Future


o

[PAGE 139]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:36 PM Page 128 er


128 Maps of Narrative Practice


Conclusion


In this chapter I have presented a re-authoring conversations map of
narrative practice. This map is founded upon a text analogy that rep-
resents stories as composed of a “landscape of action” and a “land-
scape of consciousness.” This re-authoring conversations map pro-
vides therapists with a guide for shaping therapeutic conversations
that redevelop the subordinate storylines of people's lives. It is the
redevelopment of these subordinate storylines that provides people
with a foundation to proceed to address their predicaments and prob-
lems in ways that are in harmony with the precious themes of their
lives. These precious themes become more richly known in the course
of re-authoring conversations.
The re-authoring conversations map has been a mainstay of my
therapeutic practice for many years. | have never been short on
curiosity about the events of life, or on enthusiasm for rich conversa-
tions about life. The narrative analysis of story-making has continued
to fuel this curiosity and I find that I am ever-more intrigued by life
and enthusiastic about therapeutic practice.
In writing this chapter it was my hope to provide a relatively com-
prehensive account of “the imaginative application of the narrative
mode” in therapeutic practice. As I have drawn significantly from the
work of Jerome Bruner in developing this map, it seems fitting to close
this chapter with the following quote, which captures the sentiment
associated with the narrative practices that I have been describing
here.
The imaginative application of the narrative mode leads . . .
to good stories, gripping drama, believable . . . historical
accounts. It deals in human or human-like intention and
action and the vicissitudes and consequences that mark
their course. It strives to put its timeless miracles into the
particularities of experience, and to locate the experience in
time and place. Joyce thought of the particularities of the
story as epiphanies of the ordinary. (Bruner, 1986, p. 13)

[PAGE 140]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 129 er


3
Re-Membering
Conversations


e-membering conversations are shaped by the conception that
identity is founded upon an “association of life” rather than on
a core self. This association of life has a membership composed
of the significant figures and identities of a person's past, present, and
projected future, whose voices are influential with regard to the con-
struction of the person's identity. Re-membering conversations pro-
vide an opportunity for people to revise the memberships of their
association of life: to upgrade some memberships and to downgrade
others; to honour some memberships and to revoke others; to grant
authority to some voices in regard to matters of one’s personal iden-
tity, and to disqualify other voices with regard to this.
Re-membering conversations are not about passive recollection but
about purposive reengagements with the history of one’s relationships
with significant figures and with the identities of one’s present life and
projected future. There are many options with regard to the identifica-
tion of figures and identities that might be re-membered in people's lives.
These figures and identities do not have to be directly known in order to
be significant in re-membering conversations. For example, they may be
the authors of books that have been important or characters from movies
or comics. Nor do these figures and identities have to be people; they
could be the stuffed toys of a person’s childhood or a favorite pet.

[PAGE 141]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 130 E


130 Maps of Narrative Practice


Jessica


Jessica, a woman in her forties, consulted me about the consequences
of the abuse that she was subjected to by her parents during her child-
hood and adolescence. She had been isolated in her experience of the
abuse, and her struggle to deal with its consequences had been a major
theme of her life. These consequences included highly negative con-
clusions about her identity: that she was worthless as a person and that
her life was hopeless. Because of the despair that had been constantly
with her, Jessica had come very close to abandoning her life on a num-
ber of occasions. However, she had survived, and as an outcome of my
effort to understand what had at least minimally sustained her through
these times of crisis, I learned that Jessica had managed to hold onto a
faint hope that her life might be different at some future time.
In response to learning this, I began to interview Jessica about this
hope. I was keen to understand how she had managed to maintain a
relationship with this hope despite everything she'd been through. I
was also keen to learn of any experiences that might have verified, for
Jessica, that these hopes were valid for her life. In response to my
questions, she began to tell me a story about a neighbor whom she
thought might have played a part in verifying and sustaining this hope.
For a period of about 2 years, until Jessica's family relocated when she
was age 9, this neighbor had taken Jessica in when she was hurting.
Among other things, this neighbor had physically comforted Jessica,
had fed her when she was hungry, and had introduced her to sewing
and knitting, which were this neighbour's favorite hobbies. After
encouraging Jessica to more fully draw out this neighbour's contribu-
tion to her life, I encouraged her to reflect on what this contribution
might say about who she was in the eyes of this neighbor—about what
this might say with regard to what this neighbor appreciated about her
identity.


e “Do you have any understanding of why this neighbor took
you in like this?”
e “What is your guess about why she contributed to your life
in this way?”

[PAGE 142]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 131 +


Re-Membering Conversations 131


e “What could it be that she appreciated about you that your
parents seemed oblivious to?”
e “What do you think she was recognizing about you that
wasn't visible to your parents?”
e “Do you know what she valued in you that was overlooked
by others?”


In response to these questions, Jessica began to voice some very
different understandings about herself that included positive conclu-
sions about her own worth. At first these positive conclusions were
tentatively stated, and it was quite clear that she was surprised to
hear herself speaking about her own identity in this way. As our con-
versation unfolded these conclusions about her own worth became
much firmer. This marked the first step in a reconstruction of
Jessica’s identity.
After reviewing this neighbor’s contribution to Jessica's life, our
conversation turned to an account of the inverse—that is, to Jessica’s
contribution to the neighbor’s life. The very idea that she, as a young
girl who had been so traumatized, may have made a contribution to
the life of this neighbor was startling to Jessica. She had always
assumed that she had simply been the passive recipient of what the
neighbor had to give her, that she was simply a passenger in this con-
nection. Because of this entrenched one-way account of her connec-
tion with this neighbor, it was necessary for me to provide, through my
questions, a scaffold that would make it possible for Jessica to become
knowledged about her contribution to the life of the neighbor. This
scaffold was provided by questions including:


e “Did you accept this neighbor’s invitation for you to join
her in what was clearly precious to her—that is, her knit-
ting and sewing? Or did you reject this invitation?”
e “In response to this invitation, did you join her in this pre-
cious interest, or were you closed to this?”
e “In joining with her in this way, were you honoring what
she could give to you that was precious to her, or did your
response dishonor this?”


a

[PAGE 143]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 132 +


132 Maps of Narrative Practice


e “What is your guess about what it was like for this neigh-
bor to experience your joining her in this interest in knit-
ting and sewing?’
e “Do you have any thoughts about what this honoring might
have brought to her life?”
e “How might her life have been different on account of
your responsiveness?”


In response to questions like these, Jessica began to develop an
account of her contribution to the life of this neighbor. There was
some delight for Jessica in this, but she also experienced many other
strong emotions. At times during this part of our conversation she was
in tears and quite lost for words.
The development of this account of Jessica’s contribution to the life
of this neighbor provided a foundation for questions that encouraged
further reflection, this time on how Jessica's responses might have
touched the neighbor's sense of identity. This reflection was aided by
questions about how Jessica’s contribution might have affected the
neighbor’s sense of who she was and of her sense of purpose, about
how this might have validated and reinforced the purposes and values
that this neighbor treasured, and about how this might have enriched
the neighbor’s understanding of what her life was about.


e “What is your guess about how this shaped your neighbor's
sense of what her life was about?”
e “How do you think this might have affected her sense of
purpose?”
e “Could this have reinforced any values that might have
been precious to her?”
e “If so, what's your speculation about which values were
reinforced?”
e “How might this have affected what your neighbor
believed to be important about life?”
e “Do you have any thoughts about how her sense of her
own life might have been different for knowing you in the
way that she did?”

[PAGE 144]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 133 er


Re-Membering Conversations 133


Jessica was powerfully moved by these and other similar questions,
and she was tearful for much of this part of our conversation. The idea
that she could have made such a contribution to the neighbor’s life
and sense of identity was quite overwhelming for Jessica. Because she
had assumed that her connection with this neighbor was an entirely
one-way phenomenon, the understanding that it might have been
two-way in its consequences was, to Jessica, quite awesome: “I
thought I was just a burden to everyone. Who would have thought
that as a 7 year-old girl I could have given anything back? There is
something strange that’s been happening to me as we have been talk-
ing. I am not sure what this is about, but I think that it is because for
the first time I am feeling respect for the little girl that I was.”
Months later, when reviewing the course of our meetings, Jessica
remarked that she considered this first therapeutic conversation to be
a turning point in her life. The conversation had made it possible for
her to give meaning to aspects of her life that she had previously neg-
lected: She was now able to understand many aspects of the way that
she lived to be a testimony to this neighbor's sentiment of living, and
to conclude that many of her initiatives of living were in honor of this
neighbor’s contribution to her life. This included some recent initia-
tives Jessica had taken in searching out and assisting other women
who had been subject to abuse in childhood. This conversation had
been a turning point around which the highly negative conclusions
that she had held about her own identity were eroded and displaced
by more positive conclusions. From this point on Jessica gradually
became less vulnerable to the critical understandings that she had
held about her own life and that had been overwhelming her.


Saying Hullo Again


No matter how often I witness these dramatic turning points in ther-
apeutic conversations, the difference that can be made by the appro-
priate question at the appropriate time never fails to surprise me.
What was it that shaped my questions in this conversation with
Jessica? To a significant extent, these questions were shaped by a map


o

[PAGE 145]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 134 +


134 Maps of Narrative Practice


that I refer to as a “re-membering conversations map.” The develop-
ment of this map has its genesis in my consultations with people expe-
riencing loss and grief, and I will say a little about this history here.
In 1988 I published an article titled “Saying Hullo Again: The
Incorporation of the Lost Relationship in the Resolution of Grief.”
This article gave an account of the work that I had developed through
my consultations with people who were experiencing what at the time
was frequently referred to as a “delayed grief reaction” or “pathologi-
cal mourning.” Most of these people had already received intensive
and lengthy treatments that had been oriented by normative ideas
about grieving. Many of these normative ideas sponsored the “saying
goodbye” metaphor, which was associated with the goal of achieving
acceptance of the loss of the loved one and the development of a
desire to get on with a new life that is detached from the loved one.
In my first meetings with these people, it was clear to me that they
had already lost too much. It was apparent that they had not only lost
a loved one, but that they had also lost a substantial part of their own
sense of self, of their own identity. Without prompting, these people
put me in touch with the consequences of these losses, freely relating
details of their subsequent sense of emptiness and desolation, of their
feelings of worthlessness and of despair.
It was also clear to me that, under these circumstances, any further
grief counseling shaped by a normative model—that is, one that spec-
ifies the stages of the grief process according to the saying goodbye
metaphor—would only complicate the situation further, that this
would only serve to exacerbate their sense of emptiness and desola-
tion and their feelings of worthlessness and despair. The incorporation
of the lost relationship seemed a far more appropriate goal than fur-
ther encouraging these people to forfeit this relationship. My thera-
peutic explorations of the “saying hullo” metaphor were prompted by
this consideration.
Guided by the saying hullo metaphor, I formed and introduced
questions that I hoped would open up the possibility for people in
these circumstances to reclaim their relationship with the lost loved
one. Surprised by the effect of these questions in the resolution of the
sense of emptiness and desolation, and in the resolution of the feel-


o

[PAGE 146]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 135 er


Re-Membering Conversations 135


ings of worthlessness and despair, I decided to explore the metaphor
further. I expected that a fuller understanding of the processes
involved would enable me to more effectively assist people to reposi-
tion themselves in relation to the death of a loved one, a repositioning
that would bring the relief so strongly sought after.
In the “Saying Hullo Again” article I outlined some of the categories
of questions that seemed particularly effective in contributing to this
reincorporation of the lost relationship in the resolution of grief. These
were the sort of questions that I asked Jessica when inviting her to wit-
ness her identity through the eyes of her neighbor—
when l invited her
to speculate about what this neighbor’s contribution to Jessica’s life
might say about what she appreciated and valued about Jessica.
Also included in the article were categories of questions I had
developed that were effective in encouraging people to:


e Explore the real and potential effects of these preferred
understandings about their identity on their daily life
e Contemplate ways in which these understandings might
be resurrected and circulated within the context of their
social networks, which could include exploring possibili-
ties for recruiting an audience to these understandings
about their identity
e Speculate about how this might provide a foundation for
them to proceed with their lives


Additionally, the article touched on the contribution that the per-
son had made to the life of their lost loved one and on how this con-
tribution might have shaped the sense of identity of the person who
had died. After writing this article I more fully developed this aspect
of the therapeutic inquiry. This development is evident in the ques-
tions I asked Jessica when inviting her to speculate about how this
connection with her neighbor might have affected the neighbor's
sense of who she was and her sense of purpose, about how this con-
nection might have validated and reinforced the values that this
neighbor treasured, and about how this connection might have
enriched the neighbor's understanding of what life was about.


o

[PAGE 147]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 136 er


136 Maps of Narrative Practice


The Benefits and Purpose of Re-Membering
Conversations


Through further explorations of the saying hullo metaphor, and
upon reading the work of Barbara Myerhoff (1982, 1986), a cul-
tural anthropologist, I began to refer to therapeutic conversations
that focused on the resolution of grief as “re-membering conversa-
tions.” In Chapter 4 I give a short description of Myerhoff's field-
work with an elderly Jewish community in Venice, Los Angeles, in
which she introduces the re-membering metaphor. Here, I will
briefly touch on the significance that Myerhoff (1982) attributes to
the re-membering of lives in the identity projects of the members
of this community:


To signify this special type of recollection, the term re-
membering may be used, calling attention to the reaggrega-
tion of members, the figures who belong to one’s life story,
one’s own prior selves, as well as significant others who are
part of the story. Re-membering, then, is a purposive, sig-
nificant unification, quite different from the passive, con-
tinuous fragmentary flickerings of images and feelings that
accompany other activities in the normal flow of conscious-
ness. (p. 111)


This definition of re-membering evokes the image of a person's
life and identity as an association or a club. The membership of this
association of life is made up of the significant figures of a person's
history, as well as the identities of the person's present circum-
stances, whose voices are influential with regard to how the person
constructs his or her own identity. Re-membering conversations
provide an opportunity for people to engage in a revision of the
membership of their associations of life, affording an opening for
the reconstruction of their identity. Myerhoff (1982) draws out
some of the social mechanisms that contribute to re-membered
lives:

[PAGE 148]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 137 +


Re-Membering Conversations 137


Private and collective lives, properly re-membered, are
interpretive. Full or “thick description” is such an analysis.
This involves finding linkages between the group's shared,
valued beliefs and symbols, and the specific historical
events. Particularities are subsumed and equated with
grander themes, seen as exemplifying ultimate concerns.
(p. 111)


Re-membering, as defined by Myerhoff, contributes to the devel-
opment of a “multivoiced” sense of identity and facilitates activity in
making sense of one's existence and achieving a sense of coherence
through the “ordering” of life. It is through re-membering that “life is
given a shape that extends back in the past and forward into the
future” (p. 111).
This concept of re-membering gave me another perspective on
“saying hullo again” conversations and a fuller understanding of some
of the mechanisms of these conversations that were contributing to
the very positive outcomes that I was consistently encountering in
consultations with people. The concept of re-membering also inspired
me to extend these conversations, and they have since become more
prevalent in my work generally, not just in consultations over experi-
ences of grief and loss.
I believe that these re-membering practices are generally relevant
to therapeutic conversations because they open opportunities for peo-
ple to challenge what has been so isolating of them—that is, opportu-
nities for people to challenge the dominant notions of identity in
Western culture that are associated with the construction of an encap-
sulated self, one that emphasizes norms about self-possession, self-
containment, self-reliance, self-actualization, and self-motivation.
These contemporary Western social and cultural forces that promote
isolated, single-voiced identities actually provide the context that gen-
erates many of the problems for which people seek therapy. Re-mem-
bering conversations provide an antidote to these forces. They also
provide alternative ways for people to understand their identities and
alternative avenues of identity formation.

[PAGE 149]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 138 +


138 Maps of Narrative Practice


In the therapeutic context, re-membering conversations:
Evoke “life” as a “membered” club and “identity” as an
“association” of life, in contrast to notions of identity that
construct an encapsulated self. These re-membering con-
versations encourage the development of notions of iden-
tity that emphasize the contributions that others make to
our lives and to our understandings of self.
Contribute to the development of a multivoiced sense of
identity, rather than the single-voiced sense of identity that
is a feature of the encapsulated self. In this multivoiced
sense of identity people find that their lives are joined to
the lives of others around shared and precious themes.
This is a sense of identity that features positive but non-
heroic conclusions about one’s actions in life and about
who one is.
Open possibilities for the revision of one’s membership of
life, which is mostly achieved by the upgrading and honor-
ing of some memberships. In this upgrading, certain
voices are granted more authority with regard to matters of
one’s personal identity, and this has the effect of disquali-
fying other voices. It can also have the effect of revoking
some memberships.
Richly describe the preferred versions of identity and the
knowledges of life and skills of living that have been
cogenerated in the significant relationships of people's
lives. In reviewing these memberships, these accounts of
identity and these knowledges and skills can be explored
in their particularities. This contributes significantly to
people’s sense of being knowledged about their life, which
provides a basis for them to develop specific proposals
about how they might proceed with their lives.
Provide for a two-way understanding of a person’s relation-
ship with the significant figures of their lives. This two-
way understanding displaces “passive recipient’ concep-
tions of one’s identity, and emphasizes a mutuality of con-

[PAGE 150]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 139 er


Re-Membering Conversations 139


tribution in which the sense of one’s personal agency is
resurrected.
e Encourage not passive recollection of one's past, but delib-
erate reengagements with the significant figures of one’s
history and with the identities of one’s present life that are
significant or potentially significant. These figures and
identities do not have to be directly known in order to be
considered significant.
e Are often initiated through two sets of inquiry. The first
part of this inquiry invites:
— A recounting of what the significant figure con-
tributed to the person’s life
— The person to witness his or her identity through
the eyes of this figure, initiating a rich description
of the ways in which this connection shaped or has
the potential to shape the person’s sense of who he
or she is and what his or her life is about
The second part of this inquiry invites:
— A recounting of what the person contributed to the
life of this figure
— The person to richly describe the ways in which
this connection shaped or has the potential to
shape this figure’s sense of who he or she was and
what his or her life was about


Figure 3.1 shows charting of the re-membering conversation with
Jessica onto a map that is informed by these categories of inquiry.
I will now introduce another story about a re-membering conversa-
tion. In doing this I hope to illustrate some of the considerations rel-
evant to developing a context that is favorable to introducing re-mem-
bering conversations. In Jessica’s story there was an opportunity to
introduce a re-membering conversation in the first interview.
However, circumstances are not always as straightforward, and on
these occasions careful attention to the appropriate preparation is
required before initiating these conversations.

[PAGE 151]


11eNden


day
Figure 3.1 Charting Re-Membering Conversations (Jessica)


validated & reinforced LO/ET/E
Implications of this what was precious to
v
contribution for figure's neighbor, including
identity values & purposes & LE
her sense of life
Wd


accepted neighbor's invitation
Person's contribution to
& interest, honored what was ebed
figure's life
precious to her, & joined her
in sewing & knitting OVI


Person's identity through
eyes of figure
positive conclusions
about own worth


Figure’s contribution to neighbor provided safety,
g
sustenance, physical comfort,
person's life
& introduced Jessica to
sewing and knitting


10 20 30 40 50 60

Time in minutes


e

[PAGE 152]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 141 +


Re-Membering Conversations 141


Thomas


Thomas had been meeting with Cheryl, a counselor, over a period of
5 months. He had initially agreed to consult Cheryl at the insistence
of an accommodation service. This was part of a contract that had
been worked out with Thomas—the accommodation service would
take him off the street and provide him with the accommodation that
he was seeking if he agreed to counseling. Thomas had no interest in
meeting with a counselor but acquiesced to this with the knowledge
that he could be quite skilled in “stonewalling” and in discouraging
other people’s interest in his life, especially the interest of counselors.
He had assumed that he would be able to use these skills to win a
quick discharge from therapy while at the same time appear to be
acceding to the requirements of the accommodation service.
Thomas arrived at his first meeting with Cheryl 35 minutes late but
was surprised to see that she was entirely unruffled by this. He told
her that she was “quite frankly wasting her time” with him, that he
was “a lost cause,” that he lived “in an emotional wilderness,” that
there were “no possibilities for his future,” that he predicted he would
not be in this world for very much longer, and that she wouldn't find
him very responsive. Despite things getting off to a familiar start in his
conversation with Cheryl, over the 25 minutes of their meeting some-
thing went profoundly wrong with the plans laid by Thomas. His tac-
tics of discouraging Cheryl’s interest didn't appear to be working well
at all in the first part of the meeting, and he had a vague sense that
she was “somehow getting at him.” By the end of this first brief meet-
ing, Thomas was quite disconcerted. He felt off balance and at a loss
as to how to proceed with his original plan. After leaving Cheryl's
office, he found himself standing motionless for a while on the side-
walk, not knowing which way to turn.
Before long he managed to put this experience out of his mind and
began to recognize his own life again. Then, suddenly, a week later, he
again found himself disconcerted. He had arrived early for the second
meeting with Cheryl and hadn't called in sick as had been his inten-
tion. He was now perplexed. He had no understanding of how he had
gotten to this place, and he began to worry about his mental status.


Ze

[PAGE 153]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 142 +


142 Maps of Narrative Practice


Then things seemed to deteriorate even further. He found himself
wanting to linger in his conversation with Cheryl. At the end of this
second meeting, Thomas was “quite puzzled,” felt on “unsteady
ground,” and was “dizzy” and “at a loss” as to how to understand his
experience.

This time it was more difficult for him to put this experience out of
his mind, and he found himself looking forward in anticipation to his
next meeting with Cheryl. He continued to keep his appointments
with her. Then, suddenly, Cheryl learned that she would have to relo-
cate for family reasons. Thomas was devastated upon hearing this. He
couldn't understand this devastation and thought that he was going
mad. He felt that he now had no choice but to tell Cheryl about the
strange experiences he'd been having in the context of their meetings,
hoping that she would make sense of them. They talked for a while
about this, and, as Cheryl had planned to refer Thomas to me before
her move, she suggested that they meet together with me for a con-
sultation about this. Thomas agreed.
This was the story I heard upon meeting with Thomas and Cheryl.
In an effort to assist Thomas to make sense of what was happening to
him in these meetings with Cheryl, I interviewed them both about
their experiences of their conversations with each other. About 20
minutes into this exploration, Thomas had a significant realization:
“Its acknowledgment, that's what it is! This is the first time that I’ve
put my finger on it. It’s acknowledgment! It is Cheryl’s acknowledg-
ment of me that’s been so bewildering! I’ve never had anything like
this before, and I don’t know how to take it. I really don't know how
to take it.”
I asked Thomas why he thought he was drawn to this acknowledg-
ment. “Surely you would know! Surely it's something that is only
human. Don’t you know that it is only human to long for acknowledg-
ment?” replied Thomas. I said that I wasn't sure that I did know this,
and I asked if he would care to expand on this understanding. This he
did, evoking human nature as an explanation for what he was relating
to in his meetings with Cheryl. I then interviewed Thomas about
Cheryl's responses to the stories of his life, and before long I had an
account of some of her special skills of acknowledgment.


o

[PAGE 154]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 143 +


Re-Membering Conversations 143


Thomas had evoked human nature as an explanation of his
response to Cheryl's acknowledgment of him. In these contemporary
times, it is not at all uncommon for people to evoke “human nature”
in this way (see Chapter 2). On account of this habit of thought, it is
only to be expected that people will go “naturalistic” in their effort to
understand the developments of their lives. Although many of these
naturalistic understandings are quite beautiful, and although they can
be powerfully honored in the therapeutic context, they obscure the
social and relational history of the significant developments of peo-
ple's lives. It is because of this that these naturalistic understandings
are quite thin and take us into conversational culdesacs.
In order to make way for re-membering conversations, it is impor-
tant that these culdesacs be circumvented and that thoroughfares be
opened to the social and relational history of the significant develop-
ments of people's lives. For example, a person might invoke hope as
an explanation of her survival of historical trauma and give this a “nat-
uralistic” status—that is, to propose that it is human nature to have
hope in the face of what is personally devastating. This is a very beau-
tiful notion, but it does not promote rich story development. In the
context of therapy, it is possible to honor such understandings and at
the same time circumvent them through the introduction of questions
like:


e How were you able to hold onto hope in the way that you
have despite everything you have been through?
e Do you have any ideas about how you have been able to
maintain your relationship with hope through these diffi-
cult times?
e Of all of the people who have known you, who would be
least surprised to learn that you have held onto hope in the
way that you have?
e And what is your guess about what these people witnessed
that made it possible for them to predict that you could do
this?
e Can you recall any experiences that might have been vali-
dating of these hopes?


o

[PAGE 155]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 144 +


144 Maps of Narrative Practice


e Experiences that might have verified that it was reason-
able for you to hold these hopes for your life?


Questions like these create openings for an appreciation of the
developments of people’s lives that go beyond naturalistic understand-
ings and that provide the foundation for rich story development. They
also provide the foundation for the introduction of re-membering con-
versations. When Thomas went naturalistic in his understanding of
his response to Cheryl's expressions of acknowledgment, I introduced
the following reflections and questions:


e “At some level you recognized this acknowledgment when
it was offered to you.”
e “What experiences of life can you tell me about that would
help me to understand how you recognized this acknowl-
edgment when it came your way?”
e “Do you have any sense of why this acknowledgment was
familiar to you? About what made it possible for you to
recognize it for what it was?”
e “This acknowledgment didn't just bounce off you. Rather,
you responded to it. You let this acknowledgement touch
you, and you took it in. | am very curious about how you
knew how to relate to this acknowledgment.”
e “Is there anything that you can tell me about your life that
would help me to understand how you knew what to do
with this acknowledgment?”
e “Are there any stories of your history that would make it
possible for me to comprehend your ability to take this
acknowledgment in and to let it touch you in this way?”


It was in response to these and other reflections and questions that
Thomas for the first time mentioned his mother:


Thomas: You will probably want to know about my mother.
Other counselors do. She committed suicide when I was 7
years old. I don’t remember much about it. All I know is


o

[PAGE 156]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 145 er


Re-Membering Conversations 145


that I was home at the time. I can remember looking
around the house for her. I found her in the bath. She was
still. Everything went fuzzy then. The next thing that I can
remember is that I was running somewhere and kept falling
down. I never saw her again. And no one ever said much
about her after that. I wasn’t told very much, except that
she killed herself, which I couldn't understand. Much later
I found out that she’d done this by cutting her wrists. I also
found out that she'd asked my uncle to take me out, but
this didn’t happen because he was passed out on the front
lawn from drinking too much booze. For a while after that
I lived with an aunt and uncle. This aunt was my mother’s
cousin, but it was terrible there. Eventually I couldn't take
it anymore, and I ran away to the streets when I was 14.
Then I was in a couple of foster homes that didn’t work out.
Anyway, I don't want to talk about this, and I am just telling
you because counselors always want to know this stuff.

M: You don't want to talk about this?

Thomas: I am tired of talking about it. I am tired of all
this.

M: Okay, but what are you tired of?

Thomas: About how this caused my problems. You know.

M: I'm not sure that I do.

Thomas: You know. About how all my problems and my
drug abuse is about my anger. You know, about my anger
turned against myself.

M: Anger?

Thomas: You know. Over what my mother did. The anger
that I had toward my mother for rejecting me like this. For
what she did to my life. Anyway, I have done all of this and
I just want to drop it. I just want to let the past be.

[PAGE 157]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 146 er


146 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: Are these understandings about what has happened to
your life honoring of or dishonoring of your mother?

Thomas: What?

M: Would you say that these understandings are honoring
or dishonoring of your mother’s life, and of her relationship
with you?

Thomas: What? I don’t think I have . . . Uh!

M: Take your time.

Thomas: Well, I haven't thought much about this. But I
suppose they put her in a pretty bad light. Yeah.

M: So, would you say dishonoring or honoring?

Thomas: Well, putting it like that, Pd have to say dishon-
oring.


M: I wouldn't want to have any conversations that were
dishonoring of your mother, or dishonoring of her connec-
tion with you. And I wouldn't want to encourage you to rage
against her for any reason.

Thomas: You wouldn't! Okay. Okay.

M: But I would like permission to ask you some more
questions about her, and about you when you were a
child. I would like to do this because when I was asking
about the history of your familiarity with acknowledg-
ment, your mother’s name came up, and I have a sense
that there is more to the story of her connection with
you.


Thomas: (seeming surprised) Okay.

M: I would be more interested in any memories of your
connection with her that are presuicide memories.

Thomas: Presuicide memories? Look, I’d really like to

[PAGE 158]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 147 er


Re-Membering Conversations 147


answer your question, but I honestly don't have any clear
memories of that time of my life.

M: Okay. What about vague memories then?

Thomas: Nope. I'm afraid not. Not even vague memories.


We talked for a while longer, but I was unsuccessful in my effort to
evoke earlier memories of Thomas’ relationship with his mother that
would explain his reference to her in response to my questions about
the history of his familiarity with acknowledgment. But I did have
some thoughts about the building of a context that might be favorable
to the recovery of some of these memories.
About 8 months before meeting with Thomas I had been consulted
by Juliet, a mother of three children. Juliet had been referred to me
following a suicide attempt that nearly claimed her life and had neces-
sitated admission to the hospital. A single parent, Juliet had been
experiencing hard times of the sort that Thomas’ mother, also a single
parent, probably would have encountered. It was in the context of
these hard times, and due to how they had influenced her actions,
that Juliet had reached a conclusion that she was hindering her chil-
dren’s development and that she might destroy their lives. She was
anguished about this. She wanted so much for them to have a better
life than she had experienced as a child, and she decided that they
would be better off without her—that if she wasn't around they would
be better off being raised by her older sister.
In my first meeting with Juliet it became apparent that her decision
to take her own life was born of her love for her children; this
attempted suicide was an act of love. Following this, I had some highly
memorable meetings with Juliet and her three children, for whom this
understanding of their mother’s desperate action had made a world of
difference. At the end of my meetings with Juliet and her children she
had volunteered to enter her name into one of my outsider-witness
registers, to be available to join me in my work at some future point
should this seem appropriate.
At the end of my first meeting with Thomas, I shared some
thoughts about options for how we might proceed in our conversa-


ee

[PAGE 159]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 148 er


148 Maps of Narrative Practice


tions. I said that I knew a woman named Juliet who had nearly suc-
ceeded in doing what his mother had succeeded in doing—taking her
own life. I said that I was sure that Juliet would be interested in join-
ing us for a meeting or two if Thomas thought this option might be
helpful.


M: Of course, Juliet couldn't stand in for your mother-I
doubt that anyone could do this. But it would be my idea
to interview you about what we have been talking about
today with Juliet present as an audience. I’d then ask you
to sit back while I interviewed her about what she had
heard in your story. It is my guess that she will hear things
in your story that I haven't heard, and perhaps even things
that you haven't heard. Following this, it would be my plan
to interview you about what you heard in Juliet's reflec-
tions. Now, it isn't necessary for us to do this in order to
proceed with our work together, but what do you think of
the idea?

Thomas: Well... I don't know . . . It’s not anything that I
would have thought of. But, hey! Why not? You know, I’m
really at a point in my life where I have nothing to lose.


I called Juliet that afternoon and informed her that I had been
meeting with a young man who'd been through some very hard times
in his life and who had tragically lost his mother at an early age. When
I asked Juliet if she would be willing to join us, there was no hesita-
tion in her response—this was something that she wanted to do and
we could count her in. Juliet then called back 3 days later. I have
reconstructed our telephone conversation:


Juliet: I have been talking to my kids about coming to your
next meeting with Thomas. When I told them this, they
said that they wanted to be there too. In fact, Craig said
that he should come with me. So would it be okay if they
came along as well?

[PAGE 160]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 149 er


Re-Membering Conversations 149


M: It is fine with me, but it is a pretty heavy topic of con-
versation, and I’m not sure if it’s going to be good for them
to...


Juliet: My kids know a lot about this from my own crisis.
And we've became good at talking about things that are
hard to talk about, and this has been important to all of us.
Besides, when I told them what you told me, they were all
sad for Thomas, and they’d like to help.

M: Okay. I'll call Thomas about this and get back to you as
soon as I can.


I called Thomas about this proposal to include these children. His
response was: ‘Well, it isn’t anything I would have thought of doing.
Sounds a bit wild. But then hey! I’m in this far already! I’ve got noth-
ing to lose, have I!
Soon I was meeting with Thomas, Juliet, and her three children,
Craig, 13, Robert, 9, and Corinda, 6. We talked over the proposal for
how the meeting might be structured. My plan was to first interview
Thomas about the story of his life. At this time Juliet, Craig, Robert,
and Corinda would be present as an audience to this conversation.
Second, I would interview Juliet, Craig, Robert, and Corinda about
what they had heard in Thomas's story. Thomas would be strictly an
audience to this retelling. Third, I would interview Thomas about
what he had heard in the retellings of Juliet, Craig, Robert, and
Corinda. At this time, Juliet, Craig, Robert, and Corinda would be
back in the audience position, listening to Thomas's account of their
retellings. This plan for our meeting was acceptable to everyone.
In the first part of this meeting Thomas and I reproduced the con-
versation of our initial meeting. It was then time for Thomas to sit
back and for me to interview Juliet and her three children about what
they had heard. This turned out to be a very powerful retelling for
everyone:


M: (addressing everybody but looking toward Juliet out of
concern over the possibility of burdening the children) Let's


a

[PAGE 161]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 150 E


150 Maps of Narrative Practice


start with what it was that caught your attention. Was there
something that Thomas said that particularly stood out for
you? Or was there something that you noticed about him
that you would like to talk about?

Craig: One thing that he said was that his uncle was sup-
posed to take him out, so she (Thomas’s mother) didn't
want him to be the one to discover this.

Robert: Yeah.

Corinda: | think that too.

M: What did this . .

Craig: And another thing was that Thomas didn’t show us
that he was sad about this.

Robert: Yeah, that's right. Maybe he’s already cried a lot
about it and doesn't have anything left.

Corinda: I think that too.

M: Craig, you said that Thomas’s mother didn’t want him
to discover this. What did this say to you about his mum?
What did this say to you about her relationship with him?

Craig: Let's see .. . Maybe that she really did care about
him. Yeah. Maybe that she really cared about him. What do
you think Rob?

Robert: Yeah, I agree with that. She would've have cared
about him. For sure.

M: What do you think Corinda?

Corinda: My mom loves me, and, and... . Thomas’s mum
loves him. Yes, she does too. It made me sad, and... and
it made Thomas sad too.

Craig: | think Corinda could be right about that.

M: Juliet?

[PAGE 162]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 151 +


Re-Membering Conversations 151


Juliet: (in tears) Right now I think that Pd just like to sit
here and keep listening to what my kids have to say if that’s
okay.

M: Sure, sure. Craig do you know why you understood
things in the way that you did?

Craig: What do you mean?

M: What you heard from Thomas gave you the idea that
his mother really cared for him, and you agreed with
Corinda that she could have loved him. Did you hear any-
thing that touched on what you've been through? Did this
strike a chord with anything that has happened to you?

Craig: Yeah, yeah. (tears welling in his eyes) You could say
that.

M: Would you say something about this or would you pre-
fer not to?

Craig: No, I want to. I think I know a bit about what
Thomas went through. I mean it is not really the same, it
really isn't. But it might have been the same. We nearly lost
our mum too. And we thought that she didn’t really care
about us any more. But it wasn't true, it really wasn't true,
was it, Mum?

Juliet: No, Craig, it wasn’t true, because . . .

Craig: We found out that she thought that she was just
making things hard for us, just messing everything up. We
found out that she thought that we would be better off
without her. Didn’t we? (turning to Jerry and Corinda)

Corinda: Yeah.

Robert: Yeah. It was real hard at the beginning. Everybody
was real upset. I mean real upset. We couldn't stop
Corinda from crying all the time, and she wouldn't let go of
me and Craig, and in the end, even when we knew Mum


Ze

[PAGE 163]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 152 +


152 Maps of Narrative Practice


was going to be okay, and when I went back to school, the
teachers had to let Corinda stay with me in the classroom.
That was fine though, wasn’t it Corinda?

Corinda: (with tears) Yeah. Robert looked after me.

Juliet: I want to say something. I was having a really diffi-
cult time, and I was making a mess of the things that were
most important to me. I was so low, and I thought that I
was ruining everything that was precious to me. I thought
that I was a pathetic excuse for a mother, I really did. Like
Craig said, I thought the kids would all be better off with-
out me. | now know that this was crazy thinking, but that
was the space that I was in back then.

M: Are you saying in some way that your suicide attempt
was an act of love?

Juliet: Yeah. I know it seems a bit weird to say this, but it
really was. It really was.

M: I am going to ask you all to sit back in a minute and lis-
ten to me talking with Thomas about what he heard as he
listened to you. Before I do that, though, I would like to ask
you all about what it has been like for you to be here help-
ing us out in this way.

Juliet: It has been lots of things for me. I don’t know any-
thing about Thomas’s mother, but I have been feeling a
connection with her. I have been thinking about the tur-
moil that she was probably going through. I am sure that
she wasn't perfect. I know that I haven't been perfect with
my kids. But I think that, as a mother, I might have some
understanding about what it would have been like for her
to give up her son. My heart goes out to her. My heart really
goes out to Thomas for his loss. But it also goes out to his
mother for her loss.

M: Where does this leave you right now?

[PAGE 164]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 153 er


Re-Membering Conversations 153


Juliet: (tearful) Feeling sad. But I am also feeling the
power of mothers’ love for their children. I am feeling the
power of my love for these three. And I am also feeling
proud of these three for speaking up in the way that they
have today. I just hope that Thomas gets something from
this.

M: Whats it been like for the three of you to play this part
today?

Robert: I am glad we came.

Corinda: Me too. Arent you Craig?

Craig: We've been through a lot, and if talking about what
we have been through is going to help anyone else, that's
great. Mum and us kids have been talking about how sad
lots of people are, and about how they don’t have to be so
sad. So us kids feel good about doing this, don’t we?

Robert: Yeah.

Corinda: Yeah.

M: Okay, thanks for all that you have done in our meeting
today. I am now going to talk with Thomas about what he
heard as he listened to us talking.


Tears had been streaming down Thomas’s face for a good part of
the retellings of Juliet, Craig, Robert, and Corinda. I invited him to
put words to these tears, and to say what had been happening for him
as he was listening. Thomas was so choked up with emotions that he
was unable to respond. I wondered if a time-out might be helpful, and
he nodded. He headed to the courtyard for a smoke, and Juliet and
her children headed for the kitchen for refreshments. We reconvened
our meeting about 15 minutes later, at which time Thomas was still
under the sway of powerful emotions. But he was able to speak.


Thomas: I was . . . | was just so unprepared for this.

[PAGE 165]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 154 er


154 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: Would you say a little about what you were unprepared
for?

Thomas: It was the way that Craig and Robert and
Corinda and Juliet related to what I'd said. I'd thought
partly, you know, that maybe this was simply one of those
things to go through. And to be honest, Pd also been
humoring you a bit in going along with this idea in the first
place. But this turned out to be totally something else.
Yeah, totally something else.

M: What was it about how Craig and Robert and Corinda
and Juliet related to your story that made this so totally
something else?

Thomas: Everything. Everything. Right from the start with
Craig picking up on my mother caring about me. And with
what Robert and Corinda said. Corinda really got me going
when she said my mom loves me. Right now I am trying not
to think about what Corinda said, because if I do I won't be
able to speak again. And what Juliet said, including that
part about her heart going out to my mother over her loss.
Look, I don’t understand why this had such an enormous
impact on me, but it did. It sure was powerful. Phew! Here
I go again. (more tears)

M: As you were listening to this did anything in particular
come to mind? Any mental pictures? Any realizations?
Whatever? Perhaps about your mother? Perhaps about her
relationship with your Perhaps about what you meant to
her?

Thomas: Yeah, I guess so. I guess so. I will have to sit with
this for a while though. There were lots of thoughts rush-
ing at me, and they all got into a jumble. It would be hard
for me to tease out anything in particular. But there were
some flashes among all of this.

M: Flashes?

[PAGE 166]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 155 er


Re-Membering Conversations 155


Thomas: That's the best word I can think of. Like short
flashes of light being thrown onto my history. I can’t say
much more about this, and I can’t get them back right now.

M: Do you have any sense of why these retellings of Juliet,
Craig, Robert, and Corinda touched you in the way that
they did? Do you have any sense of what they might have
struck a chord with?

Thomas: | can’t think of anything in particular right now.
I don't know if what Juliet and her children said about my
mother is right. But I am thinking there must be some
truth in this because of the impact this had on me. Wow! I
really have never had an experience like this before, and
that's no exaggeration. It's really no exaggeration.

M: We are coming to the end of our time together. Where
has this exercise taken you to? Where are you right now?

Thomas: In what way do you mean?

M: Sometimes these events are like journeys, and people
arrive at a place in their life that wasn't visible to them at
the outset of the event. Do you have any sense of standing
in a place right now that...

Thomas: Okay, I know what you mean. This has turned
some parts of my life upside down. It’s been quite unset-
tling. And I don’t know for sure, but I think that this might
be important.


Juliet and her children joined us again for the next meeting. It was
in the context of this meeting that Thomas recalled some faint mem-
ories of his mother that hadn't previously been available to his con-
sciousness. One of these memories was of walking home with her
from a shopping center, and Thomas guessed that this was in the year
leading up to her suicide. He had some recollection that she had been
away and a vague sense that she had been in the hospital for reasons
that he couldn't understand. On this walk they happened across a


a

[PAGE 167]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 156 er


156 Maps of Narrative Practice


dead dog—he thought it was a terrier—that had been hit by a car. He
thought he could recall his mother saying something like: “Kids
around here have to see enough bad things already.” She then cradled
the dog in her arms, carried it onto a derelict building allotment, and
had Thomas help her scrape a hole in the ground. She lowered the
terrier into this shallow grave, and then she and Thomas covered it
with building rubble. Although he couldn’t remember her words, he
could recall his mother “giving the terrier last rites” and bidding
farewell to its spirit. They then walked back to the street together, she
holding his hand. But they didn’t immediately recommence their
homeward journey. Instead, they sat on the gutter, his mother looking
at him and crying. This seemed to go on for a long while, with Thomas
asking his mother time and again what was wrong, and with her
unable to respond.
This memory provided the foundation for a rich re-membering con-
versation that was structured by the two categories of inquiry that I
have described in this chapter. Before introducing this inquiry, I asked
some general questions that 1 hoped would prepare the way for the
initiation of this re-membering conversation:


M: Thomas, you've recalled your mother saying something
like: “We have to do something. Kids around here already
have to see enough bad things.”

Thomas: Yeah. That's about it.

M: And then the two of you buried the terrier. Does this
suggest anything to you about the value that she put on
children's lives?

Thomas: Yeah. I suppose she must have known of lots of
kids who were having a hard time. And she must have been
worried about this. So she must have believed that kids
were important. Yeah, she must have valued kids.

M: And you also recall her giving the dog last rites and bid-
ding farewell to its spirit.

[PAGE 168]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 157 +


Re-Membering Conversations 157


Thomas: Yeah. That's right.

M: Does this gesture suggest anything to you about her
attitude toward life?

Thomas: I guess so. Well, it must. But I’m not sure how to
say what it meant. Maybe, maybe something about respect-
ing there’s something unique about every life. Something
that's to be valued. I'll have to think more about this to find
the right words.


I then proceeded with the re-membering conversation by asking
questions that helped Thomas to recount what his mother con-
tributed to his life:


M: She included you in every step of this ritual in ways
that children often don't get included.

Thomas: Yeah. That's my memory of it.

M: Do you have any sense of what being included in this
way might have brought to the life of that little boy?

Thomas: Ask me that again.

M: Do you have any sense of what being included by your
mother in this way could have contributed to your life?

Thomas: Well, I can only guess that it must have made me
feel a bit warm inside, and maybea little bit important, like
I was grown up enough to handle this. Like I was worth-
while.

M: You also said that your mother held your hand at times
during this ritual.

Thomas: Yeah. I’m sure she did.

M: What's your guess about how this touched the life of
that little boy?

[PAGE 169]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 158 +


158 Maps of Narrative Practice


Thomas: (tearful) The only thing that I can think of right
now is that this must have made me feel alive on the inside.
That's the only thing I can think of right now. Maybe later
I'll find some other ways of saying it.


My next set of questions encouraged Thomas to witness his iden-
tity through the eyes of his mother:


M: How do you explain this inclusion of you in something
in which children are often not included?

Thomas: I don’t know if I have an answer for this.

M: Well, what does this inclusion suggest about what she
was respecting in you?

Thomas: That I was a kid who could be counted upon?
Maybe that’s what it was. You know, that I was the sort of
kid who could be trusted to handle this. That there was
something a bit solid about me.

M: A bit solid?

Thomas: Yeah. That I was a kid who didn't need to be
shielded from these things, I guess. But hey, all this is tak-
ing me right out of the square, and I need to think more
about this.

M: Okay then. Can I ask a different question?

Thomas: Sure, sure. As long as it’s okay that 1 don't have
many answers.


M: What understanding do you have of your mother’s
physical touch at this time? What does this suggest about
what she valued in you and appreciated about you?

Thomas: That it was good to be with me at this time?
Yeah. That I was good to be with, that I was good company
even when I was little, and that because . . . perhaps

[PAGE 170]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 159 E


Re-Membering Conversations 159


because even though I was little, I could understand what
she was doing?

M: And afterwards, you were sitting on the gutter together,
and she was in tears just looking at you. What's your guess
about what she was seeing in you at this time?

Thomas: (tearful) 1 dunno. Maybe something about the
spirit in me? (now quite choked up, indicating that talking
was not possible and that he needed some time out)

M: (later, after a break) You have been bringing me up to
speed on what it is that your mother might have appreci-
ated about you. Would it be okay if we went back a step or
two, and I asked some more questions about what she con-
tributed to your life? Getting clearer about this could give
us an even better foundation for figuring out what she val-
ued in you.

Thomas: Sure, sure. Go for it.


Following this I asked questions that would help Thomas to
recount what he had contributed to the life of his mother:


M: You responded to her inclusion of you, and you joined
her every step in the ritual of burying the dog.

Thomas: Yeah, you could say that I did that. Yeah.

M: What's your guess about what it was like for your
mother to have your company in this way?

Thomas: Boy, these are big questions! Well, maybe it gave
her a sense of security. Like a sense of being joined, like . . .
I'm trying to find the right word. There's a word for this.

M: We've got lots of time.

Thomas: Dammit! It’s frustrating. It’s a word like . . . soli-
darity! That's it! Maybe it gave her a sense of solidarity.

[PAGE 171]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 160 er


160 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: Solidarity?

Thomas: Yeah, maybe it gave her a sense of solidarity in
caring about what lots of people don’t care about.

M: And what's your speculation about what it was like for
her to have this little boys hand to hold at this time? What
is your guess about how this might have touched her?

Thomas: (tearful) A warm feeling?

M: A warm feeling. You brought warmth to her life?

Thomas: I think so... maybe . . . yeah.

M: Are there any other guesses that you could make about
how your mother’s experience of this event was different on
account of your presence?

Thomas: Yeah. But I have to leave this question for now if
that's okay, and just sit for a while with what's already going
on for me.

M: Fine, fine.


These last questions were intended to help Thomas, richly describe
the ways in which this connection with his mother had shaped his
mother’s sense of who she was and what her life was about:


M: To have you joining her in this burial ritual in this way,
what's your guess about how this might have affected her
sense of what was important in life? Could this have been
validating of what she believed, of what she held precious?
Or do you think that it might have been irrelevant to her
sense of what life was all about?

Thomas: No, no. I can only think that it must have sup
ported what was precious to her.

M: That it would have supported what was precious to
her?

[PAGE 172]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 161 er


Re-Membering Conversations 161


Thomas: Yeah. I’m only just getting to figure out what she
stood for, you know. Or even...

M: I know...

Thomas: Look, I would never have known this, but maybe
there were some things that my mum was passionate
about, that are really important.

M: And your response supported this. Or what would you
say? Validated this? Confirmed this? Verified this? Or...

Thomas: Yeah, maybe it would have to be all of these.

M: Your mother had her little son’s hand to hold after bid-
ding farewell to the spirit of the dog. What's your guess
about how this might have affected her sense of being a
mother?

Thomas: I don’t know for sure. I want to say the word
“proud,” but I’m not sure . . .


Over several meetings we came back to these and other similar
questions. In the course of this, Thomas became more convinced that
the source of this familiarity with acknowledgment was to be found in
his relationship with his mother, and he began to develop a much
stronger sense of their mutual contributions to each other’s lives and
to each other's sense of identity. This had a profoundly positive effect
on Thomas's conclusions about his own worth. And the development
of some appreciation of his contribution to his mother’s life as a 6-
year-old boy significantly resurrected his sense of personal agency and
eroded his conception of himself as a passive subject of life's forces.
These re-membering conversations also had the effect of recon-
necting Thomas to the sort of values and purposes that he came to
believe linked him with his mother’s life. As this link became more
richly known through some archaeological work on his family of ori-
gin, he developed the ability to evoke his mother’s presence in his life,
and this he found highly sustaining. This was an antidote to the sense
of emptiness and desolation and the feelings of worthlessness and


a

[PAGE 173]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 162 E


162 Maps of Narrative Practice


despair that had been so overwhelmingly present for such a significant
period of his life. It was in the context of these conversations that
Thomas suddenly became aware of some new possibilities on the
horizons of his life, and over a period of time he began to step into
these possibilities. He also discovered an aunt (his mother’s second
cousin) who had been fond of his mother when they were young
women. Thomas found delight in building a connection with this
aunt, whose family came to adopt him.
Figure 3.2 shows my charting of the initial re-membering conversa-
tion with Thomas.


Conclusion


This chapter described some of the ideas that shape re-membering
conversations. These conversations can act as an antidote to the pow-
erfully isolating understandings of identity that are so pervasive in
contemporary Western culture. Considering life as an association with
a membership, and introducing practices specifically shaped by the
acknowledgement that identity is wrought by important figures of a
person’s past and present, opens diverse possibilities for the recon-
struction of identity in the context of therapeutic conversations.
In retelling the stories of my conversations with Jessica and with
Thomas, Juliet, and her family, I have endeavored to provide a com-
prehensive account of the form of therapeutic inquiry associated with
the re-membering conversations map. I have also described some of
the groundwork that must at times be undertaken before the initiation
of these re-membering conversations. On many occasions, it is only
after significant preparation that it becomes possible for people to
reincorporate their relationship with the significant figures of their
past and their present.
Over many years of meeting with people about the predicaments of
their lives, this re-membering metaphor has touched my own life in a
multiplicity of ways. For example, these consultations have encour-
aged me to reflect more fully on my connections with the significant
figures of my own history and on their contribution to the shaping of


ee

[PAGE 174]


11eNden


day


Figure 3.2 Charting Re-Membering Conversations (Thomas)

LO/ET/E

validated & supported v
Implications of this what was precious to
contribution for figure's mother & reinforced
LE

identity her sense of pride in
Wada
being a mother


ebed
brought a sense of
Person's contribution to
security, solidarity, &
figure's life £9T
warmth to mother’s
life


a kid who could be counted
on, who could be trusted,
Person's identity through
who was solid, who was
eyes of figure
good company, & who had a
spirit


inclusion of Thomas in a yet richer
Figure's contribution to
erson’s life last rites ritual, the account of
P warming of his life, mother’s
contributing to aliveness contribution


10 20 30 40 50 60

Time in minutes


e

[PAGE 175]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 164 +


164 Maps of Narrative Practice


my own life and work. This has also prompted rich conversations with
my family and friends that have opened possibilities for the revision of
the membership of my own association of life. And routinely engaging
with this re-membering metaphor has also contributed to a greater
consciousness of the part that the people who have consulted me have
played in the development of my work and to a stronger sense of what
my work is about in terms of what is precious to me. Needless to say,
this has been very sustaining.

[PAGE 176]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 165 +


4

Definitional
Ceremonies


tructuring therapy sessions as definitional ceremonies provides
a context for rich story development. These ceremonies are rit-
uals that acknowledge and “regrade” peoples’ lives, in contrast to
many rituals of contemporary culture that judge and degrade people’s
lives. In many of these degrading rituals, peoples’ lives are measured
against socially constructed norms, and they are judged to be inade-
quate, incompetant, disordered, and often a failure in terms of their
identities. Definitional ceremonies provide people with the option of
telling or performing the stories of their lives before an audience of
carefully chosen outsider witnesses. These outsider witnesses
respond to these stories with retellings that are shaped by a specific
tradition of acknowledgment.
The responses of the outsider witnesses are not shaped by contem-
porary practices of applause (giving affirmations, pointing out posi-
tives, congratulatory responses, and so on) or by practices of profes-
sional evaluation and interpretation. It is not the place of outsider wit-
nesses to form opinions, give advice, make declarations, or introduce
moral stories or homilies. Rather, outsider witnesses engage one
another in conversations about the expressions of the telling they were
drawn to, about the images that these expressions evoked, about the
personal experiences that resonated with these expressions, and about

[PAGE 177]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 166 E


166 Maps of Narrative Practice


their sense of how their lives have been touched by the expressions.
In these outsider witness retellings, what people give value to in
their acts of living is re-presented in ways that are powerfully resonant
and highly acknowledging. Additionally, it is through these retellings
that people experience their lives as joined around shared and pre-
cious themes in ways that significantly thicken the counterplots of
their existence.


Alison, Fiona, Louise, and Jake


I was between appointments late on a Friday afternoon when the
receptionist asked if I would be able to take a call from a young
woman who said she wouldn't keep me on the line for long. I took the
call, and I have recounted our telephone conversation here:


Alison: Hi, Michael! Its Alison! I don’t know if you'll
remember me. I came to see you with my mum and dad a
while back. Actually it was quite a long time ago.

M: Alison, let me have your family name.

Alison: Johnston, Alison Johnston, and I think that I came
to see you about...

M: Would that be about 10 years ago?

Alison: Yeah. Actually it was about 12 years ago. When I
was 15. I’m 27 now.

M: And you have a brother a couple of years older who was
into athletics.

Alison: Yeah, you've got it. So you do remember me!

M: Well, Alison, it’s great to hear from you after all this
time. Twelve years!

Alison: Yeah, I’ve been meaning to give you a call for some
time. You know, just to catch you up. Things are sailing


EN

[PAGE 178]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 167 er


Definitional Ceremonies 167


along pretty well in my life and I just thought that you'd like
to know.

M: How’s Henrietta? (One of the stuffed toys I use in my
practice, whom I hadn't seen for 12 years. At times I introduce
stuffed toys to people who consult me. These stuffed toys are
attributed to a range of lived experiences, personal character-
istics, sentiments of life, and problem-solving skills that peo-
ple can strongly identify with. Stuffed toys can provide people
with a sense of solidarity and inspiration in their efforts to
address problems and predicaments (White, 2006).

Alison: Actually, that’s the other reason that I called you.
Henrietta and I did have some ups and downs back then,
and we've seen each other through some hard times. I feel
very attached to her. But lately I’ve been feeling a bit self-
ish about hanging on to Henrietta, mostly because | imag-
ine that there are other kids out there who could do with
her help. You, know, kids following in my footsteps who
could find it helpful to connect with her. I know that she
meant so much to me. So I’ve been thinking that it’s about
time that she returned to work with you.

M: This sounds like quite a big step for you to be taking.

Alison: Yeah, it is. And I know I'll be a bit sad about it. But
it's the right thing.

M: Okay. Why don’t we meet for a handing-over ceremony,
one in which we could celebrate what you have con-
tributed to each other’s lives. What do you think?

Alison: Great! Shall we do this over coffee?

M: Sounds good to me.


Alison said that it would be her preference to meet in a local café
for this handing-over ceremony. It was good to see her again and to
have the opportunity to catch up on the developments in her life over

[PAGE 179]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 168 er


168 Maps of Narrative Practice


the past 12 years. It was also good to see Henrietta again and to hear
about the part that these two had played in each other's lives over this
time. Alison had given me permission to take notes about their team-
work, and at the end of our conversation I asked if she would be pre-
pared to sign what I had written. This, I said, could be a new refer-
ence for Henrietta’s portfolio. Alison was delighted to do so. She also
included her telephone number. When I commented on this, Alison
said that she would welcome calls from anyone who was introduced
to Henrietta in the course of my work. She'd be more than happy to
share stories about her connection with Henrietta and about what this
had made possible in her life.
This made me realize that I hadn't invited Alison to enter her name
into one of my “outsider witness” registers. These registers list the
names and contact details of people who volunteer to join me in my
work with others. I took this opportunity to describe to Alison the role
of the outsider witness, and I asked her if she was interested in sign-
ing up. Alison promptly reminded me that there had been two out-
sider witnesses present at one of our meetings 12 years ago. She
recalled that she’d found this especially helpful and said that she
would be happy to play this part for others.
Approximately 5 weeks later I was consulted by Louise, Jake, and
their daughter, Fiona. Fiona was 16 years old, and she'd had a 15-
month struggle with anorexia, which had already hospitalized her on
two occasions. In some respects, Fiona reminded me of Alison. In the
course of our first meeting I perceived an opportunity to introduce
Fiona to Henrietta. I also lent Henrietta’s portfolio to Fiona and
remarked on the recent reference from Alison. At this time I also
informed Fiona that Alison would be happy to talk about her connec-
tion with Henrietta if she was interested in giving her a call.
At my second meeting with this family, I learned that Fiona had
called Alison, and that this had been helpful. Among other things,
Fiona found Alison to be particularly understanding. In response to
this, I raised the possibility of Alison joining us for a meeting and
described the role that she would be taking if she did so: Alison would
first be an audience to my conversation with Fiona and her parents.
Then they would sit back and listen closely as I interviewed Alison


aoe

[PAGE 180]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 169 +


Definitional Ceremonies 169


about what she'd heard in their story. Then it would then be time for
Alison to return to the audience position, and for Fiona and her par-
ents to speak of what they had heard in Alison’s retelling of their story.
I mentioned that it was my experience that structuring such meetings
in this way often contributes to an acceleration of positive develop-
ments and that if Fiona and her parents decide to proceed with this,
they would need to let me know about what sort of questions they
would be happy for me to ask in Alison’s presence and which they
would like me to avoid. Fiona was enthusiastic about this idea, and
her parents were supportive of this.
Alison joined us for our fourth meeting. During my interview with
Fiona and her family, with Alison in the audience position, much of
the focus was on the influence and the operations of the anorexia in
the lives and relationships of the family members, on their experience
of this, on aspects of their lives that they'd managed to hold apart from
anorexia's sphere of influence, and on initiatives that were challenging
of its status. Alison was the “outsider witness” to this conversation—
a term I have borrowed from Barbara Myerhoff (1982, 1986). Alison
was not an active participant in this conversation, but rather witness-
ing it from the outside.
When the time seemed right, the positions were switched, and I
interviewed Alison about what she'd heard, with Fiona and her par-
ents now in the audience position. Alison’s retelling of the stories
she'd heard turned out to have considerable effect on the lives of
Fiona and her parents. In the third stage, the positions were again
switched, and I interviewed Fiona and her parents about what they'd
heard in Alison’s retelling of their stories.
The following transcript provides an account of the second stage in
this meeting, Alison’s response to the stories shared by Fiona and her
parents. Alison’s response was structured by my questions.


M: Alison, would you begin by talking about what you
heard that you were most drawn to?

Alison: I just think that Fiona and her parents are just the
most amaz—

[PAGE 181]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 170 er


170 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: Alison, could we stay with what you heard that most
caught your attention, and then we can get on to your
reflections.

Alison: Okay. Okay. Well, there were quite a few things.
Fiona talked about how she’s becoming more aware of all
of the expectations about perfection that have got so big in
her life, and about how she is now talking about these with
her mum. And now with some other people, too. She said
that she has started to say these expectations out loud
when she’s having a hard time with them. Someone used
the words “unmasking anorexia,” and that's what she’s
doing. I reckon it's a pretty big step for Fiona to let other
people in like this. Fiona could have just given in to
anorexia and if she’d done this she would have become
totally alone. Then anorexia would find it quite easy to take
her life away from her.

M: There was this, and other things as well? You said “quite
a few things.”

Alison: Yeah. It wasn’t just that Fiona was saying these
expectations out loud. She also said that her mum has been
asking her about what anorexia is saying to her when things
are going badly. I know that Fiona doesn't always answer her,
but her mum keeps the opportunity there for her, and even
guesses out loud about what anorexia is up to when Fiona
doesn't answer. And another thing is that her mum has
started to talk to Fiona about all of the expectations that are
on her as well, and about how she is always hearing this lit-
tle voice in her own head that goes, “Are you being a good
wife?” or “You are supposed to be here for the kids” or “But
you haven't done the cleaning yet” or “You look too much like
this or like that.” I know her mum has been feeling pretty ter-
rible, like she’s responsible for what's been happening to
Fiona, that she feels like she’s failed Fiona, but she hasn't let
this get in the way of getting together with Fiona in this.

[PAGE 182]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 171 +


Definitional Ceremonies 171


M: Okay. Was there anything else that you . . .

Alison: I’ve got one more thing. This one's about Fiona's dad.

M: Okay.

Alison: He said that he was getting a bit of an education
in listening to Fiona and her mum talking like this. So, he’s
been interested. And he's also been open to what they've
been saying.

M: Thanks, Alison. You've been catching me up on what
really caught your attention here. What came to your mind
while you were listening to this?

Alison: What came to my mind while I was listening?

M: How did what you heard shape your sense of these peo-
ple? How did this effect your picture of who they are?

Alison: Well, what actually came to my mind was a storm.
I had a picture of Fiona and her mother weathering this
huge storm, something really massive, like a cyclone. I
think it was because I was watching the news last night
about this big cyclone off Darwin. Only with Fiona and her
mum, it’s a cyclone made of all of these expectations about
who they should be and shouldn't be. I had this picture of
this cyclone bending their lives like trees, bending them so
far that they are almost flat to the ground. But they won't
break. They are weathering this with each other, and they
are starting to spring back up at times.

M: This is a very strong image.

Alison: Yeah. Her dad is there too, but in a different way.
Let's see. If I think about it, yeah, that's it, he's finding ways
of bending that will give the best chance of everyone get-
ting through this.

M: What did you hear from Jake that set off this image of
him?

[PAGE 183]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 172 +


172 Maps of Narrative Practice


Alison: It was when he said that he was getting an educa-
tion when he was listening to Fiona and her mum, when
they were, you know, taking off anorexia's mask. He was
open to what he was hearing, and I noticed that he wasn't
crowding in on them with his own agenda.

M: This is quite an image of these people weathering this
cyclone. What does this suggest to you about what is
important to Fiona and her parents?

Alison: What's important to them?

M: Yeah. What's your guess about what Fiona and her par-
ents value, or about what is precious to them?

Alison: Well, with Fiona and her mum, they are both
women who are talking about what's going on for them on
the inside. You know, about all of these expectations about
who they should be, and about what they are up against.
So, maybe this is something about their hopes. Or maybe
about their dreams. Dreams that they haven't ever had the
chance to talk about before.

M: Maybe about what sort of dreams?

Alison: Dreams about having different lives, about not just
having all of these frustrations to live with. About having a
life where they have space to breathe clear air. Maybe
dreams about being . . . being entitled to a bit more. That
sort of thing.

M: Your guess is that it is about these hopes and dreams.
Did you hear anything in particular that might relate to
these hopes and dreams?

Alison: I think this was about when Fiona's mum talked
about how she knew that Fiona really hungered for lots of
things that anorexia was getting in the way of, and that she
herself, Fiona's mum, was only just starting to think about
some of the things she also hungered for, things that had


o

[PAGE 184]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 173 +


Definitional Ceremonies 173


been pushed out of her mind for a very long time, nearly
forever.

M: And you also had this image of Jake being with them in
weathering the cyclone, about finding ways of bending that
will give the best chance of everyone getting through this.
What does this suggest to you about what is important to
Jake?

Alison: Well, like I said, he’s hanging in there to. And I
reckon that some of these new directions aren't going to be
easy for him because he’s also going to have to make
changes too. I think he’s going to have to do different
things, things that he hasn't done before, particularly with
Fiona's mum getting clearer about all of the expectations
and things that she’s hungered for. I think it could be a
really big stretch for him.

M: You talked about him hanging in with this. What does
this suggest about what's important to him?

Alison: There’s something about, maybe about being able
to be out of his comfort zone a bit and to see this through.
I don't think I’m being very clear. . . .

M: Like a principle of seeing things through, of not let-
ting—


Alison: Yeah, something about seeing through what has to
be seen through.

M: You have talked about what you heard that really stood
out for you, and about how this shaped your sense of Fiona
and her parents. Would you say a little about what this
struck a chord with in your own life?

Alison: I know the answer to this. It took me right back to
my own struggle with anorexia. Anorexia really had me in a
corner. | was down on my knees, and it nearly had me dead.
I was nearly a goner. I know this now. For a while nearly


a

[PAGE 185]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 174 +


174 Maps of Narrative Practice


everyone had given up on me, and I was almost totally
alone. And the more alone I became the worse the situa-
tion got. But I still had these lifelines that I hadn't really
realized had been there all the way along, and one of these
was with my own mum. | remember that learning that we
werent so different was really important. I mean we were
different, but we were dealing with lots of the same things.
And we drewa lot from each other in this.

M: How do you mean?

Alison: Well, I can say it better these days. Mum and I
started to talk more about what was happening on the
inside of us, and even though she didn't have anorexia,
what was happening on her inside was pretty similar. You
know, being hammered by all of these expectations, day in,
day out, night in, night out.

M: Okay, I understand. Another question?

Alison: Okay.

M: You've been an audience to a story about aspects of
these people's lives. And you've given a retelling of what
you heard in their story. When people are an audience to
important stories, and when they have the opportunity to
respond in the way that you have, they often go on a jour-
ney in their own lives. Being present to these stories takes
them to a place that they wouldn't have arrived at if they'd
been at work or out shopping. So I'd be interested in any
reflections that you might have about where this has taken
you. Maybe to new thoughts about your own life. Maybe to
some realizations. Anything.

Alison: Well one thing that I do know is that I’ve got a bet-
ter understanding of how I got through this, about how I
got my life back from anorexia. I did know that it was
important that my mum didn't let me get isolated, even
though her guesses about what was going on inside my


ee

[PAGE 186]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 175 +


Definitional Ceremonies 175


thoughts often really irritated me. And I mean really irri-
tated me. But I think I am clearer about how me and my
mum did this together, and about how important it was for
me to hear about what was going on inside of her thoughts.

M: Having a better understanding. Do you have any ideas
about what this better understanding will bring to your life?

Alison: I think even a better appreciation of my relation-
ship with my mum, and this gives me a really warm feeling
inside. And I also got more of a realization of my dad's part
in this, and how hard it must have been for him to make
lots of the changes that had to be made. I know that he'd
say that he’s a better person for this, but it must have been
pretty tough at times. I think I'll go and have a good talk
with him about this.

M: What’s your guess about the outcome of doing this?

Alison: I don't know, but I think it would be good for him
and me in our relationship with each other.

M: It is nearly time for you to switch places with Fiona and
her parents. But before we finish, would you again just
return to what you heard from Jake that has opened up this
possibility for this conversation with your father? And also
about what you heard from Fiona and her mother that has
given you an even stronger appreciation of your relation-
ship with your mother, and that has given you such a warm
feeling inside?

Alison: Okay...


After this retelling, Alison returned to the audience position. At this
time I began to interview Fiona and her parents about what they'd
heard in this retelling that had caught their attention, about any
images that this had evoked of their own lives and identities, about
any realizations regarding their own lives that might have been set off
by this, about their understandings of why they were drawn to partic-


Ze

[PAGE 187]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 176 er


176 Maps of Narrative Practice


ular aspects of Alison’s retelling, and about what they had arrived at
on account of being an audience to this retelling. In response to these
questions I learned that Alison’s retelling had been a very profound
experience for all three family members.
The metaphor of the cyclone had been deeply resonant for them,
as were Alison’s reflections on what this suggested about what they
gave value to in life. Alison’s reflections provided a foundation for
them to further embroider upon what life was about for them, to refa-
miliarize themselves with the purposes and values that were of central
importance in their lives, and to reinvigorate these.
Fiona talked about how the retelling had helped her to get clearer
about what anorexia was up to and had given her a glimmer of what a
future apart from anorexia would be like. This, she said, had fueled
her hopes. Although she was at a point where it was still difficult to
distinguish thoughts that were favorable to anorexia from thoughts
that were favorable to her making a stronger appearance in life, she
felt that Alison’s reflections had “helped to lift some of the fog.”
Louise talked quite emotionally about how this retelling had taken
some weight off her shoulders, as she'd felt so burdened by a sense of
failure and guilt. The validation that she’d experienced in the retelling
had been almost overwhelming and was not something she would
have ever expected to be the recipient of.
Both Fiona and Louise spoke of how touched they had been by
Alison’s reflections on their relationship, and they were in tears for a
time as they talked about the frustrations associated with their new
teamwork and about some of the breakthroughs they felt they were
beginning to achieve in their project to free Fiona’s life from the
clutches of anorexia and to free Louise’s life from expectations associ-
ated with impoverishing gender-role prescriptions.
Louise spoke of the inspiration that she’d drawn from Fiona in her
initiative to speak up about her internal experience of the expectations
for perfection—about how this had made it possible for Louise to
begin to give voice to what she'd never given voice to and begin to
challenge some of the forces of life that were in league with these pre-
scriptions. Fiona was speechless for a time upon hearing this—that
she was a source of inspiration for her mother was a huge piece of


ee

[PAGE 188]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 177 +


Definitional Ceremonies 177


news for her to take in. I had a sense that taking in this news was
something of an antidote to the sense of desolation and emptiness
that she had been feeling.
Jake was quite taken by Alison's reflections on his own contribu-
tion in “bending in directions most favorable to getting through” what
had to be gotten through. He acknowledged that he had been find-
ing this challenging and that it had required him to do things he'd
never done before. For example, it had required him to challenge old
habits in his relationship with Louise, including those that were a
reflection of the taken-for-granted assumptions that contributed to
the forces that she'd been up against. He spoke of the defensiveness
that he had felt within himself and that he had been struggling with,
but also of some of the ways that he had managed to “loosen up a
bit.” He was feeling some pride in the fact that he thought he was
becoming “less uptight.”
At the end of our meeting, as we were saying goodbye, I asked
Alison if she thought that her own parents would be interested and
available to join her in a future meeting as an audience to another
conversation with Fiona and her parents and to participate with her in
another retelling. Alison thought that they would be quite motivated
to do this. Fiona, Louise, and Jake were also enthusiastic about this
idea, and three meetings later Alison's parents joined us.
It was clear from the feedback I received and from information
about subsequent developments that these two meetings—first with
Alison as an audience, and then with her and her parents as an audi-
ence—contributed to significant turning points in Fiona's recovery
from anorexia nervosa. | believe that Alison and her parents’ contri-
bution to these turning points far outweighed any contribution that I
could have made in my role as therapist. This is usually the case
when an audience is recruited to play this part. However, it is very
unlikely that such an outcome can be achieved if the therapist does-
nt develop questions that are effective in structuring the audience
retellings. The questions that I asked were shaped by categories of
inquiry that I have developed over many years in my exploration of
these retellings.
In the following sections I describe the history of this practice of


m

[PAGE 189]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 178 E


178 Maps of Narrative Practice


engaging an audience, the ideas that have contributed to the refine-
ment of this, and the categories of inquiry that structure these
retellings. I also discuss a range of considerations relevant to success-
ful outcome in the employment of this practice.


Engaging an Audience: The Lead-Up to the Use of
Definitional Ceremonies in Therapeutic Practice


In the 1980s, along with my friend and colleague David Epston, I began
to actively engage audiences in my work with families. This was partly
inspired by our observations of the extent to which many of the children
we met with spontaneously recruited audiences to the preferred devel-
opments of their lives. For example, in the context of our meetings with
families, children would be awarded certificates that acknowledged sig-
nificant achievements in their effort to reclaim their lives from trouble-
some problems. Invariably these children would show this certificate to
others—perhaps to their siblings, cousins, friends, or peers at school.
This usually had the effect of prompting questions from the “audience,”
which provided an opportunity for these children to give an account of
the feats signified by the certificate and at times to actually demonstrate
their prowess. These questions and responses from the “audience” were
clearly influential in acknowledging the preferred developments in
these children’s lives, in contributing to the endurance of these devel-
opments, and in extending them.
The practice of engaging audiences in our work with families was
also inspired by our explorations of the narrative metaphor. We had
developed a strong appreciation of the extent to which people’s lives
are shaped by their personal narratives, and of the extent to which
these personal narratives are coauthored in the context of people’s
relationships with those significant to them. In our work we had
become aware of the vital importance of rich narrative development in
opening to people a range of possibilities with regard to addressing
their problems and concerns. These were possibilities not previously
recognized. It was obvious to us that the audience played a critically
important role in this rich story development.


ee

[PAGE 190]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 179 +


Definitional Ceremonies 179


A third factor influencing this development in the recruitment of an
audience was our awareness of the degree to which personal narratives
are shaped by the socially constructed norms of culture, by the institu-
tions of culture, and by the power relations of these institutions. Very
often, we found that our therapeutic conversations were contributing
to the development of personal narratives that contradicted these
socially constructed norms and that shaped action that challenged
these power relations. In these circumstances we found that it was
very important to engage an audience that would play a role in verify-
ing these alternative personal narratives. Apart from other things, this
contributed to building a sense of solidarity with regard to the values
and aspirations for life reflected in these personal narratives. This was
highly sustaining in circumstances that could otherwise diminish any
story development that might be at odds with what was expected.
These observations about the role of the audience, dispelled any
thought that audience engagement should be a secondary considera-
tion in therapeutic practice. However, at this time we rarely involved
the audience directly in therapeutic conversations. Rather, we encour-
aged the people consulting us to identify others whose response might
be significantly supportive of preferred developments in their lives,
and we assisted them in seeking this audience out. We often took
recourse to written means of achieving this—certificates, “to whom it
may concern letters,” and so on.
Over many years this audience engagement was a consistent theme
in our work. Initially these audiences were drawn from family and
friendship networks, from school and workplace environments, from
pools of acquaintances including neighbors and shopkeepers, and from
communities of people unknown to those seeking consultation. As we
further explored this practice, we began to draw on the people who had
previously consulted us, asking them if they'd be interested in joining us
in our work at some future time in ways that might contribute to the res-
olution of other people's problems and concerns. These invitations have
mostly been met with strong enthusiasm—people have been more than
willing to have their names and contact details entered into our regis-
ters. I can count on one hand the number of times, over the years, that
this invitation to join one of these registers has been declined.


o

[PAGE 191]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 180 E


180 Maps of Narrative Practice


The Origin of Definitional Ceremonies


The work of cultural anthropologist Barbara Myerhoff (1982, 1986)
provided us with a fuller understanding of the significance of the audi-
ence’s contribution. Her understanding of the role of the “definitional
ceremony’ in people's identity projects also encouraged us to further
explore and develop options for recruiting audiences to our therapeu-
tic conversations and to research the sort of audience responses that
seemed most effective in contributing to rich story development and
to the endurance and expansion of the preferred developments of peo-
ple's lives. Myerhoff described the definitional ceremony when pro-
viding an account of the identity projects of a community of elderly
Jews in Venice, Los Angeles. This community was the focus of her
anthropological fieldwork in the mid-1970s.
As children and infants, at the turn of the 20th century, many of
the elderly Jews of this community had left the shtetls of Eastern
Europe and migrated to North America. Later in life, in their retire-
ment, they had been drawn to the mild climate of Southern
California, which was kind to their health, and to the inexpensive
housing in Venice, a beachside principality of Los Angeles. A large
number of these elderly Jews had become relatively isolated as a con-
sequence of losing their extended families to the Holocaust and as an
outcome of outliving their own children. For many of these people,
this isolation had led to the development of uncertainty about their
very existence, an uncertainty fueled by a sense of invisibility in the
eyes of the wider community, in the eyes of those in their more imme-
diate network, and in their own eyes.
With the assistance of a highly devoted and talented community
organizer named Maurie Rosen, these elderly Jews built a sense of
community in Venice. It was in the context of this community that
they recuperated and reenergized their sense of existence. Of all of
the mechanisms that contributed to this recuperation and reenergiz-
ing, the definitional ceremony played the primary role. Definitional
ceremony was the term employed by Myerhoff to describe the forums,
convened by this community, in which community members would
have the opportunity to tell and retell, and to perform and to reper-


ee

[PAGE 192]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 181 Ss


Definitional Ceremonies 181


form, the stories of their lives. It was in these forums that these eld-
erly Jews had the opportunity to reappear on their own terms in the
eyes of community members and in the eyes of the outsiders who
were invited to participate.


When cultures are fragmented and in serious disarray,
proper audiences may be hard to find. Natural occasions
may not be offered and then they must be artificially
invented. I have called such performances “Definitional
Ceremonies,” understanding them to be collective self-def-
initions specifically intended to proclaim an interpretation
to an audience not otherwise available. The latter must be
captured by any means necessary and made to see the truth
of the groups history as the members understand it.
Socially marginal people, disdained, ignored groups, indi-
viduals with what Erving Goffman calls “spoiled identities,”
regularly seek opportunities to appear before others in the
light of their own internally provided interpretation.
(Myerhoff, 1982, p. 105)


These definitional ceremonies provided an antidote to the effects
of the isolation experienced by the people of this community and to
the sense of invisibility that was a chief outcome of this isolation. In
drawing attention to the role of definitional ceremonies, Myerhoff
(1986) asserted that:


Definitional ceremonies deal with the problems of invisi-
bility and marginality; they are strategies that provide
opportunities for being seen and in one's own terms, gar-
nering witnesses to one's worth, vitality, and being. (p. 267)


Participation in these definitional ceremonies fostered an ethos of
living that was centered on the displacement of “thin” conclusions
about identity and on the recuperation of “thick” conclusions—for the
people of this community, life was an identity project. These identity
projects were characterized by a special self-reflexive consciousness.


a

[PAGE 193]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 182 +


182 Maps of Narrative Practice


In this consciousness, community members were aware of their par-
ticipation in the ongoing construction of their own and each other's
identities. In this consciousness, they were alert to the life-shaping
effect of their own contributions to the production of their own lives.
In this consciousness they were able to “assume responsibility for
inventing themselves and yet maintain their sense of authenticity and
integrity” (Myerhoff, 1982, p. 100). This made it more possible for
community members to intervene in the shaping of their lives in ways
that were in harmony with what was precious to them.
Myerhoff (1982) drew attention to the exceptional nature of this
phenomenon.


Sometimes conditions conspire to make a generational
cohort acutely self-conscious and then they become active
participants in their own history and provide their own
sharp, insistent definitions of themselves and explanations
for their destiny, past and future. They are then knowing
actors in a historical drama they script, rather than subjects
of someone else's study. They “make” themselves, some-
times even “make themselves up,” an activity which is not
inevitable or automatic but reserved for special people in
special circumstances. (p. 100)


As part of this self-reflexive consciousness, the actions of the mem-
bers of this community reflected an understanding of the extent to
which identity is:


e A public and social achievement, not a private and individ-
ual achievement
e Shaped by historical and cultural forces rather than by the
forces of human nature, however this human nature might
be conceived of
e The outcome of deriving a sense of authenticity through
social processes that acknowledge one’s preferred claims
about one’s identity and history (this is in contrast to the
idea that it is through the identification and expression of


a

[PAGE 194]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 183 er


Definitional Ceremonies 183


the essences of the “self” through introspection that one
finds authenticity in life)


The prominence given to “collective self-definitions,” to the imper-
ative of “appearing before others,” to “garnering witnesses to one’s
worth, vitality, and being,” and to “proclaiming an interpretation to an
audience not otherwise available” emphasises the central significance
of the contribution of the audience in these definitional ceremonies.
It was the audience response to the stories told and performed in
these forums that was verifying of these stories. It was the audience's
acknowledgement of the identity claims* expressed in these stories
that was authenticating of these identity claims. It was the audience
recognition of these stories that so significantly contributed to the
community members’ achieving a sense of feeling at one with their
claims about their lives. In the context of these forums, the audience
found themselves “participating in someone else’s drama” and becom-
ing “witnesses who pusha plot forward almost unwittingly


These old Jews . . . separating the curtains between the real
and unreal, imagined and actual, to step across the thresh-
old and draw with them, pulling behind them, witnesses
who find, often to their surprise, that they are somehow
participating in someone else’s drama. . . . Having stepped
over the threshold, they become the “fifth business,” wit-
nesses who push a plot forward almost unwittingly; their
story is not wholly their own but lives on, woven into the
stuff of other people's lives. (Myerhoff 1986, p. 284)


Myerhoff stressed the significance of the active participation of the
outsider witnesses in these definitional ceremonies. It was the audi-


* The term claims is not used here in a pejorative sense. Rather, it reflects the idea that
all conclusions about identity begin as identity claims that are socially constructed, and
that it is the social verification of these claims that lends veracity to them. In the context
of this social verification, a truth status is allocated to identity claims, which has a power-
ful shaping effect on a person's life and on the responses of others to the actions of this
person.

[PAGE 195]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 184 +


184 Maps of Narrative Practice


ence retellings of the stories that most powerfully authenticated the
identity claims expressed in those stories. It was the audience
retellings that lent “greater public and factual” character to these
claims, serving to amplify and authorize them. It was the audience
retellings that fostered in community members a sense of being at one
with their claims about their lives. It was the audience retellings that
played the principal role in the renewal of one’s sense of personal
authenticity.


Definitional Ceremonies in Therapeutic Practice


Myerhoff’s description of the role of the witnesses in these defini-
tional ceremonies struck a chord with some of the discoveries we had
made in our therapeutic practices—discoveries about the relevance of
the audience to rich story development, to the building of thick con-
clusions about identity, and to the endurance and expansion of pre-
ferred outcomes in the lives of the people who were consulting us.
Just as with the members of this community of elderly Jews in Venice,
we perceived that the audiences that we were recruiting in our work
were providing an opportunity for the people who were consulting us
to:


e Re-appear on their own terms in the eyes of community
members and in the eyes of the outsiders who were invited
to participate

e Experience an acknowledgment of the identity claims
expressed in their stories
e Experience the authentication of these identity claims
e Intervene in the shaping of their lives in ways that were in
harmony with what was precious to them


It was clear that the audiences that we were engaging in our work
played the role of witnesses who lent “greater public and factual’
character to people’s identity claims and who pushed “a plot forward
almost unwittingly.”

[PAGE 196]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 185 E


Definitional Ceremonies 185


Understanding the significance of audience participation in our
therapeutic practices, we more strongly focused on eliciting from
audiences retellings of what they had heard in people’s accounts of
the preferred developments of their lives. However, at this time the
audience was still mostly engaged indirectly in our work.
Tom Andersen’s (1987) development of “reflecting-team work” pro-
vided the inspiration to more directly engage the audience in thera-
peutic conversations. At first these more directly engaged audiences
were drawn from the networks of the lives of the people consulting us
and from the networks of our own lives. Later these audiences were
also drawn from the professional disciplines. At this time I set about
exploring what aspects of the retellings of the outsider witnesses were
most effective in contributing to rich story development in therapeu-
tic conversations. In the following section I describe some of the find-
ings of these explorations, focusing on the structure of meetings
shaped by as definitional ceremonies and on the specifics of the tra-
dition of acknowledgment associated with these audience retellings.


The Definitional Ceremony Structure


In therapeutic practice, definitional ceremonies are divided into three
distinct stages:


1. The telling of the significant life story by the person for
whom the definitional ceremony is for.
2. The retelling of the story by the people invited to be out-
sider witnesses.
3. The retelling of the outsider witnesses’ retelling, which is
done by the person for whom the definitional ceremony is
for.

The Telling


In this first stage, the therapist interviews the people seeking consul-
tation while the outsider witnesses listen as an audience. In the con-
text of this interview, the therapist finds opportunities to ask questions


m

[PAGE 197]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 186 E


186 Maps of Narrative Practice


that encourage the telling of significant stories of people's lives that
are relevant to matters of personal and relationship identity. The out-
sider witnesses listen carefully to the stories told and prepare to
engage in a retelling of what they have heard.
In my meeting with Fiona, her parents, and Alison, I first inter-
viewed Fiona and her parents. This interview provided the context for
further explorations of the operations of anorexia nervosa in the lives
and relationships of family members, of their experiences of this, and
of the many forces that supported anorexia nervosa. It also provided
the context for further explorations of developments that were not
favorable to anorexia nervosa, of the foundations of these develop-
ments, of what these developments reflected about what family mem-
bers accorded value to, and of the history of what they accorded value
to. Alison was in the audience position during this time, as an outsider
witness to this conversation that I refer to as the telling. Alison was
not an active participant in this conversation, but rather witnessed it
from the outside.

The Retelling


When the time seems right, the outsider witnesses switch positions
with the people whose lives are at the center of the definitional cere-
mony. These people now form an audience to the retelling of the out-
sider witnesses. This retelling is usually shaped by the questions of
the therapist. It is not a retelling of the whole content of the telling or
a summary of what the outsider witnesses heard. Rather, it is a
retelling of those aspects of the original telling that the outsider wit-
nesses were drawn to, a retelling that encapsulates and embroiders
upon these aspects of the telling so that the retelling exceeds the
boundaries of the original telling in significant ways. This contributes
to the rich description of the relationships and personal identities of
the people whose lives are at the center of the ceremony. These out-
sider witness retellings also contribute to the linking of the stories of
people’s lives around shared themes, and they are powerfully resonant
in that they vividly represent what people accord value to in ways that
are highly acknowledging.
When the story of Fiona and her parents had been sufficiently



[PAGE 198]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 187 er


Definitional Ceremonies 187


drawn out to provide Alison with a foundation to respond, I asked
them to sit back while I interviewed Alison about what she had heard.
My questions supported Alison in the development of a retelling that
vividly re-presented what it was that Fiona and her parents accorded
value to. These questions encouraged Alison to identify the aspects of
the telling that had particularly caught her attention and aroused her
interest. They also invited Alison to speak of the images or mental pic-
tures that were evoked by the expressions of the telling, of what these
expressions struck a chord with in her own experience, and of the
ways in which she had been personally moved by these expressions.
In this manner, Alison’s retelling encapsulated elements of the origi-
nal telling, but also exceeded the boundaries of it in various ways. This
retelling contributed significantly to the sort of rich story development
that was redefining of the relationships between Fiona and her par-
ents and of their identities. This retelling also contributed to rich story
development througha linking of all the participants’ lives around spe-
cific themes that related to what they intended for their lives and what
they accorded value to. In a subsequent meeting, when Alison’s par-
ents joined her as outsider witnesses, the stories of their lives were
also linked to these themes.
A key part of outsider witness retellings is their adherence to a tra-
dition of acknowledgment. This tradition of acknowledgement can be
described in terms of four principal categories of inquiry. I use the
term inquiry to emphasize the fact that retellings are not conducted
according to an “anything goes” sentiment, but rather are guided by
questions from the therapist. Specifically, these retellings are not
about giving affirmations, offering congratulatory responses, pointing
out positives, focusing on strengths and resources, making moral judg-
ments or evaluating people's lives against cultural norms (whether
these judgments and evaluations are positive or negative), interpreting
the lives of others and formulating hypotheses, delivering interven-
tions with the intention of resolving people’s problems, giving advice
or presenting moral stories or homilies, reframing the events of peo-
ple's lives, imposing alternative stories about people's lives, trying to
help people with their predicaments and dilemmas, or expressing
worry for the lives of others. Further, outsider witness responses are


a

[PAGE 199]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 188 er


188 Maps of Narrative Practice


not so much about empathy and sympathy but about resonance—out-
sider witness responses that are most effective are those that re-pres-
ent what people give value to in a way that is highly resonant to these
people.
In defining what these outsider witness retellings are not, it is not
my intention to suggest that all that routinely goes in the name of
acknowledgment is inappropriate with regard responding to the
events of people's lives. I am not questioning the validity of these
responses in daily life; I can think of many occasions in which con-
oratulating, giving affirmations, advising, and so on is appropriate and
valuable. However, in the context of definitional ceremony conversa-
tions, these responses are unlikely to contribute to rich story develop-
ment and may even promote thin conclusions about life
Additionally, many of the responses listed above involve acts of
judgment—for example, congratulating a person implies that the per-
son has performed well according to a particular criterion and that the
audience occupies a position of knowledge that makes it valid for
them to make such an assessment. The therapeutic context is not an
everyday life context, and in this context people can easily be and feel
patronized by congratulatory responses, or feel that the audience
doesn't understand and takes lightly their circumstances or predica-
ments, or that the audience is insincere, or that the audience is ridi-
culing and mocking them. Because there is a power relationship in the
therapeutic context, any of these experiences will lead to a sense of
alienation from the therapist and from the outsider witnesses.
Therapists have an ethical responsibility for the consequences of
the audience participation in therapeutic contexts. This responsibility
can be best observed if the therapist structures the retellings of the
outsider witnesses. In speaking of this structuring, I don’t mean to
imply that it restricts the audience participation. Rather, in my expe-
rience, this structuring provides conditions under which outsider wit-
nesses find themselves thinking beyond what they routinely think and
giving voice to what they would not otherwise be giving voice to. In
general, retellings are not constricted by familiar and taken-for-
granted responses to the stories of people's lives.
Retellings structured according to the four following categories of


oe

[PAGE 200]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 189 er


Definitional Ceremonies 189


inquiry have the potential to be highly resonant for the people whose
lives are at the center of the definitional ceremony. It is this resonance
that contributes significantly to rich story development, to a stronger
familiarity with what one accords value to in life, and to the erosion
and displacement of various negative conclusions about one’s life and
identity. This resonance also facilities an experience of being knowl-
edged about how to proceed in addressing the dilemmas and predica-
ments being faced.
Before I discuss the four categories of inquiry, however, I will pro-
vide a brief overview of how I prepare outsider witnesses for the def-
initional ceremony.


Outsider-Witness Preparation
In most cases, I talk briefly with the outsider witnesses before they
participate in the meeting. At this time I inform them that, in their
retelling, I will be inviting them to:


e Play a part in a tradition of acknowledgment that I under-
stand to be particularly relevant to rich story development
e Engage in retellings that are the outcome of close listen-
ing and that are composed of particular aspects of the sto-
ries that they were drawn to
e Express these retellings in ways that will not be imposing
e Respond personally in speaking of their understanding of
why they are drawn to what they are drawn to and about
how this has affected them
e Step back from many of the common ways that people
respond to the stories of other people's lives, including
from giving opinions or advice, making judgments, and
theorizing


I then negotiate with the outsider witnesses the option of my inter-
jecting with a question if I have a sense that this might contribute to
responses more favorable to rich story development, or if I think that
the retelling is entering into territories of acknowledgment that con-
tradict the tradition that we are intending to reproduce in these


ee

[PAGE 201]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 190 $


190 Maps of Narrative Practice


retellings. I also make it clear that this option of interjection is neces-
sitated by the fact that I will be taking full ethical responsibility for the
consequences of the outsider witness retelling. This arrangement is
invariably welcomed by outsider witnesses, for it helps to reduce
apprehension and allay fears and concerns about the task ahead. It is
also relieving, for it offers outsider witnesses the freedom to respond
to my questions without having to get into the sort of self-monitoring
that would be entirely restrictive of them in their responses.
I then usually describe the four categories of inquiry that will shape
my interview of the outsider witnesses, being careful to use language
that is familiar to them and taking into account cultural considera-
tions and the age and stage of development of the outsider witnesses.
At this time, copies of the following description (or a version of it) can
be handed out.


The Four Categories of Inquiry
1. First, the focus will be on the expression. I will be asking you to
identify and speak about what you heard that you were most drawn
to: what caught your attention or captured your imagination. At this
time I will be particularly interested in the expressions that pro-
vided you with a sense of what it is that the person accords value
to in life. These expressions may be specific words or phrases or
particular moods and sentiments. In speaking of the expressions
that you are most drawn to, you will be signaling that your interest
in the persons life is particular and distinct—not a general human
interest or a global interest. This focus on the person's specific
expressions will lend a precision to your retelling.
2. Second, the focus will be on the image. I will ask you to describe
any images that came to your mind as you listened—images that
were evoked by the expressions that you were drawn to. These
images might take the form of certain metaphors about the person's
life, or they might be mental pictures of the person's identity or
relationships. Or they might be in the form of a “sense” that you
derive from the person's life. After you describe these, I will
encourage you to speculate about what these metaphors and men-
tal pictures might reflect about the person’s purposes, values,


o

[PAGE 202]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 191 +


Definitional Ceremonies 191


beliefs, hopes, aspirations, dreams, and commitments—about what
the person intends for his or her life and accords value to. At this
time I will ask you questions that place the stress on what these
images might say about the person's life and identity; I will not be
asking you to formulate any solid conclusions about this matter.
3. Third, the focus will be on personal resonance.* I will encourage
you to provide some account of why you were so drawn to these
expressions, with a specific focus on your understanding of what
these expressions struck a chord with in your own personal history.
In placing your interest in the person's expression within the con-
text of your own experiences of life, your interest becomes what I
often refer to as “embodied interest,” not disembodied interest.
Another way of saying this is that your interest will be clearly estab-
lished as personal interest, not academic interest; engaged and vital
interest, not distant, armchair interest. What will be most relevant
at this time will be for you to speak of what experiences in your own
history lit up and came into memory on account of these expres-
sions. For those of the professional disciplines, this can include
experiences of therapeutic conversations had with others.
4. Fourth, the focus will be on transport. I will invite you to identify
and speak of the ways in which you have been moved on account
of being present to witness these stories of life. It is rarely possible
to be an audience to the powerful dramas of other people's lives
without this moving us in some way. I mean “moved” in a broad
sense of the word. It might help for you to think about the places
that this experience has taken you that you would not have arrived
at had you been out gardening or shopping at this time. This can
help you to prepare for my questions about where this experience
has taken you with regard to your own thoughts, including your
reflections on your own existence, your understandings of your own


* In this chapter I use the term resonance to describe two different phenomena. First, I
employed this term to characterize the retellings of the definitional ceremony, understand-
ing these to be powerfully resonant with what people give value to in life. Second, I have
employed this term to characterize the personal resonances experienced by the outsider
witnesses. These resonances are experienced in response to people's expressions.


Ze

[PAGE 203]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 192 +


192 Maps of Narrative Practice


life, or your perspectives on life more generally. Or about where this
experience has taken you with regard to ideas about conversations
that you might have with figures of your own life, or about options
for action with regard to predicaments in your own life and in your
relationships. This acknowledgement will be an account of how
your life has been touched in ways that have contributed to your
becoming someone other than who you were before you witnessed
the person’s expressions and had the opportunity to respond to
them.
After describing these four categories of inquiry in terms that will
be clear to the outsider witnesses, I suggest that, while listening to the
telling, outsider witnesses simply endeavour to be aware of what they
are drawn to and to be conscious of what images, reflections, or
thoughts this is evoking for them. I inform the outsider witnesses that
the material that provides a foundation for responses to the third (res-
onance) and fourth (transport) levels of this inquiry will be generated
in response to my questions during the course of the retelling.
To further illustrate these categories of inquiry, I have charted
Alison’s retelling onto a “definitional ceremony conversations map”
(Figure 4.1). This is a generalized charting that depicts the journey of
this conversation as progressive and incremental in its movement
through the four stages of outsider witness inquiry. However, Alison’s
retelling was not actually this linear in its progression, for time and
again I encouraged her to recenter the expressions of Fiona, Louise,
and Jake. This constant recentering of the expressions of the people
who are the center of these therapeutic conversations ensures that all
outsider witness responses are grounded in these expressions. This
authenticates these responses and this is a characteristic of the defi-
nitional ceremonies of narrative practice.
I developed the expression, image, resonance, and transport cate-
gories of inquiry in response to my explorations of audience participa-
tion in therapeutic practice. I also put other categories of inquiry,
mostly derived from narrative conceptions of life, to the test, and
although many of these were influential, I found the four categories
that I have described here to be most effective in promoting rich story
development. These findings are based on my own direct observations


m

[PAGE 204]



ddpraızenden


Figure 4.1 Charting Outsider-Witness Retellings (Alison)

LO/ET/E

—better understanding of how she v

reclaimed life from anorexia nervosa
Transport =strong appreciation of relationship LE

with mother & associated warm feelings
Wd
-ideas for conversation with father

ebed
—experience of hammering
Resonance expectations
—the lifeline discovered in £6T

relationship with mother
The image & speculation cyclone metaphor
about what this reflects —mother’s & daughter’s dreams about
regarding intentional what life could be
understandings & what is —Jake’s commitment to seeing
accorded value through what has to be seen through
yet richer

Particularities of ) description ol
. —exposé of expectations of perfection expressions that
expression —Louise joining
joining Fiona in the exposé
p triggered
ggere this
—Jake's openness to an education transport


5 10 15 20

Time in minutes



[PAGE 205]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 194 $


194 Maps of Narrative Practice


of the effects of these retellings, as well as on feedback I have
received from the people whose lives are at the center of the defini-
tional ceremonies
I also found that the retellings that seemed most seamless and that
were most significant to outsider witnesses were those that were
structured by these four categories of inquiry. For outsider witnesses,
attending to what they are most strongly drawn to in people's expres-
sions usually heightens awareness of their associative thoughts and of
the images of life and identity that are triggered by these expressions.
These images of life and identity are often rich in metaphor, analogy,
and simile. Such images have the potential to set off reverberations
into the history of their lives. Much in the way that the surface of the
eardrum resonates when touched by the reverberations of sound
waves, aspects of our own personal experiences can resonate in
response to these reverberations of the image. These experiences,
many of which have previously been neglected, “light up” and come
into memory. We therefore experience a sense that, in some way, the
stories of our lives are joined with the stories of the lives of the peo-
ple at the center of the ceremony.


Image, Reverberation, Resonance, and Katharsis
These concepts of image, reverberation, and resonance are drawn
from the work of Gaston Bachelard (1969), a philosopher of science
who wrote about the images of reverie and the poetics of the image. I
have considered many of his ideas highly relevant to therapeutic prac-
tice in general, and to outsider witness inquiry in particular. Having
these three concepts in mind when interviewing outsider witnesses
has significantly shaped the questions that I have generated.
Another concept that I have found strongly influential, and that is
implicit in the fourth category of outsider witness inquiry (transport),
is the concept of katharsis. I spell this with a k to distinguish it from
contemporary notions of catharsis associated with metaphors of dis-
charge, release, abreaction, and so on. By katharsis I am referring to
what I understand to be a central classical understanding of this con-
cept—katharisis as a phenomenon that one experiences in response
to witnessing powerful expressions of life’s dramas, a phenomenon


a

[PAGE 206]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 195 er


Definitional Ceremonies 195


particularly associated with one’s response to the performance of
Greek tragedy. According to this classical definition, an experience is
kathartic if one is moved by it—moved not just in terms of having an
emotional experience, but in terms of being transported to another
place in which one might:


e Achieve a new perspective on one’s life and identity
e Reengage with neglected aspects of one's own history
e Reconnect with revered values and purposes for one's life
e Make new meanings of experiences of one’s life that were
not previously understood
e Experience a familiarity with knowledge of life and skills
of living that one was previously barely aware of
e Initiate steps in one’s life otherwise never considered
e Think beyond what one routinely thinks


I believe that the employment of this concept of katharsis is very
much in accord with the priority that is given in outsider witness prac-
tices to the description of the particularities of the expressions of the
people whose lives are at the center of these definitional ceremonies.
This is because the phenomenon of katharsis relates to specific
expressions of life that strike a chord for us, that we are drawn to, that
most capture our imagination, that fire our curiosity, and that provoke
our fascination.
The katharsis concept fosters inquiry into the identification of the
ways in which one has been transported by the stories of the people
whose lives are at the center of the definitional ceremony. And it
encourages the acknowledgment of this—acknowledgment of the way
that these stories have taken us to places that we could not have pre-
dicted. It helps us to find appropriate ways of acknowledging that
these powerful expressions of life have shaped our own lives and that
we have become someone other than who we would have been if we
had not been present to witness these expressions. These acknowl-
edgments are made even more powerful by their grounding in the
specifics of their influence—they are not grand or ingratiating.
It should also be noted that the concept of katharsis does not apply


a

[PAGE 207]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 196 E


196 Maps of Narrative Practice


solely to outsider witness retellings. I believe it is an appropriate con-
cept through which to understand our own responses as therapists to
the everyday dramas of life that we witness in our therapeutic conver-
sations, in teaching contexts, and in working with communities.
There are occasions in which outsider witnesses have difficulty
identifying katharsis. At these times therapists can introduce explo-
rations of the potential ramifications of the outsider witness's experi-
ence of resonance. For example, in acknowledging resonance, an out-
sider witness might give an account of the contribution of a favorite
aunt who saw the person through difficult times but find it difficult to
identify any katharthic response. The therapist can briefly interview
this outsider witness about whether the aunt knew how significant her
contribution was, and if not, about what it would mean for her to
know this and about how the direct acknowledgment of this might
touch the life of the outsider witness. Another example: An outsider
witness might give an account of a yearning that he or she experienced
in the context of resonance but then find it difficult to trace any ele-
ment of katharsis. In response, the therapist might inquire about the
experience of publicly declaring this yearning: What has it been like
for you to speak openly of this yearning here? What are the effects of
taking this step? Will this make it any easier for you to make this
yearning visible to others? If so, what might be the consequences of
this?

The Retelling of the Retelling


After the retelling, the outsider witnesses return to the audience posi-
tion, and the people whose lives are at the center of the ceremony are
interviewed about what they have heard in the retelling. In this way,
they are engaged in the second of the retellings, this time in a retelling
of the outsider witnesses' retelling
This interview is conducted according to the same four categories
of inquiry (expression, image, resonance, and transport), except that
the focus of the second category of inquiry (image) remains on the
images of the person's life and identity rather than on images of the
life and identity of the outsider witnesses. In other words, the person
is interviewed about the metaphors or mental pictures of his or her



[PAGE 208]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 197 er


Definitional Ceremonies 197


own life that were evoked by the retellings of the outsider witnesses.
People are interviewed about:


e The expressions of the outsider witnesses that they were
drawn to
e The images or mental pictures evoked by these expres-
sions (this time, the images or mental pictures pertaining
to their own lives, not the lives of the outsider witnesses)
and what this reflects about what they intend for their
lives and what they accord value to in life
e The personal experiences that these expressions touched
on


e Where these expressions of the outsider witnesses had
taken them to in their thoughts on, understanding about,
and perceptions of their own lives and in their reflections
on possibilities for action


In this stage of the meeting with Alison, Fiona, Louise, and Jake, I
began by interviewing Fiona and her parents about what they had
heard in Alison’s retelling that had particularly caught their attention
and aroused their interest. They were then interviewed about what
these expressions had evoked for them: for Fiona, a vision of new
hope for a future apart from anorexia; for Louise, an image of a mother
who had persevered in the face of powerfully discouraging forces and
of the inspiration that she drew from Fiona’s initiatives in reclaiming
her life from anorexia, for Fiona and Louise, a portrait of their life-giv-
ing teamwork and of women who were challenging inequitable expec-
tations for their lives; for Jake, a stronger sense of his commitment to
values of fairness expressed in his willingness to face the challenges
associated with negotiating a new relationship arrangement with
Louise and Fiona.
I also interviewed Fiona and her parents about their personal expe-
riences that had resonated with these aspects of Alison’s retelling and
about the destinations that they might have arrived at in their under-
standings and in their reflections on possibilities for their lives on
account of being an audience to this retelling and as an outcome of


oe

[PAGE 209]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 198 er


198 Maps of Narrative Practice


participating in a retelling of this retelling. I learned that, apart from
other things, Fiona had arrived at a greater clarity about the operations
of anorexia nervosa and about aspects of her teamwork with Louise;
Louise had felt freed from some of the burden of guilt and had new
realizations about challenges and developments in her own life that
paralleled those that Fiona was experiencing; and Jake had some pro-
posals for how he might modify some of his previously taken-for-
granted ways of responding to Louise and Fiona.

Shifting Between the Three Stages of Telling and Retelling


The shifts between the telling, the retelling, and the retelling of the
retelling are distinct and relatively formal movements. For example,
when engaging in the retelling, it is important that outsider witnesses
do not bring the audience into this circle; they do not directly address
those in the audience position, but rather talk with each other (or with
the therapist) about what they heard during the telling. To directly
address the people whose lives are at the center of the ceremony
would be to deprive them of their audience status. This would have
profound implications with regard to the listening orientation of the
audience, limiting what they might otherwise hear. Degeneration of
these distinct positions would compromise the conditions that give
rise to rich story development.
To facilitate these distinct shifts of position, one-way screens and
closed-circuit television can be utilized. However, this is not neces-
sary, and in many of the contexts in which I employ definitional cere-
mony structures, including in work with communities, such facilities
are rarely available and often not appropriate. In these circumstances,
those in the audience position sit apart from those who are engaging
in the tellings and retellings, and those who are engaging in the
tellings and retellings form a circle with the therapist.
In providing an account of this structure of definitional ceremony
in therapeutic contexts, | have emphasised three stages of telling and
retelling. However, given the appropriate circumstances, the luxury of
time, and the interest and energy level of participants, these positions
may be switched time and again in the facilitation of multiple levels
of telling and retelling. There can even be a fourth stage in which all


oe

[PAGE 210]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 199 er


Definitional Ceremonies 199


parties meet together to talk about their experience of the exercise. I
have discussed this fourth stage in detail elsewhere (White, 1995).


The Extended Performance of Katharsis
Another variation on the stages of definitional ceremonies may be
appropriate when the person seeking consultation has found the
katharsis aspect of the conversation extremely beneficial. This is par-
ticularly the case when the person seeking consultation has little
sense of personal agency, as is common among people who have been
through significant trauma. When people have little sense of personal
agency, they often feel irrelevant, empty, desolate, and paralyzed—as
if their life is frozen in time. Outsider witnesses’ acknowledgment of
katharsis—their explanations of how they have been transported by
the stories they have heard from the person—can be a potent antidote
to this.
When therapists sense that outsider witness retellings have been
particularly resonant for the person seeking consultation, they can talk
with the outsider witnesses after the definitional ceremony about the
possibility of extending the performance of katharsis. These “extended
performances” are are intended to provide outsider witnesses with an
opportunity to acknowledge the continuing effects of the katharsis on
their lives. This acknowledgment can be in the form of notes, letters,
audiotapes, or videotapes sent to the person whose life was at the cen-
ter of the definitional ceremony, or they can be other gestures that
convey the significance of the katharsis with regard to events follow-
ing the definitional ceremony. Here is an example of of this.
Marianne had a history of significant and recurrent trauma, and
she had struggled with the consequences of this over a long period of
her life. In our second meeting I interviewed Marianne in the pres-
ence of three outsider witnesses. Two of them were people who had
previously consulted me about the effects of trauma in their lives. The
third, Hazel, was a counselor who had a special interest in working
with people who had been subject to trauma.
In the first part of this second meeting I interviewed Marianne
about her experience of trauma, about the consequences of this to her
life, about her responses to trauma, and about the foundation of these


aoe

[PAGE 211]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 200 +


200 Maps of Narrative Practice


responses. I then interviewed the outsider witnesses and noticed that
Marianne seemed particularly drawn to Hazel's acknowledgment of
katharsis. In this acknowledgment, Hazel had spoken of some new
realizations that she had come to about what might be helpful in her
work with two women who had been consulting her about the effects
of trauma on their lives. Hazel said that until this moment she had felt
somehow constrained in her consultations with these two women and
frustrated that she couldn't find a way of proceeding that was to her
satisfaction. She also said that over the last month or so she had
become concerned that she was failing these two women. In the con-
text of the outsider witness retelling, Hazel spoke of these new real-
izations and of the possibilities that she thought these might bring to
her therapeutic conversations with these two women. She rounded off
this acknowledgment of katharsis with: “Because of what I’ve heard
from Marianne, I now have some clear ideas about how to proceed in
my consultations with these two women.” When I interviewed
Marianne about her response to the retellings of the outsider wit-
nesses, she dwelled for some time on this account of her potential
contribution to Hazel’s work. She seemed a little awestruck: “I always
think of myself as something that is useless and just a burden to oth-
ers. Who would have ever thought that I could do anything that might
help someone else? This is a big thing to get my head around, it really
is. It is going to take a while!”
At the end of this meeting Hazel was acutely aware of the signifi-
cance of her acknowledgment of katharsis. Three weeks later I
received two letters addressed to Marianne via my office, along with
a note from Hazel. In this note Hazel explained that these two letters
had been cowritten by her and the women she’d mentioned, and that
these letters provided an account of the ways in which Marianne’s
story had opened new avenues for them to address the consequences
of trauma in their lives. Hazel also suggested that I read these letters
to Marianne during my next meeting with her.
Marianne was so moved by these letters that she had to take a time-
out in the courtyard on two occasions in order to, in her words, “get
myself together again.” She was also powerfully touched by the gifts
that we had discovered in the two envelopes. One of the letters was


ee

[PAGE 212]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 201 er


Definitional Ceremonies 201


accompanied by a beautiful hand-crafted card with an inscription that
honored Marianne’s contribution. The other letter was accompanied
by five coupons for espresso and cake at a café.
Some time later Marianne informed me she had never experienced
anything even close to this sort of acknowledgment in her entire life—
that this was “light-years” away from anything that she’d ever known.
She also said that it had been important that this acknowledgment
wasn't in a form that she could refute or deny; she hadn’t experienced
it as an attempt to point out positives but rather as a factual account
of the ripples produced by her own expressions. This provided her
with a platform for new initiatives to recover from the trauma of her
history. I also learned that this experience had affirmed a long-held
secret hope that all she had been through would not be for nothing.
As I mentioned earlier, extended performances of katharsis can be
particularly significant for people who have been subject to trauma. It
is common for these people to hold onto a secret longing for the world
to be different due to what they have been through or a secret hope
that all that they endured wasn’t for nothing, a hidden desire to con-
tribute to the lives of others who have had similar experiences or a fan-
tasy about playing a part in relieving the suffering of others, or a pas-
sion to play some part in acts of redress in relation to the injustices of
the world. Extended performances of katharsis can be powerfully res-
onant with these longings, hopes, desires, fantasies, and passions and
can serve as antidotes to a sense of personal emptiness and desolation.


Outsider Witness Selection


As previously mentioned, when I first began conducting definitional
ceremonies, | drew outsider witnesses principally from people's fam-
ily and friendship networks, from school and workplace environments,
and from pools of acquaintances including neighbors and shopkeep-
ers. I also drew from communities of people unknown to the people
seeking consultation, including from our my personal and social net-
works or from others of the professional disciplines visiting us for
training and consultation.

[PAGE 213]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 202 E


202 Maps of Narrative Practice


In my continued development of these ceremonies, however, I have
increasingly drawn from my registers of people who have previously
sought my consultation and who volunteer to join me in my work with
others who might follow in their footsteps. Invitations to join these
registers are invariably received enthusiastically. I believe that this
enthusiasm is partly due the fact that many of these people have had
direct experience with outsider witness retellings in the context of
their own therapy sessions with me. Thus, they understand that their
contribution to the life of others has the potential to be quite pro-
found. They also understand that they will not be taking responsibil-
ity for the problems of the people they help and that their participa-
tion will be time-limited.

Repositioning


When outsider witnesses are recruited from within people’s families,
especially when these family members are in significant dispute with
those whose lives will be at the center of the definitional ceremony, it
is usually necessary to help them to “reposition” themselves before
their participation as outsider witnesses. This is because the defini-
tional ceremony will require them to disengage from their habitual
ways of responding to the people who will be the subjects of their
retellings. These habitual responses can seem almost hard-wired with
regard to the tensions in family relationships, making them very diffi-
cult to break.
Disengaging from these habitual responses often can be best
achieved by inviting the family members to separate, for the duration
of the definitional ceremony, from their usual sense of being in rela-
tionship with each other. One effective way of achieving this is for
them to adopt an alternative position from which they will find it eas-
ier to reproduce the tradition of outsider witness response. To help
them establish this alternative position, therapists can invite family
members to share stories about life experiences in which they were
the subject of significant acknowledgment, understanding, compas-
sion, or acceptance and to identify the figures who extended this.
Family members can then reposition themselves as one of these fig-
ures during the outsider witness retelling. It is important that the fig-


ee

[PAGE 214]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 203 +


Definitional Ceremonies 203


ures chosen by family members are acceptable to those who are the
focus of the definitional ceremony. The figures chosen should not be
ones that these people have had a negative experience of or feel alien-
ated from in any way. If a figure chosen is unknown to those who are
the focus of the definitional ceremony, it is important that the iden-
tity of this figure is drawn out before it is sanctioned as an acceptable
choice.
This repositioning inquiry is usually prefaced by some discussion of
the difficulties that can be predicted in trying to respond in ways that
are not dictated by usual habits of response. It is also prefaced by the
observation that although many things can be uniquely achieved in
the context of family relationships, some things are better achieved in
the context of other forms of relationship. This observation is followed
up with the suggestion that family members not reposition themselves
as each other, or as other members of the immediate family.
As figures who are candidates for this repositioning are identified,
the therapist can inquire about the ways in which they went about
expressing acknowledgment, understanding, love, compassion, or
acceptance. In this inquiry, the therapist encourages family members
to spell out the sort of skills employed by these figures in these expres-
sions. In this way, the relationship know-how associated with these
expressions is richly described and becomes easier to reproduce in the
context of outsider witness retellings. If it seems necessary, the thera-
pist can further this outsider witness preparation by encouraging fam-
ily members to provide an understanding of what these expressions
suggest about the figures’ sentiments of living, about their perspec-
tives on life, and about their purposes, values, and beliefs. Drawing
out the skills and sentiments of these figures should not be rushed; an
entire meeting can be devoted to this if necessary.
Once this is achieved, the therapist informs family members that
he or she will assist them in maintaining the position they have cho-
sen for the definitional ceremony. An agreement should be reached
about how the therapist might interject if it becomes apparent that
family members are falling back into habitual responses. Further, fam-
ily members are informed that on such occasions they will be con-
sulted about options for proceeding. These options may include a sim-


ee

[PAGE 215]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 204 +


204 Maps of Narrative Practice


ple reminder to reengage with their chosen positions, a second repo-
sitioning interview (to better understand the skills associated with the
figures' expressions of acknowledgment), a temporary suspension of
the exercise to gain clarification on hurdles to engaging with the cho-
sen positions or to explore what might make it more possible to
assume these positions, or a permanent abandonment of the exercise
to pursue other approaches.
Repositioning of family members is not required in all situations, but
itis invariably necessary when there is significant tension between fam-
ily members and the people whose lives are the focus of the definitional
ceremony. Readers who are interested in reading an illustration of the
repositioning of family members can refer to my article “Narrative prac-
tice, couple therapy and conflict dissolution” (White, 2004).


Therapeutic Responsibility in Guiding Definitional
Ceremony Conversations


Regardless of the source of outsider witnesses, the therapist assumes
ultimate responsibility for the shaping of retellings. If this responsibil-
ity is not taken up from the outset of outsider witness retellings, it is
relatively certain that other traditions of responding to the stories of
people's lives will be enacted. This is even the case when the outsider
witnesses have been familiarized with the categories of inquiry rele-
vant to rich story development.

Responding to Superlatives


It is not at all uncommon for outsider witnesses to immediately engage
with superlatives at the commencement of their retellings: “I think that
Joan is the most amazing person” or “Wow, Harry is just one extraordi-
nary guy.” When this happens, the therapist immediately refocuses the
outsider witness on the first category of inquiry: their retelling of the
aspects of the expression that struck a chord with them. For example,
the therapist could say, “Okay, I can see that you are appreciative of
Joan. Tell, me what is it that you heard or experienced in Joan’s story
that you were most drawn to?” or “Id like to hear what you actually


m

[PAGE 216]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 205 er


Definitional Ceremonies 205


heard that shaped your impressions of Harry. Could we start with what
it was that Harry said that really struck a chord for you?”

Responding to “Going Autobiographical”

Another common tendency for outsider witnesses is to “go autobio-
graphical” when acknowledging resonance. In response to the invita-
tion to embody their interest in a person’ life, outsider witnesses
often share a small personal narrative about an episode of their own
histories. These mini-narratives are not just a recounting of the expe-
rience that resonated with aspects of the person’s story but also a
description of how the outsider witnesses responded to the experi-
ence, about what this meant to them, about what this made possible
in their lives, and so on. If this goes unchecked, the outsider witness
retelling will quickly enter the territory of advice-giving through moral
story and homily, or of the sort of sharing-experience-for-the-sake-of-
sharing-experience that will displace the experiences of the person
who is at the center of the definitional ceremony.
When outsider witnesses go autobiographical, therapists can
encourage them to more richly describe the resonant experience: “You
have been catching us up on how you responded to this experience in
your own history and on what this made possible for you. But I would
like to know more about the actual experience itself. Would it be okay
if we went back a step or two, and I asked you some questions about
this?” Another option is to re-focus on the expressions of the people
who are the focus of the definitional ceremony: “It is obvious that the
story that you heard profoundly touched on your own experiences.
Could you say more about which aspects of the story that you heard
were so powerful for you?”
The following transcript provides an example of an outsider witness
retelling that become autobiographical and how the conversation was
successfully redirected toward the expressions of the people who were
the focus of the definitional ceremony. This retelling was in response
to a conversation with a single-parent mother, Leanne, and her two
children, Amy, 7, and Rebecca, 4. Leanne's primary concern was
about what she understood to be a delay in Amy’s development, about
what she perceived to be the failure of her relationship with Amy, and


a

[PAGE 217]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 206 er


206 Maps of Narrative Practice


about her sense of failure as a mother. One of the outsider witnesses
participating in this meeting was a therapist named John. He began
his account of personal resonance as follows:


John: There were so many echoes in this for me. It took
me back to when I was just a boy who was like Amy in so
many ways. I also didn’t relate much to other kids. I got
easily bored. I was a bit of a handful at times. Actually lots
of the time. And if the diagnosis of ADHD was around
then, I know I would have gotten it, just like Amy has. But
my mother, she was wonderful. She said to the world out
there, this is my son, and I know there are some things
about him that are different, and lots of these things can be
appreciated if you just know how to approach them. Let
me tell you about the things that are different about him
that you can learn to appreciate. She was just wonderful.
And she would also say to everyone, Tl tell you how to—

M: What was it like for you to revisit this image of your
mother?

John: It was powerful. And it was really beautiful. (smiling)
This is how my mother lived. She had these principles of—

M: I would like to understand more about what you heard
or witnessed in Leanne's story that so powerfully evoked
this image of your mother. What was it that you witnessed
as you listened to Leanne's story that mirrored your
mother’s ways?

John: Oh! That's easy. It was when Leanne...


John’s telling of his experience of resonance had become autobio-
graphical—it was an account of his identification with Amy in her
predicament, of his mother’s wonderful response to this, of the princi-
ples that shaped her response, and of how this was a reflection of her
ways in life. I strongly appreciated John’s recounting of this resonance,
but I was concerned about its autobiographical nature—there was a risk


ee

[PAGE 218]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 207 er


Definitional Ceremonies 207


that it could be received by Leanne as a moral story or homily and could
consolidate some of Leanne’s negative conclusions about her identity by
giving her an opportunity to judge herself poorly in relation to this other
woman who was being revered. In encouraging John to speak more of
what he witnessed in Leanne’s telling, that had evoked this image of his
mother, this hazard was circumvented. Instead of experiencing an unfa-
vorable comparison between her actions and the actions of John’s
mother, she experienced parallels being drawn between her identity as
a mother and the identity of another mother who was being revered.
This recentering of Leanne’s expressions was also a prelude to my ques-
tions about the transporting or kathartic aspects of her story:


M: I understand that listening to Leanne's story was a pow-
erful experience for you—that in this Leanne evoked the
image of your mother and that this was beautiful. What's
your guess about what it is going to be like for you going
away from here today having had this experience?

John: I’m in a great place and would just like to sit with
this a bit.

M: Could I ask you a question about your work?

John: Sure, sure.

M: Do you sometimes get consulted by women who are
single-parent mothers?

John: Sure I do. And I think I know what you are asking. I
think there are things to hear in my work that I don’t think
I have been hearing well enough.

M: Are you saying that there is something that has come of
hearing Leanne’s story and of talking about what this
touched on for you that will contribute to your hearing
things in other women’s stories that you might not have
fully heard?

John: You're right on it. That's what I’m saying.

[PAGE 219]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 208 $


208 Maps of Narrative Practice


Leanne was quite emotional as I interviewed her for the retelling of
the retelling. John’s account of resonance, the parallels drawn
between her expressions and those of his mother, and his acknowledg-
ment of katharsis deeply touched her. It was clear that this was an
antidote to her conclusions about being a failure. Leanne said that she
felt less burdened and that she could see some possibilities for pro-
ceeding with her effort to address her concerns about Amy. I have
charted John’s retelling in Figure 4.2.
The tendency to go autobiographical can be countered if therapists
suggest, when orientating outsider witnesses to the tradition of
acknowledgment associated with retellings, that outsider witnesses
endeavor to prioritize not the events of their lives that are well known
and familiar, but the experiences that might have been outside of
memory or only dimly perceived before listening to the stories of those
whose lives are the focus of the definitional ceremony.

Responding to “Going One-Down”


When asked to to acknowledge katharsis, outsider witnesses may
respond by “going one-down.” For example: “In hearing about how
Joan got through what she was put through in the way that she did, I
had this realization that I didn’t do nearly as well in coping with some
things that what I went through. Joan really did so much better than
I ever could have done.” “Going one-down” in this way represents a
diminishment of one’s life for the sake of the elevation of another, and
it is invariably experienced as unhelpful because it leads to a sense of
being misunderstood and to the erosion of joining around shared
themes. Another hazard of going one-down is that it constructs a
heroic identity of the person whose life is at the center of the defini-
tional ceremonies. Although heroic accounts of identity have become
quite popular in contemporary culture, they can be very isolating and
alienating of the people who are construed as heroes.

Responding to Expressions of Anguish


Because of the way it is structured, the first stage of the definitional
ceremony usually yields conversations in which people begin to give
meaning to some of the neglected initiatives of their lives and reveal


o

[PAGE 220]

zu zu


ddpizendew


Figure 4.2 Charting Outsider-Witness Retellings (John)

LO/ET/E


v


Transport predicting that he would hear in LE

women’s stories what he hadn't Wd
previously heard well enough
Jo


ebed

Resonance experience of being found “a bit
607
of a handful” as a boy & mother's
response

The image & speculation me of
about what this reflects reverng ot,
. . & beautiful
regarding intentional mace of
understandings & what is 5
. . im ,

mother
accorded value

what was witnessed in
Particularities of Leanne’s expressions that
expression mirrored mother’s expres-
sions & evoked her image

Zu


5 10 20

Time in minutes


5

[PAGE 221]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 210 E


210 Maps of Narrative Practice


traces of positive subordinate storylines. By the time that these peo-
ple assume the audience position for the retelling, the outsider wit-
nesses usually have plenty of material with which to ground their
responses. At this point, it is common for the outsider witnesses to
respond to the expressions of the telling that were specifically associ-
ated with the positive subordinate storylines. However, at times the
outsider witnesses are drawn to the more anguished expressions,
including those relating to frustration and pain. In these circum-
stances, it is important for therapists to ask questions that draw out
the values, hopes, dreams, and so on that are implicit in the anguished
expressions. For example, if outsider witnesses have been drawn to
expressions of pain, they can be encouraged to speculate about what
this might be a testimony to in terms of what the person holds pre-
cious. If outsider witnesses have been drawn to expressions of despair,
they can be encouraged to speculate about what this might reflect in
terms of the person's hopes and dreams about life. If outsider wit-
nesses have been drawn to a lament about the emptiness of a person's
life, they can be encouraged to speculate about what this might sug-
gest about what is important to the person in terms of achieving a
sense of personal intimacy.
This approach is based on the ideas of Jacques Derrida (1973,
1976, 1978). Although Derrida focused on the deconstruction of
texts, I have found his ideas to be very useful in the context of thera-
peutic conversations. Derrida's basic contention was that the meaning
of a word, phrase, or sentence is contingent upon the words, phrases,
or sentences surrounding it—that one can only attribute meaning to
something by distinguishing the difference between it and everything
else in its context. In a therapeutic context, this means that, in order
to express an experience of life, people must distinguish that experi-
ence from the contrasting experiences surrounding it. For example, to
express despair, one must distinguished this despair from another
experience that it is not—say, for instance, from an experience in life
that is defined as an expression of hope. For one to express pain, the
experiences that give rise to this must be distinguished from another
experience, such as one that is read as sign of what is given value to
in life or is representative of what might be held precious. Thus, pain


o

[PAGE 222]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 211 +


Definitional Ceremonies 211


might be understood to be a testimony to what a person has held pre-
cious and has been violated, and ongoing distress might be under-
stood to be a tribute to a person’s success in maintaining a relation-
ship with what he or she gives value to despite the forces that discour-
age this. I have discussed this principle and its implications in more
detail elsewhere (White, 2000, 2003).
Therapists can also draw out the implicit during the third stage of
outsider witness inquiry (resonance) if the outsider witnesses have
provided an account of some of the more painful experiences of their
lives. This can be done by asking questions that provide an opportu-
nity for the outsider witnesses to speak of what is precious to them
that was touched by the expressions of the people whose lives are at
the center of the ceremony. With regard to katharsis, the implicit can
be drawn out through questions that help outsider witnesses to go
beyond expressions of pain in their effort to identify the ways in which
they might have been transported.
The following transcript provides an example of an outsider wit-
ness, Roger, recounting of personal resonance that features a theme
of pain. The retelling was in response to a story told by a father,
Patrick, and his adult son, Kevin, who had been estranged for some
years but had, in the context of our meeting, recovered their relation-
ship with each other. This had turned out to be of great importance to
both of them. The questions I asked helped Roger to draw out what
was implicit in his recounting.


Roger: What really got to me was seeing the joy on
Patrick and Kevin's face. And I could see what reconnect-
ing meant to them both. I could see the affection between
them. This touched on something really painful for me.
(now tearful)

M: Would you be prepared to say a little about this here?

Roger: I never had this sort of connection with my father.
He was a really hard man. I really didn’t ever get any affec-
tion from him. When he wasn’t giving me a hard time, I

[PAGE 223]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 212 +


212 Maps of Narrative Practice


dont think I really existed for him. So I never had any of
this. Even just to talk about it now is painful.

M: Were there any other father-type people in your life?

Roger: No. And I never got to meet my grandfathers
either. I don’t know anything about them.

M: But you didn’t simply just get resigned to what you had?

Roger: No, I guess not.

M: I don't understand this. There weren't any other father-
type figures to give you a different experience. What was it
that stopped you from just becoming resigned to what you
had? Just accepting what you were accustomed to?

Roger: I don't know. Maybe it was just a. . . just this long-
ing that I had for some sort of connection with my father?

M: Do you know what kept this longing alive? Are there
any stories that you can tell me about your life that might
explain how you held onto this longing? Anything at all that
might have encouraged and supported this longing or vali-
dated it in some way?

Roger: Encouraged it? Well... you know, this has got me
thinking. My mom died when I was quite young, and her
stepmother did what she could to care for me. And I
remember that things weren't going well for me in high
school and I just wanted to drop out. But my nan got a
tutor in for a while and this helped to turn things around.
This is amazing!

M: What’s amazing?

Roger: | would never have thought about this. But you
know, there are some things about Patrick that remind me
of this guy who was my tutor. For a start, he was Irish too,
and he was kind to me, he really was. Wow!

[PAGE 224]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 213 +


Definitional Ceremonies 213


M: My understanding then is that because of what you
have witnessed today between Patrick and Kevin that you
have openly spoken of this longing for the first time. And
that for the first time you are making a connection between
this longing and your Irish tutor of many years ago.

Roger: Yeah. Yeah.

M: What's this been like for you?

Roger: Like I’ve talked about something and discovered
something that’s been there all along but I couldn't see it.

M: Does this make any difference?

Roger: Of course. Of course it does. I’ve got something |
didn’t know I had that I am going to do more thinking
about and more talking about. It sure eases the pain, even
now!


It was through this interview that the implicit longing in Roger’s
expression of pain became visible and was named. His expression of
pain was in relation to a longing for recognition from, and connection
with, an adult male. This longing had been sustained by this tutor’s
responses to Roger when he was a boy. The identification of this had
a profound effect on Roger’s acknowledgment of personal resonance
and katharsis. (Figure 4.3 shows my charting of Roger’s retelling.) For
Patrick and Kevin, witnessing Roger's life being touched in this way by
the story of the recovery of their relationship was, in turn, quite pro-
found and contributed significantly to the rich development of the
story of their own relationship.
In drawing out the implicit in this way, the therapist is not endeav-
oring to reduce the intensity of people’s expression of frustration or
pain, to shy away from these experiences, or to substitute other less
vexing experiences for them. Rather, the therapist is being consistent
with the assumption that life is multistoried and with the intention of
reproducing the tradition of acknowledgment that promotes rich story
development.

[PAGE 225]



darı enden
Figure 4.3 Charting Outsider-Witness Retellings (Roger)


effects of public LO/ET/E

acknowledgment of
v
Transport longing & reconnection
with experience LE
of tutor
> Wd
-experience of father’s
hardness
Resonance —longing for connection ebed
with father
—contact with Irish tutor VIZ
The image & speculation
about what this reflects
regarding intentional image of
understandings & what is affectionate
accorded value relationship

joy on Patrick &

Particularities of Kevins face 5
. expressions of
expression
affection
between them


5 10 15 20

Time in minutes



[PAGE 226]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 215 +


Definitional Ceremonies 215


Cautions


In some circumstances therapists may become vulnerable to relin-
quishing their responsibility for shaping outsider witness responses.
This is particularly likely to occur when the people in the outsider wit-
ness position have significant insider knowledge of the experiences
and predicaments of those at the center of the definitional ceremony.
In these circumstances 1 have on occasion found myself relatively
inactive in the early part of the retellings, and, to my alarm, becoming
a bystander to the development of outsider witness responses that are
very unlikely to contribute to rich story development and personal res-
onance.


This vulnerability is the outcome of confusing insider knowledge
with know-how. It is one thing to have insider knowledge of specific
experiences and circumstances of life, but it is another to know how
to express this in ways that might contribute to rich story development
and in ways that will be powerfully resonant for and healing of others.
It is possible to assume the responsibility for the shaping of these
retellings while simultaneously acknowledging the significance of the
insider knowledge that is possessed by the outsider witness.
The participation of outsider witnesses drawn from the professional
disciplines is another circumstance in which the therapist can be vul-
nerable to relinquishing this responsibility in shaping outsider witness
responses. This is particularly the case when these outsider witnesses
have a passing knowledge of definitional ceremony practices, includ-
ing the categories of inquiry that shape retellings. I have, at times,
relinquished this responsibility in these circumstances, only to find
the outsider witnesses reproducing other traditions of response: theo-
rizing and hypothesizing about people's lives and relationships, evalu-
ating people's expressions and reaching diagnoses according to the
expert knowledges of the professional disciplines, formulating inter-
ventions and treatments for the problems of people's lives, and engag-
ing in other practices that are informed by some of the professional
and popular discourses of psychology.
In offering these cautions, I am not trying to be critical of the out-
sider witnesses who inadvertently reproduce some of these responses

[PAGE 227]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 216 +


216 Maps of Narrative Practice


to the stories of people’s lives. It can be surprisingly difficult to break
from these orthodox responses. Nor do I intend to question the gen-
eral validity of these discourses. Rather, I am underscoring considera-
tions that I believe are vital in establishing conditions that give rise to
rich story development in the context of definitional ceremony prac-
tice.

There are, however, circumstances in which it is not necessary for
the therapist to take this leading role in the shaping of the outsider
witness retelling. When outsider witnesses have more than a passing
knowledge of this tradition of retelling, it is possible for the therapist
to assume a more backseat role and allow the outsider witnesses to
either interview each other according to this tradition or to appoint
one member of the group to assume more of this responsibility. I have
always found that when outsider witnesses become well acquainted
with this tradition of retelling, the requirement for me to actively
shape these retellings quickly diminishes.


Technology, Anonymity, and Ethics


Although I have described definitional ceremony practices as involv-
ing the direct participation of outsider witnesses this does not always
have to be the case. For example, the technology of conference calls
provides an option for outsider witness retellings when it is not possi-
ble for the outsider witnesses to be physically present or when
anonymity is required by the people who are the focus of these defi-
nitional ceremonies.
Technology can also be utilized in the recording of outsider witness
retellings in response to the therapist's subsequent accounts of the
stories of people's lives. (Of course, the parties involved must agree to
this.) In other words, the therapist can meet with someone who has
volunteered to participate as a “remote” outsider witness by listening
to the therapist recount the stories of the therapeutic conversation.
This meeting is audio- or video-recorded, as is the outsider witness
retelling in response to the therapist’s story. These recordings can then
be played at the next meeting with the people who are the subject of


Ze

[PAGE 228]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 217 +


Definitional Ceremonies 217


the retelling, and the therapist can elicit a retelling of the retelling
after these people have watched or listened to the tape. This option is
suitable when the appropriate outsider witness cannot be present for
a therapeutic conversation or when anonymity is required.
With regard to anonymity generally, this is rarely an issue for those
who participate in these contexts. However, the people who are at the
center of the definitional ceremony must be fully informed of its
processes and structure before decisions about outsider witness par-
ticipation are made. They should also be provided with the option to
speak to others who have first-hand experience in being a the center
of definitional ceremony practices. Additionally, therapists must ask if
there are any subjects the people do not wish to be interviewed about
in the context of the definitional ceremony, and the people should be
assured that the therapist will not pass on any personal information to
the outsider witness candidates—anything that the outsider witnesses
might know about these people's lives will be learned directly from the
people during the course of the telling. Further, people should be
informed that the usual conventions with regard to confidentiality in
group therapy contexts will be explicitly addressed and observed.
It is my experience that people rarely decline the option of directly
involving outsider witnesses in their meetings with me. Furthermore,
those who have had the opportunity to be the focus of one of these def-
initional ceremonies almost invariably choose to meet again in the con-
text of a definitional ceremony when they are given the option between
it and a solo meeting. With regard to the question of confidentiality
and anonymity, it is usually the case that people are enthusiastic about
the possibility of sharing the stories of their lives with others.
On a few occasions I have heard members of the professional dis-
ciplines voice concerns that engaging in definitional ceremony prac-
tices might be in contravention of professional ethics. In reviewing the
ethical codes of these professional disciplines, I have not discerned
any conflict with the practices that I have described in this chapter.
Rather, it has been my conclusion that these practices are in accord
with the principles expressed in these ethical codes. However, should
readers have concerns about conflict between these practices and the
ethical codes of their professional associations, it is important that


ee

[PAGE 229]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 218 +


218 Maps of Narrative Practice


they resolve this by reviewing the relevant ethical codes and tailoring
these practices in a way that honors any concerns they may have.


Conclusion


In this chapter I have described therapeutic practices associated with
definitional ceremonies. These practices contribute to the reproduc-
tion of a tradition of acknowledgment that can be strongly resonant
for the people at the center of these [definitional] ceremonies. Rich
story development and the augmentation of a sense of personal
agency is the outcome [of this.] and this provides a foundation for
people to proceed to address their predicaments and concerns.
It is relevant to note that a sense of awkwardness and some per-
sonal discomfort is often experienced by therapists at the beginning of
their explorations of definitional ceremony practices. This awkward-
ness is probably due to the fact that they are reproducing a tradition
of acknowledgment that differs from customary therapeutic responses
to the stories of people's lives. This discomfort may also be associated
with the structuring of a context that contradicts the direct person-to-
person dialogue that shapes most therapeutic conversations today.
This sense of awkwardness and this discomfort diminishes as the
effects of these practices of acknowledgment become visible and as
the importance of disrupting direct person-to-person dialogue
becomes apparent.
Of all the therapeutic practices that I have come across in the his-
tory of my career, those associated with the definitional ceremony have
the potential to be the most powerful. Time and again I have observed
outsider witness retellings achieve what is quite beyond my potential
to achieve in my role as a therapist. I have also witnessed this on many
occasions when observing other therapists' explorations of definitional
ceremonies. However, this does not diminish the significance of the
therapist's contribution. The retellings of definitional ceremonies
achieve resonance for the people who consult therapists when they are
shaped by the appropriate outsider witness inquiry and when vital con-
siderations to the success of these practices are closely monitored.


Ze

[PAGE 230]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 219 +


5
Conversations
That Highlight
Unique
Outcomes
Ithough life is rich in lived experience, we give meaning to very
little of this experience. The aspects of lived experience that are
rendered meaningful are those that we take into the known and
familiar storylines of our lives; these aspects are highly selected. The
myriad experiences of daily life mostly pass like a blip across the
screen of our consciousness and into a historical vacuum. Many of
these experiences are “out of phase” with the plots or themes of the
dominant stories of our lives and thus are not registered or given
meaning to. However, these out-of-phase experiences can be poten-
tially significant, and in favourable circumstances they can be consti-
tuted as “unique outcomes” or “exceptions.” The identification of such
out-of-phase aspects of lived experience can provide a point of entry
for the development of alternative storylines of people's lives.
In preparation for this storyline development, it is the therapist's
task to assist people to render significant some of these neglected
aspects of lived experience. Upon engaging in this task, it is not
uncommon for therapists to take a leading role in this attribution of
meaning. When this is the case, the therapist undertakes efforts to
convince people of the worth of these aspects of lived experience and
assumes primary authorship. This is hazardous, for it can be imposing
and risks alienating people who seek consultation. It also places the

[PAGE 231]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 220 +


220 Maps of Narrative Practice


therapist at the center of the therapeutic conversation, thus closing
the door on possibilities for collaborative inquiry.
Conversations that highlight unique outcomes support a decen-
tered therapist participation, which privileges the authorship of the
people seeking consultation. These conversations assist people in ren-
dering specific out-of-phase aspects of their experience significant;
they support people in the characterization of, and in reflecting on,
these aspects of their experience. This is very often novel for people
who consult therapists, as these people often have been simply sub-
ject to the meanings given and the position taken by others on the
developments of their lives. Among other things, conversations that
highlight unique outcomes provide people with the opportunity to
give voice to intentions for their own lives and to develop a stronger
familiarity with what they accord value to in life. This provides them
with a springboard for action in addressing their problems, predica-
ments and dilemmas.


Peter and Trudy


I met with Peter, 14, and his single-parent mother, Trudy, along with
the referring therapist, Melanie, for a consultation interview. Melanie
worked for a medium-security detention center, and at the time of the
consultation, Peter was an inmate at this center. This was one of sev-
eral centers that Peter had spent time in during the course of his
young life. Most of these incarcerations had been the outcome of
destroying property, but some were for assault and petty theft. Peter
had a longstanding habit of going on a rampage when frustrated with
life, and he had the capacity to do fearsome damage at these times.
Many efforts had been made to encourage Peter to take responsibil-
ity for his actions and to appreciate the seriousness of them, but to no
avail. Peter’s nonresponsiveness to these efforts had led the people try-
ing to help him to determine that he was generally incapable of reflect-
ing on his life, unable to foresee the consequences of his actions, and
relatively inept with regard to taking responsibility. He was judged to be
a concrete thinker, lacking a capacity to think in abstract terms.


ee

[PAGE 232]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 221 $


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 221


However, Melanie had recently noticed an interesting development
in Peter's life: He had handled an incident at the detention center that
he found frustrating by exiting the room and going to the gymnasium
instead of lashing out at people and smashing things. As it was more
usual for Peter to run amok at these times, Melanie had a strong
appreciation of the significance of this response to frustration.
However, she also realized that Peter’s initiative could easily be lost,
and she hoped that in a consultation with me it would be rendered
meaningful and that it would open an avenue to the development of
an alternative storyline about Peter's life. Melanie also hoped that this
consultation would provide a foundation for Peter to take further steps
of a similar nature.
A final item on Melanie’s agenda for the consultation interview was
the improvement of Peter’s relationship with his mother, which had
been quite disrupted by the circumstances of Peter’s and Trudy’s lives.
As Trudy had recently been awarded a housing unit by a local author-
ity and was now able to provide Peter with a home on the occasions
that he was granted leave from the detention center, this seemed a
perfect time to explore possibilities for the development of the
mother/son alliance.
Melanie's appreciation of Peter's initiative in “walking away” when
frustrated, and her understanding that this initiative might provide a
point of entry to the development of an alternative storyline of his life,
resonated strongly for me. And her agenda for this meeting clearly met
with Peter and Trudy’s approval. So I asked Peter and Trudy if it would
be okay with them for me to ask some further questions about Peter's
recent initiative in exiting the scene of frustration. Trudy responded to
this proposal:


Trudy: Melanie told me about this, and at the time I
thought this was encouraging. So we've already talked
about this and I don’t know if there is much more to say
about it. And just the other day Peter got into more trouble,
and things have gone off the rails again.

M: Melanie mentioned this recent upset, and I can appre-

[PAGE 233]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 222 +


222 Maps of Narrative Practice


ciate that you're concerned about it. From what I under-
stand this sort of upset had been quite common, whereas
leaving the scene of frustration isn’t so much part of Peter's
history.

Trudy: Uh! Yeah. That's true. It was different. For sure it
was.


M: Well, that’s why I was interested to learn more about
this, because it was different. I would like to ask you and
Peter some questions about this so I might get to find out
more about it.

Trudy: Yeah, I guess that would be interesting.

M: What about you, Peter. Do you agree that this is differ-
ent? That leaving the scene of frustration is different?

Peter: Yeah.

M: Would you be interested in exploring this a little?

Peter: Don't mind.

M: Are there other things that you'd prefer to talk about?

Peter: Nope.

M: Okay. Peter, your mum just said that this was encour-
aging. These were her words. Would you say the same, or
would you have something different to say about leaving
the scene of frustration? Maybe different words?

Peter: Nope.

M: Nope what?

Peter: What my mum said is fine.

M: So, you'd say the same? That this was an encouraging
development?

Peter: Yeah, I suppose.

[PAGE 234]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 223 er


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 223


M: Why would you say it's encouraging?

Peter: Dunno. Suppose because I wasn't in so much trou-
ble this time.

M: I understand that you were feeling pretty upset, and
you could have done anything. How come you didn’t get
into so much trouble this time?

Peter: Just walked away from it. That's all.

M: So that's a name for what you did? It was about “walk-
ing away from trouble.”

Peter: Yeah. | figured, “Who needs it?”

M: This time it was different because you figured that you
didn't need it. And this made it possible for you to...

Peter: Step back, I suppose.

M: Step back?

Peter: Yeah. I stepped backa bit this time.

M: So it was about three things. Stepping back, figuring
you didnt need it, and walking away from trouble.

Peter: Yeah. That's it.

M: Say a little more about “figuring you didn't need it.”

Peter: | just figured things out.

M: How were you feeling at the time?

Peter: Pretty heated.

M: You were feeling pretty heated, but you were still able
to step back and to figure things out.

Peter: Yeah. I didn’t lose it.

M: What didn’t you lose?

[PAGE 235]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 224 +


224 Maps of Narrative Practice


Peter: Kept my mind. I didnt lose it.

M: Okay, so it was about all these things: stepping back,
figuring things out, figuring you didn't need it, keeping your
mind, not losing it, and walking away from trouble.

Peter: Yeah. That'd be it.

M: What did this make possible for you?

Peter: What do you mean?

M: What happened after this that wouldn't have happened
if you'd lost it?

Peter: Well, I kept my privileges.

M: What privileges?

Peter: Weekend leave. My metalwork class. I didn’t have
to go to counseling.

M: Okay. Anything else?

Peter: Didn't lose out on television or gym time.

M: I am getting to understand what stepping back, figur-
ing things out, figuring you didn’t need it, keeping your
mind, not losing it, and walking away from trouble made
possible for you.

Peter: Yeah. And I didn't wreck anything this time. I didn't
get wild and bust everything up.

M: Sorry?

Peter: Instead of getting wild and busting everything up.

M: Is there anything that you can tell me that would help
me understand how you achieved this? Instead of wrecking
things, you kept all of your privileges.

Peter: Maybe. Maybe it was . . . | dunno

[PAGE 236]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 225 er


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 225


M: You said “maybe.” What were you thinking when you
said “maybe”?

Peter: Well . . . maybe I was looking up the road a bit to
where I wanted to be.

M: That was part of it?

Peter: Guess so.

M: I don't suppose this all came out of the blue—this step-
ping back, figuring things out, figuring you didn’t need it,
keeping your mind, not losing it, walking away from trou-
ble, and looking up the road. Can you think of anything
that might have led up to this?

Peter: Like what?

M: Like anything else that has happened in recent times
that might have provided a foundation or a platform for this
development, or that might have helped you get ready for
this step, or that might have paved the way for you to walk
away from trouble?

Peter: Um . . . probably there is something. But I can't
think of it right now.

M: Perhaps I could ask your mum this question?

Peter: Go ahead.

M: Trudy, we've been talking about what this was all about
for Peter. And we've also been talking about what this made
possible for him. Can you think of anything that might
have led up to this? Any other developments that you have
noticed in Peter’s life that might have prepared the way for
this?

Trudy: All I know is that when things go off the rails, like
they often do with Peter, there can be some real serious
consequences. Breaking the law can get you locked up.

[PAGE 237]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 226 er


226 Maps of Narrative Practice


And breaking the law when you are already locked up just
makes things worse. Peter's already been locked up enough
times, I can tell you that. It just seems that he just isn't
capable of running his own life. It just seems like he can’t
take responsibility.

M: I understand that you've had lots of concerns about
what's happening to Peters life, and about what happens
when he goes off the rails.

Trudy: I sure have.

M: How have these concerns affected you? In what way
have these concerns affected your life?

Trudy: Well, I sure lose sleep over what he does, I can tell
you that.

M: You lose sleep over this? What is it, the worry, or... ?

Trudy: For sure it's the worry. It’s a constant thing.

M: And the worry has the effect of... ?

Trudy: Stresses me out big time.

M: And this makes it hard for you and Peter to... ?

Trudy: For us to get along. Sure does.

M: Getting along is something that's important to... ?

Trudy: Getting along is what I have always wanted. It is
what I keep hoping for. It’s what I am holding out for. If
only.

M: Thanks, Trudy. It's essential that I understand what's
important to you, and if it is okay with you we'll come back
to this.

Trudy: Sure.

M: Peter, you've been helping me to understand what this

[PAGE 238]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 227 +


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 227


development in walking away from trouble is about, and
you have also been catching me up on what this has made
possible for you. Later I would like to get back to figuring
out what led up to this. But for now, I'd be interested to
know what this development is like for you.

Peter: Uh! Well, I dont ...um...

M: I’ve got a list here about what this has all been about:
walking out on trouble, stepping back, figuring things out,
figuring you didn't need it, keeping your mind, not losing it,
walking away from trouble, and looking up the road. I’ve got
another list about some of the things that this is making
possible for you, like keeping your privileges and avoiding
going wild and busting things up. What's this like for you?
What is it like for you to see this happening in your life?

Peter: It's good to see I suppose.

M: There is good and there is good and there is good.
There are many different kinds of good. What sort of good
is this? And who is it good for? Do you mean that it is good
for you, or for your mother, or for the detention center?

Peter: It's positive.

M: It's positive for whom?

Peter: Positive for me.

M: It's positive for you. Could you say a bit about the way
it's positive for you?

Peter: Yeah. It just makes me feel good.

M: Do you know why this development makes you feel
good?

Peter: Like it's a good feeling to be getting somewhere.

M: It is about a feeling of getting somewhere. Why is get-
ting somewhere important to you?


o

[PAGE 239]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 228 +


228 Maps of Narrative Practice


Peter: Because I'll be able to do something with my life,
that's why. Pll be able to say what I want and do something
about it.

M: You sound quite clear about this.

Peter: Yeah. P'll know that I'll be able to make things hap-
pen. If things aren't working out, just knowing this means
that [ll be able to do something about it.

M: Is getting somewhere in your life, and having a say
about the direction of your own life, been important to you
for very long?

Peter: I think it has. Yeah, I think it has been. At least for
a year, or maybe more, I think.

M: Peter, would it be okay by you for me to ask your
mother for some of her ideas about this?

Peter: Sure, go ahead.

M: Trudy, this is what I understand so far. This recent
development was about Peter stepping back, figuring
things out, figuring he didn't need it, keeping his mind, not
losing it, walking away from trouble, and looking up the
road to where he wanted to be. And this made it possible
for him avoid going wild and busting things up, and instead
to keep privileges, like weekend leave, metalwork class, tel-
evision, and gym time. When I asked Peter what this was
like for him, I learned that it made him feel good because
of getting somewhere in life. I also heard that having a say
about the direction of his own life has been important to
him for a while now. Just standing back and looking at all
of this, what name would you give to this overall develop-
ment?

Trudy: I'd have to say it is about him managing his own
life. And for a quite a while there I thought we'd never see
it.

[PAGE 240]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 229 +


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 229


M: Managing his own life. Does this fit for you, Peter?

Peter: Yeah. That's what I’m doing.

M: Trudy, what's your sense about what this sort of devel-
opment in managing his own life could make possible for
Peter?

Trudy: Well, it could make it possible for him to improve
his life. It could make it possible for him to stay out of
detention centers.

M: Improve his life in what way?

Trudy: Like I said. It could make it possible for him to stay
out of detention centers.

M: Anything else?

Trudy: It could make it possible for him to improve his life
in lots of ways.

M: Like?

Trudy: Well, even though things went wrong for Peter, I
have always known that he's had his talents. He's always
been interested in how things work, in pulling things
apart, and I can tell you that he has always taken things
apart and put them back together again to figure this out.
Now that's something that could come in handy if he is
managing his own life more. That's something that could
help him to get ahead and get a good job that he wouldn't
be bored in. And this is something that might give him
some space to have his own life. He'd have more space to
move.


M: What would that be like for you, Peter? If managing
your own life made this possible?

Peter: That would be real positive.

M: I know that you have already answered this question,


o

[PAGE 241]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 230 E


230 Maps of Narrative Practice


but I would like to get more of a sense of what “real posi-
tive” means to you. I am asking this again because I think
there might be more to this development in managing your
own life.

Peter: I dont know. I'd just be happy to see that I could
make happen what needed to happen. Pd just be happy to
know that I could make happen what I wanted.

M: Happy to see that you could make happen what needed
to happen and what you wanted to happen.

Trudy: One thing is for sure. He'd be a lot more comfort-
able with his life.

M: Peter?

Peter: Yeah. Things would be more comfortable.

M: Okay. I understand more about what this development
in managing your own life would be like for you. It would
make things more comfortable, and you'd be happy to see
that you could make happen what you needed and wanted
to happen. I've got a question: Why would you be happy to
see this?

Peter: Um... I’m not sure.

M: Would it be okay for me to ask your mum this question?

Peter: Yeah, feel free.

M: Trudy, why do you think Peter would judge this devel-
opment in managing his own future to be real positive?

Trudy: He'll be able to figure things out for himself more.
And besides, he's got a right to this.

M: He's got a right to what?

Trudy: He's got a right to manage his own life. He's got a
right to having his own space. Everyone's got this right, but

[PAGE 242]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 231 er


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 231


it gets taken a lot. I know it was taken from Peter. I know
that he hasn't had this chance.

M: What do you think of this, Peter? Your mum said that
she thought you'd say this was a real positive development
because you have a right to manage your own life and a
right to your own space. Does this fit for you?

Peter: Yeah.

M: Why would you say this fits for you?

Peter: Because | didn't have that chance when I was a kid.

M: What happened?

Peter: Oh, my stepdad just gave me a hard time.

M: He took this right from you?

Peter: Yeah. Totally.

Trudy: I have to tell you that I feel very badly about this
because I brought this onto Peter's life. I brought this man
into our lives, and I let this go on. This was complicity on
my part. God it was awful, and forever Il feel guilty about
this. I know that I could have been paralyzed by guilt
because of this.


At this point in the therapeutic conversation it was my understand-
ing that we had all traveled a considerable distance in a relatively brief
period of time. The point of entry to this conversation was Peter's
action in exiting the scene of frustration. When I first began to con-
sult Trudy and Peter about this action, Trudy was of the opinion that
because this had already been talked about there was nothing more to
discuss about it. However, both Trudy and Peter were willing to
respond to my questions about this initiative.
In the context of the therapeutic inquiry that I then instigated, it
turned out that there was a lot more to say about Peter’s exiting the
scene of frustration. This initiative was rendered highly significant. It

[PAGE 243]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 232 +


232 Maps of Narrative Practice


became saturated with meaning and symbolic of what was important
to Peter. It symbolized both his aspiration to affect the course of his
future and what he held precious in life; that is, the right to manage
his own life and the right to his own space. He'd not previously given
voice to this aspiration or emphasized in this way what he accorded
value to in his own life.


Unique Outcomes


In narrative conversations the sort of action that Peter undertook in
walking out on trouble is read as a “unique outcome” or “exception.” I
draw the term unique outcome from Erving Goffman (1961) who, in
defining it, states that in structuring experience into “any social strand
of any person’s course through life . . . unique outcomes are neglected
in favor of such changes over time as are basic and common to mem-
bers of a social category, although occurring independently to each of
them” (p. 127). Peter's walking out on trouble was of a particular cate-
gory of unique outcomes that can be classified as an “initiative.” Such
initiatives, like other unique outcomes, are ever-present in people's
lives, but they are mostly neglected and lost. I have a sense that one is
likely to have a good life when only 97% of one’s initiatives in living are
stalled; that is, when 3% of one’s initiatives of living survive, one can
expect to experience a reasonable quality of life. However, when 98% of
one’s initiatives in living are lost—when only 2% survive—one can
expect to experiencea relatively poor quality of life. This leads me to the
conclusion that, as therapists, when consulted by people about prob-
lems and predicaments, we have a role to play in the un-stalling of, and
in supporting the endurance of, 1% of their initiatives in living.
When developments that might be candidates for unique outcome
status become visible to me in my consultations, it is my habit to
explore options for these to be rendered weighty, and for this to pro-
vide the basis for a conversation in which people have the opportunity
to identify and to further develop accounts of what they intend for
their lives and of what they accord value to in life. There is a signifi-
cant gap between the naming of unique outcomes and the process of


ee

[PAGE 244]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 233 $


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 233


figuring out what these unique outcomes reflect in terms of what peo-
ple intend for their lives and what they give value to. The therapist's
job is to help people bridge this gap. In my conversation with Trudy
and Peter, the navigation of the gap between these two points was
shaped by a second version of the statement of position map I dis-
cussed in Chapter 1.


The Statement of Position Map, Version 2


This version of the statement of position map consists of the same
basic categories of inquiry included in the first version of the map.
However, instead of generating externalizing conversations by focus-
ing on the problems and predicaments of people's lives, this map gen-
erates alternative storylines for people's lives by focusing on unique
outcomes and exceptions to the dominant and often problem-satu-
rated storylines. Therapeutic inquiry shaped by this version of the
statement of position map invariably provides a foundation for the
introduction of the sort of re-authoring conversations that are dis-
cussed in Chapter 2. For example, in response to the understandings
about what people intend for their lives and give value to, the thera-
pist can craft landscape of action questions that encourage people to
reengage with their histories and give voice to accounts of the devel-
opments that reflect those understandings.
I have received consistent feedback from participants of training
events that this version of the statement of position map has assisted
them in stepping back from assuming primary authorship in their
effort to render the positive but neglected developments of people’s
lives meaningful. When therapists do assume primary authorship in
this way, it is common for them to enter into a “convincing mode” in
which their responses are primarily limited to giving affirmations,
pointing out positives, and making attempts at reframing. This version
of the statement of position map can be of considerable assistance to
the therapist in maintaining a decentered but influential participation
in these therapeutic conversations. This is a decentered participation
in that therapists endeavor to privilege the authorship of the people


o

[PAGE 245]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 234 +


234 Maps of Narrative Practice


seeking consultation. And it is an influential participation in the sense
that the therapist brings structure to this inquiry about the develop-
ments of people’s lives that may potentially be unique outcomes. This
structure hinges on the following four categories of inquiry.

Inquiry Category 1. Negotiation of a Particular, Experience-Near Definition

of the Unique Outcome


In this first stage, the therapist launches an inquiry into developments
that have the potential to be rendered meaningful as unique out-
comes. In the context of this inquiry, people are invited to provide an
extended description of these developments and to richly characterize
them in experience-near and particular terms. I emphasize experi-
ence-near and particular terms because no development in life will be
perceived or received in identical ways by different people or in iden-
tical ways at different times in a person’s life, nor is any development
a direct replica of any other development in life or in history.
In the first part of my conversation with Peter and Trudy, the initia-
tive of leaving the scene of frustration was defined as ‘walking away
from trouble.” A number of associated developments were also
named, including “stepping back” and “figuring, who needs it.” I did
not make haste in this part of the interview, but rather continued to
ask Peter to clarify the meaning of his initiative. Thus the initiative
became more richly characterized. For example, when I asked him to
say more about figuring he didn’t need it, he responded that it was
about “figuring things out,” about how he “kept his mind” and “didn’t
lose it,” and about “looking up the road.” Later this initiative was
defined by Trudy as “managing his own life.”
This sort of “loitering with intent” allows for an extended descrip-
tion of such developments and promotes a rich characterization of
them. This is important in the negotiation of enduring and solid expe-
rience-near and particular definitions of unique outcomes.
The development that was rendered meaningful as a unique out-
come for Peter and Trudy was of recent history. However, therapists
do not need to restrict themselves to events of the past in their effort
to identify such developments, as they are also invariably evident in
the present. Following is an example of this.


o

[PAGE 246]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 235 er


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 235


I met with Dillon and his family for a consultation session in the
presence of some “guests” who were participants of a training course
that I was conducting. The family had been fully briefed on the con-
text of this meeting and had opted to proceed. Dillon was a young
man, 15 years old, who was in trouble in virtually every domain of his
life. After yet another crisis, he was on the verge of permanent expul-
sion from his family. Although he had agreed to come to the interview,
from the outset he didn’t seem at all enthusiastic about participating.
I checked again about whether he'd been fully briefed about the cir-
cumstances of the interview, and he confirmed that he had. But then
he said in a resentful tone: “Who are these people anyway?” This was
predominantly expressed as a statement, but there was an element of
a question in this.
I took this as an opportunity to ask Dillon about what he wanted to
know about these guests. He gruffly responded with: “their hobbies.”
I then proceeded to interview the guests about their hobbies, and
when this was done I asked which of these Dillon found himself relat-
ing to. He'd been drawn to what he had heard about horseback riding
and humor. I then began to inquire into what sort of step he'd taken
in inviting these guests to introduce themselves. Dillon was engaged
by this, but he had difficulty naming this initiative. When I asked for
the assistance of other family members, his mother described his ini-
tiative as “building bridges,” stating that she’d been very surprised by
this as she had not witnessed Dillon’s performing this skill in 5 years.
Subsequently, Dillon embraced this definition of his initiative—it was
one that was clearly experience-near and particular to his life—and
this provided a point of entry for the identification and rich develop-
ment of a subordinate storyline of his life.

Inquiry Category 2. Mapping the Effects of the Unique Outcome


This second stage features an inquiry into the effects of the unique
outcome that can be traced through the various domains of people’s
lives, including the domains of home and familial relationships, work-
place, school and education, peer contexts and friendships, one’s rela-
tionship with oneself, and so on. This can also be an inquiry into the
“potential” effects of the unique outcome in these domains of life, and


oz

[PAGE 247]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 236 E


236 Maps of Narrative Practice


on one's future possibilities and life's horizons generally. Additionally,
at this stage there is frequently an opportunity to place some focus on
the developments that may have led up to the unique outcome.
In my conversation with Peter and Trudy, stages one and two of this
“statement of position map” were not as clearly defined in relation to
each other as they are in many other conversations. However, with
regard to the effects of the unique outcome that was characterized, |
learned that, among other things, this had made it possible for Peter
to keep his privileges, including weekend leave, metalwork class, tel-
evision, gym time, and to avoid going wild and busting everything up.
Later there was also speculation about how this could make it possi-
ble for him to improve his life, to stay out of detention centers, to have
space for his own life, and to have space to move.
This inquiry has the effect of bringing the unique outcome into a
sequence of developments that unfold through time—of incorporat-
ing it into a storyline. This emphasizes and secures the significance of
the unique outcome; it is rendered less vulnerable to any conclusions
that it was the outcome of luck, an aberration, or entirely of the mak-
ing of others.

Inquiry Category 3. Evaluating the Unique Outcome and its Effects


In this stage, the therapist supports people in evaluating the unique
outcome and its effects or potential effects. As with the earlier state-
ment of position map, this evaluation can be initiated with questions
like: Are these developments okay with you? How do you feel about
these developments? How are these developments for you? Where do
you stand on these outcomes? What’s your position on what is unfold-
ing here? Is this development positive or negative—or both, or neither,
or something in between?
These questions invite people to pause and reflect on specific
developments of their lives, to identify and speak of their experience
of them, and to reach a judgment about them. Many people find this
quite a novel experience, for these developments contradict those
associated with what is more known and familiar to them about their
lives. This can also be a novel experience due to the fact that such
developments have often been subject to the judgment of others. The


ee

[PAGE 248]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 237 +


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 237


following two excerpts from my conversation with Peter and Trudy
illustrate my use of these experience and evaluation questions.


Excerpt 1

M: Ive got a list here about what this has all been about
... I've got another list about some of the things that this
is making possible for you . . . What's this like for you?
What is it like for you to see this happening in your life?

Peter: It's good to see I suppose.

M: There is good and there is good and there is good.
There are many different kinds of good. What sort of good
is this? And who is it good for? Do you mean that it is good
for you, or for your mother, or for the detention center?

Peter: It's positive.

M: It's positive for whom?

Peter: Positive for me.

M: It's positive for you. Could you say a bit about the way
it's positive for you?

Peter: Yeah. It just makes me feel good.

M: Do you know why this development makes you feel
good?

Peter: Like it's a good feeling to be getting somewhere.


Excerpt 2

M: What would that be like for you, Peter? If managing
your own life made this possible?

Peter: That would be real positive.

M: I know that you have already answered this question, but
I would like to get more of a sense of what “real positive”

[PAGE 249]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 238 $


238 Maps of Narrative Practice


means to you. I am asking this again because I think there
might be more to this development in managing your own life.

Peter: I don't know. I'd just be happy to see that I could
make happen what needed to happen. I'd just be happy to
know that I could make happen what I wanted.

M: Happy to see that you could make happen what needed
to happen and what you wanted to happen.

Trudy: One thing is for sure. He'd be a lot more comfort-
able with his life.

M: Peter?

Peter: Yeah. Things would be more comfortable.


Because being consulted about this subject can be quite a novel
experience, it is usually important for the therapist to preface these
evaluation questions with a brief summary of some of the principal
effects of the unique outcomes that have already been drawn out in the
second stage of the conversation. I refer to these summaries as “edito-
rials,” and they provide people with a surface upon which to reflect
when responding to the evaluation questions. For example, in my con-
versation with Peter and Trudy, before asking these evaluation ques-
tions, I first gave a brief summary of the meanings attributed to the
unique outcome and of what I understood to be the principal conse-
quences of this: “I've got a list here about what this has all been about:
walking out on trouble, stepping back, figuring things out, figuring you
didn't need it, keeping your mind, not losing it, walking away from
trouble, and looking up the road. I’ve got another list about some of the
things that this is making possible for you, like keeping your privileges
and avoiding going wild and busting things up. What's this like for you?
What is it like for you to see this happening in your life?”
At this time care is also taken to ensure that people have the oppor-
tunity to give voice to complexities in their position on the develop-
ments that are the subject of inquiry. This is because it is common for
therapists to assume that people would evaluate these consequences

[PAGE 250]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 239 er


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 239


to be wholly positive (when this might not be the case), to prematurely
bring closure to the inquiry, and then to proceed on this assumption.

Inquiry Category 4. Justifying the Evaluation


This fourth stage features an inquiry into the “why” of the evaluations
that people have made in these conversations. As with the earlier state-
ment of position map, this level of inquiry can be initiated with ques-
tions like: Why is this okay for you? Why do you feel this way about
this development? Why are you taking this stand/position on this
development? The inquiry can also be initiated by asking people to
share a story that will provide an account of the “why”: Would you tell
me a story about your life that would help me to understand why you
would take this position on this development? What stories about your
history would your father/mother/sibling share that might throw some
light on why you are so happy about this development? The following
excerpts provide an account of this stage of the therapeutic inquiry.


Excerpt 1

M: Do you know why this development makes you feel good?

Peter: Like it’s a good feeling to be getting somewhere.

M: It is about a feeling of getting somewhere. Why is get-
ting somewhere important to you?

Peter: Because I'll be able to do something with my life,
that's why. Pll be able to say what I want and do something
about it.

M: You sound quite clear about this.

Peter: Yeah. I'll know that I'll be able to make things hap-
pen. If things aren't working out, just knowing this means
that I'll be able to do something about it.

M: Is getting somewhere in your life, and having a say
about the direction of your own life, been important to you
for very long?

[PAGE 251]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 240 +


240 Maps of Narrative Practice


Peter: I think it has. Yeah, I think it has been. At least for a
year, or maybe more, I think.


Excerpt 2

M: Okay. I understand more about what this development
in managing your own life would be like for you. It would
make things more comfortable, and you'd be happy to see
that you could make happen what you needed and wanted
to happen. I’ve got a question: Why would you be happy to
see this?

Peter: Um... I’m not sure.

M: Would it be okay for me to ask your mum this question?

Peter: Yeah, feel free.

M: ‘Trudy, why do you think Peter would judge this devel-
opment in managing his own future to be real positive?

Trudy: He'll be able to figure things out for himself more.
And besides, he's got a right to this.

M: He's got a right to what?

Trudy: He's got a right to manage his own life. He's got a
right to having his own space. Everyone's got this right, but
it gets taken a lot. I know it was taken from Peter. I know
that he hasn't had this chance.

M: What do you think of this, Peter? Your mum said that
she thought you'd say this was a real positive development
because you have a right to manage your own life and a
right to your own space. Does this fit for you?

Peter: Yeah.

M: Why would you say this fits for you?

Peter: Because I didn’t have that chance when I was a kid

[PAGE 252]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 241 $


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 241


M: What happened?

Peter: Oh, my stepdad just gave me a hard time.

M: He took this right from you?

Peter: Yeah. Totally.


As with the evaluation questions, these justification questions are
usually prefaced by editorials. These editorials provide a “surface”
upon which to reflect, and this assists people in the development of
responses to these questions. As I discussed in Chapter 1, I strongly
believe in the resurrection of “why” questions in therapeutic conver-
sations. For example, it was in response to “why” questions that Peter
gave expression to an aspiration to affect the course of his future.
These “why” questions open space for people to give voice to and fur-
ther develop intentional understandings about life and about what
they accord value to in life. And it was in response to these “why”
questions that Trudy gave value to the concept of one’s “right” to man-
age one’s own life, which was then further developed by Peter as the
therapeutic conversation proceeded. People are defined by their pur-
poses in life, and the defining of this aspiration and this account of
what is accorded value constituted a conclusion about Peter’s identity
that contradicted the known and familiar negative conclusions that
were associated with the dominant storyline of his life.
Intentional understandings of life and about what is accorded value
in life can provide the point of entry to re-authoring conversations that
contribute to rich story development. For example, in response to the
expression of these understandings in this fourth stage of inquiry, peo-
ple can be invited to reflect on and recount events of their lives that
would confirm the relevance and the appropriateness of these under-
standings. In Chapter 2 I referred to this sort of question as a “land-
scape of action” question.
I should also note that I never expect an instantaneous response to
these justification questions. In fact, people frequently respond with
an “I don’t know.” This is to be expected in a cultural climate in which
internal understandings about life and identity have displaced inten-

[PAGE 253]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 242 +


242 Maps of Narrative Practice


tional understandings and in which it has become quite rare for peo-
ple to be consulted about the why of their preferences for particular
developments of their lives. Because of this, it is quite common for
people to experience this consultation about the why to be quite rad-
ical and a significant challenge.
When encountering these “I don't know” responses, it is important
that therapists provide more support to people in their effort to
answer. This support can be given in many ways. In addition to offer-
ing editorials that preface these questions, the therapist can invite
people to extend the review of the principal effects of the unique out-
comes, as well as their evaluation of these effects. This contributes to
the development of a more solid surface upon which to reflect when
people are entertaining these “why” questions.
Yet another option for supporting people's efforts to respond to
these questions is for the therapist to provide an account of how oth-
ers have responded to similar questions: “About 6 weeks ago I was
meeting with a couple who'd managed a similar feat in their effort to
get free of the conflict that had been dominating their relationship.
This couple was similarly enthusiastic about the outcome of this ini-
tiative, and when I asked why I learned that this was because
Does this bear a resemblance to what you would say about why you
are enthusiastic about these developments, Or would you put in an
entirely different way?” These accounts of the responses of others
usually contribute to a foundation for people to be knowledgeable
about the “why” of their own position on developments in their lives;
having an account of the why in regard to developments in the lives of
others makes it possible for people to distinguish their own position
on similar developments in their lives.
As I noted in Chapter 1, when therapists are meeting with young
children who respond with an “I don't know” to these “why” questions,
the inquiry can be facilitated through the introduction of a guessing
game. The child's parents and siblings can be invited to make guesses
about why the developments are preferred by the child. The therapist
can also contribute to this stock of guesses. The child can then be
interviewed about whether any of these guesses came close to the
mark, and if so, about what words the child would use to develop this


o

[PAGE 254]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 243 $


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 243


“why.” If the child determines that these guesses have not come close,
he or she can interviewed about how he or she knows this, which usu-
ally helps the child puts words to his or her own “why.”


The four categories of inquiry that are featured in this version of the
statement of position map shape people's orientation to the develop-
ments of their lives that might be candidates for a unique outcome
status. Of course, they also shape the therapist's orientation to such
developments. In the context of this inquiry, the meanings of such
developments are negotiated, and these developments are imbued
with significance. As these developments become weightier, people
become more curious about them, and as the inquiry unfolds, fasci-
nation is triggered. This fascination for what would otherwise be neg-
lected or considered trivial contributes to people’s engagement in and
responsiveness to the inquiry.
In this discussion of this version of the statement of position map,
I have presented a linear account of the progress of conversations.
However, in actual practice, a strictly linear progression is rarely seen,
and clarifications of people’s responses at one level of inquiry can
bring about revisions in, or the embroidering of, responses at another
level of inquiry.
Figures 5.1 and 5.2 show my charting of the conversation with
Peter and ‘Trudy onto the statement of position map that I have
described in this chapter.


Midstream Employment of the Statement of Position Map


When people undertake initiatives during the course of the therapeu-
tic conversation, therapists can solidify the initiative as a unique out-
come by employing the second version of the statement of position
map midstream in the therapeutic conversation.
I did this when Peter clearly articulated that he gave value to the
right to have a life that had been taken from him by his stepfather and
when Trudy spoke in strong terms about what she regarded to be her


a

[PAGE 255]



ddprzendew
Figure 5.1 Charting Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes (Peter)


LO/ET/E


Justifying the evaluation
LEtP

Wd


Evaluating the effects of
the unique ebed
outcome/solution
ppc


Mapping the effects & —kept privileges
potential effects of the —avoided counseling summary of the
unique outcome/solution -avoided going wild consequences of
& wrecking things the initiative

—walking away from trouble = ary of
Negotiating an experience- =stepping back summary O 2
near & particular —figuring “who needs it” volta eating :
definition of the unique -figuring things out the scene of 5
outcome/solution —not losing it frustration
—keeping one's mind ; =
2 | -b


—'breaking the law can get

Known & familiar yen locked up ; ;
-incapable of running own life
—can't take responsibility
SZ J


5 10 15

Time in minutes



[PAGE 256]



ddpazendew


Figure 5.2 Charting Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes (Peter)

LO/ET/E


v

-to do something with life
LE
Justifying the evaluation —to “say what I want and do
something about it” —right to manage own life
Wd
—able to make things happen —right to own space


ebed
Evaluating the effects of
the unique -good to see —real positive
GSvbz
outcome/solution it's positive —happy to see
—a good feeling —comfortable


. -improve life

Mapping the effects & -stay out of detention center
potential effects of the -get ahead and get good job
unique outcome/solution -space to have own life
—space to move


Negotiating an experiencenear & particular
definition of the unique managing
outcome/solution own life


Known & familiar


15 20 25

Time in minutes


Br

[PAGE 257]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 246 +


246 Maps of Narrative Practice


“complicity” in this tyranny and about the extent to which she could
have been paralyzed by guilt on account of this. I detected in these
comments two developments that were candidates for unique out-
come status. First, Trudy was making an acknowledgment, to Peter, of
the part that she believed she had played in what he had been subject
to by his stepfather. Second, she had not been paralyzed by guilt in the
way that she might have been.
I chose to consult Peter about these initiatives, interviewing him
first about the consequences of Trudy's refusal to be paralyzed by
guilt and about his evaluation of this refusal (he judged it to be a
beneficial contribution to his life), and second about Trudy’s initia-
tive in acknowledging what she strongly believed to be her “com-
plicity.” My questions were shaped by the four categories of inquiry:
Peter characterized her initiative (“owning up” and “being honest”),
gave some account of its consequences, evaluated these conse-
quences and, with Trudy’s assistance, justified this evaluation (if
contributed to the establishment of a sense of security that he
highly valued). A significant outcome of this was that in the act of
acknowledging some responsibility for what Peter had been subject
to, Trudy experienced making a very significant contribution to her
son’s life.
The following transcript of this part of my conversation with Peter
and ‘Trudy illustrates my use of the second version of the statement of
position map midstream in the therapeutic conversation. Figure 5.3,
following the transcript, shows my charting of their conversation.


Trudy: I have to tell you that I feel very badly about this
because I brought this onto Peter’s life. I brought this man
into our lives, and I let this go on. This was complicity on
my part. God it was awful, and forever I'll feel guilty about
this. I know that I could have been paralyzed by guilt
because of this.

M: Peter, what's it like for you to hear your mum talking
about how badly she feels about bringing this man into
your life? What's it like for you to hear her talk about how

[PAGE 258]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 247 +


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 247


she feels partly responsible for what you went through, and
that she is so sorry about this?

Peter: It's good I suppose.

M: Why is this good?

Peter: Because it is the truth.

M: What’s important to you about this?

Peter: It's owning up.

M: What is it about the owning up that is important?

Peter: It’s being honest.

M: “Owning up” and “being honest” are good names for the
step that your mother is taking here?

Peter: Yeah.

M: Trudy, do these words “owning up” and “honesty” fit for
your

Trudy: Sure. It is past time for this to happen. It’s past
time to do this. We've both been carrying heavy weights.
Mine is guilt.

M: How does it affect you to hear your mum’s honesty?

Peter: Um...

M: Does this touch how you feel? Does it have some effect
on your connection with your mum? For example, does it
make you feel closer to her, or more distant, or neither?

Peter: Closer.

M: Could you say anything else about what this honesty is
like for you?

Peter: It makes me feel a bit better about what's gone down.

M: A bit better about what's gone down. Anything else?


a

[PAGE 259]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 248 +


248 Maps of Narrative Practice


Peter: Yeah. I can relax.

M: This honesty brings you closer to your mum, and makes
you feel a bit better about what happened, and you can
relax. And this is happening right now. What's it like for you
that this is happening right now?

Peter: It makes me a bit happier.

M: Anything else?

Peter: Cant think of anything right now.

M: Do you understand why it makes you a bit happier?

Peter: Maybe because it tells me things are different now.

M: That...

Peter: That it won't happen again.

M: Perhaps I could ask your mum about why she thinks
this makes you feel a bit happier?

Peter: Go ahead.

M: Trudy?

Trudy: Maybe it’s because it makes Peter feel more safe.
Because it makes him feel, I don’t know . . . How would
you say it? Maybe more secure in our connection. I think
we've always wanted this connection. I certainly have with
him. I have always wanted this sort of connection with a
child of mine, but everything’s got in the way of this,
including what I did in bringing this man into our home.

M: Peter, does what your mom is saying fit for you? That
this makes you a bit happier because you feel safer, and
more secure in your connection with her? And that both of
you have always wanted this connection?

Peter: Sure, it fits.

[PAGE 260]



ddrı enden


Figure 5.3 Charting Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes (Peter)

LO/ET/E


Justifying the evaluation LEP

-safety
Wd
-connectedness
Y

obea
Evaluating the effects of
the unique
6vzZ
outcome/solution
happier


Mapping the effects &
potential effects of the -closer
unique outcome/solution -feel a bit better
—can relax
Y

Negotiating an experiencenear & particular
definition of the unique
—owning up
outcome/solution
—honesty
Y


Known & familiar


25 30 35

Time in minutes


e

[PAGE 261]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 250 er


250 Maps of Narrative Practice


The Nature of Narrative Conversations: From Unique
Outcomes to Rich Story Development


The distance that can be traveled in one therapeutic conversation
from the starting point of a unique outcome to destinations in new
territories of life and identity is often truly remarkable. Furthermore,
it is entirely impossible to predict this destination at the outset. In my
experience with these conversations, the only thing that can safely be
predicted is that the outcome will defy any prediction. This is one of
the enthralling aspects of engaging with these narrative practices. In
the context of these conversations we remain “in suspense” with
regard to the outcome, knowing only that at the end of the conversa-
tion we will be standing in territories of life and identity that we
couldn't have imagined at the outset. The transcript I have included
in this section illustrates both of these phenomena: the distance peo-
ple travel during the course of these conversations and the unpre-
dictability of the destination.
The transcript also illustrates another important point about the
maps of narrative practice: that the boundaries between them are often
blurred. Throughout this book I have presented these maps as distinct
entities so that I could describe them more clearly. However, in prac-
tice these maps usually blur into each other. Narrative conversations
are not “disciplined.” They do not proceed in an orderly cookbook fash-
ion, but are somewhat unruly. The therapist's participation in these
conversations is significantly determined by people’s responses, and
formulating a question before hearing a person’s response to a previous
question rarely works. It is the opportunities present in people's
responses that determine the therapist's participation. In the following
excerpt readers will find elements of the re-authoring, re-membering,
and definitional ceremony maps of narrative practice.
The focus of the interview again turned to Trudy’s declaration that
she hadn't allowed herself to be paralyzed by guilt. I was openly curi-
ous about what had made this possible for her—about what had pro-
vided a foundation for her to resist being captive to guilt. In response
to this, Trudy described a crisis in her life some 18 months ago. This
crisis had precipitated a number of realizations, and as an outcome of


ee

[PAGE 262]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 251 er


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 251


this she found herself “facing a crossroads.” She could continue to
allow guilt to paralyze her life, or she “could take another road” upon
which she would adopt a “more realistic” perspective on some of the
forces at play with regard to the predicaments of her history—forces
over which she had previously had no control. At this time, she had
“made the right call” and was determined that “nothing can get in my
way now.”


M: So this was a crossroads for you. You suddenly had
another option regarding the road that you could travel, and
you were determined to make the right call.

Trudy: Yes, that’s it exactly.

M: So that attitude “nothing can get in my way now’ was a
new development?

Trudy: Yeah. I’d have to say that before this I had this atti-
tude like I was defeated. Really defeated. Oh, it was horri-
ble. It was like a shadow over everything.

M: And over the past 18 months you have held onto this
different attitude, even through difficult times?

Trudy: Exactly. Although I still get a bit shaky sometimes.
But I won't let go of it.

M: You have talked about how you'd always wanted a close
connection to a child of yours. Have there been other
things that you've always wanted? Are there other longings
or hopes that have been important to you that have been
frustrated by the circumstances of your life?

Trudy: Yeah. For sure there have been.

M: Would you say a bit about these?

Trudy: Well, to start with, like Peter, I’ve always wanted
something better for my future. I’ve wanted to have a life
where there is more understanding, and at least some con-

[PAGE 263]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 252 +


252 Maps of Narrative Practice


sideration. I've wanted a more peaceful life, where there
could be some respect.

M: Longings and hopes for a better future, for a life where
there is more understanding and consideration. And a more
peaceful life where there could be some respect.

Trudy: Yeah. And like Peter, to have a chance maybe to man-
age my own life. To have a bit of space to have my own life,
too. This is what I always intended to do, but I just couldn't
seem to make this happen. It’s been very frustrating.

M: These intentions for your life go way back?

Trudy: Yeah, of course. Of course.

M: How far back?

Trudy: Well, right back to when I was just a little kid. Yeah,
way back. I was always out for something different. I could-
n't have said this in the way that I have today. I didn’t have
the words for it then. But this is what I was out for. I had
my hopes. But I just didn’t have the opportunity to carry
this out like I wanted to. I didn’t have the freedom for this.
And that’s been very frustrating. For a lot of the time I felt
that I was banging my head against a brick wall.

M: Were these intentions shared by others in the family
you grew up in?

Trudy: No. No way. There wasn’t any understanding.
There was no patience. No respect. Everyone just had
these strong opinions, and everyone just wrote off anything
that anyone else thought. Everyone was always trying to
overrule everybody else. It was a tough place to be. I didn't
want any part in this. I sure didn’t want to continue it on.

M: So how did you manage to hold onto these intentions
for your life when these weren't supported by anyone else
in your family, and when it was such a tough place to be in?

[PAGE 264]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 253 +


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 253


Trudy: Oh, I don't know. Resilience I guess. Maybe I had
some resilience.

M: Resilience. What sustained this resilience? Did anyone
ever validate or acknowledge the importance of these
intentions and hopes? Was there anyone who might have
shared these hopes for your life?

Trudy: Actually, there was someone. I had a grandmother
who I was close to, who I had a lot of time with when I was
young. This was Grandma Lillian—she was my mum's
mother.

M: How did you know that she supported these intentions
and hopes for a different life?

Trudy: Some things you just know. She really cared for me.
Grandma Lillian gave me a lot of support. She liked that I
was thoughtful. She never tried to overrule what I said. It
was always okay for me just to say what I felt with her. She
was understanding, and she'd never just put her opinion on
me.


M: Over what period of time did you have this contact with
your grandmother?

Trudy: Oh, this is a sad story. When I was about 10 years
old my father got this new job as a clerk in a mining town
up north, and we left. I wanted to go back for holidays with
my grandmother, but my father wouldn't let me. He used
to say pretty bad things about her. I think he had always
been a bit threatened by her. I remember him saying that
she was interfering with “his family.” He always talked
about “his family” as if he owned the rest of us.

M: Oh. So you never got to...

Trudy: I remember feeling really sad about being cut off
from her. She used to send cards and letters, but my father
stopped this. He kept putting her down, and I found out


m

[PAGE 265]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 254 er


254 Maps of Narrative Practice


later that he’d sent most of these back to her unopened
without telling me or anybody else. She saved them, and
my cousin eventually gave them to me. I realized that she’d
never given up. It was really lovely to have those letters and
cards, but it also hurt, because I’d missed her a lot.

M: You said that you experienced understanding and sup-
port from her.

Trudy: And lots of love as well.

M: Do you why you were such a focus of her understand-
ing and love and support? Do you know what it was that
she appreciated about you?

Trudy: I think I always knew that she loved me for who I
was as a little girl. She didn't have all of these big plans for
my life. She liked the way that I wasn’t pushy, the way that
we could hang out and not have all of this tension around
all of the time.

M: If your Grandma Lillian could be here now, and I was
to ask her about what she appreciated in you, what's your
guess about what she would say?

Trudy: Let's see... I think she'd say that I was a more sen-
sitive person. A more thoughtful person. She saw that I
wasn't one of those opinionated people who just crashed
their way through things. She liked that I was more gentle.
We could be mellowed out together.

M: Do you know what it was like for her to have you for a
granddaughter who responded to her in the way that you
did?

Trudy: What it was like for her? How do you mean?

M: I understand that there was something special when
the two of you were together. I know that this meant a lot
to you. And you have put me in touch with what she appre-

[PAGE 266]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 255 $


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 255


ciated about you. I can only guess that for her to be with
you also touched her life in ways. What's your guess about
this?

Trudy: Well, I suppose that she felt that I understood her
too. That I had a feeling for what she had a feeling for.

M: Do you have any thoughts about how this might have
affected her life?

Trudy: I know she looked forward to my visits. When I
went to her house I would get to the front gate and I could
see her looking out of the kitchen window, waiting for me.
So I guess that I made her happy in some ways.

M: Pd like to ask Peter about what he's been hearing as
we've been talking, if this is okay.

Trudy: Sure.

M: What's it been like for you to be listening to the story
about the connection between your mother and her grand-
mother?

Peter: Fine.

M: There is fine and there is fine and there is fine. What
sort of fine is that?

Peter: It's fine because I’m getting a better picture of
things.

M: What are you getting a better picture of?

Peter: Of what happened to my mum and my grand-
mother.

M: What happened to them?

Peter: They didn't have the space that they needed, and
they wanted something better.

M: Do you think that this fits in any way with what you


o

[PAGE 267]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 256 E


256 Maps of Narrative Practice


were saying about walking out on trouble and about your
rights to manage your own life and to have your own space?
Or is this different?

Peter: Yeah. I'd say its something the same. We're a bit
connected.

M: How do you mean, were a bit connected?

Peter: Well, the three of us have had our troubles, and we
all kept going.

M: What's it like for you to have this connection?

Peter: I didn't know about this. I didnt know about
Grandma Lillian.

M: You didn’t know anything about your great-grand-
mother.

A: No. Didn't even know that I had a Grandma Lillian.

M: Trudy, if your grandmother could be here now, listen-
ing to my conversation with Peter about walking out on
trouble, and listening to my conversation with you about
how you have continued to hold onto what was precious to
both of you, what do you think she would be most taken
with? What do you think she'd be most drawn to?

Trudy: Well, I know that she also had a hard time in the
family she grew up in. There was no place for her to have
a voice in anything. And yet she didnt give up. She kept
trying to find ways to overcome all of this. You know,
despite everything she found a way get through all this dis-
couragement with what mattered to her. I’m sure she’d be
taken with Peter doing the same thing.

M: She'd be taken with Peter doing the same thing. Peter,
does what we are hearing about Grandma Lillian fit with
what you were saying about having a right to your own life,
a right to your own space?


ee

[PAGE 268]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 257 er


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 257


Peter: Yeah. I suppose we are a bit the same here too.
Yeah, that'd be true.

M: Trudy, you said that if Grandma Lillian was here she’d
be drawn to Peter's walking away from trouble. What's your
guess about how this would affect her sense of Peter? How
do you think it would affect her picture of Peter as a per-
son?

Trudy: I think she’d see Peter as someone who can steer
things in a direction that’s more okay for him. Someone
who was starting to find his own road and who's moving
more toward what's important for him even though the
road's still pretty steep and there's lots of work to do.
Someone who won't let this turn him back to where he
Was.


M: Why do you think she'd be so drawn to Peter's actions
in walking away from trouble?

Trudy: Because of her own struggle to get her own life
free. She didn’t have much of a chance to manage her own
life, and she didn’t have much power, but she kept up try-
ing. She kept up trying to make a space for her own life.
And in the end it’s the memories of her and what she did
that count.

M: Just imagine Lillian being here today as an audience to
our conversation about developments in Peter's life and in
your life. Where do you think she'd be right now in her
thoughts, or in her feelings, or in her understandings, or in
her realizations?

Trudy: Well, to know that it was what she stood for that
won through, that this overcame all of those loud-mouthed
efforts to control her life. To know that this is what carried
through to her great-grandson would really mean a lot to
her.

[PAGE 269]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 258 +


258 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: So it would mean that all of her struggles against what
she was put through were...

Trudy: Were worthwhile. Yes. That's it. That all of the lit-
tle things she did to keep these hopes going, to do what she
intended for her own life, was totally worth something. I
think she would actually feel a huge sense of relief.

M: So despite all the .. .

Trudy: All the pushing and shoving, and all of the shout-
ing down, she achieved so much more than all of those
people who had all the power. You know, she'd feel really
proud of Peter.

M: She’d feel really proud of Peter?

Trudy: Yes. And something else I've thought of as well is
that I know that she also struggled with guilt, and this
would take the load of guilt off her shoulders too. I know
that it would do this.

M: Peter, what's it like for you hear this? Does this interest
you? Or does it not interest you?

Peter: It’s sure interesting.

M: What parts interest you?

Peter: About how hard things were for my grandmother,
and about how she didn't let this put her off. And about her
being proud of me.

M: What does it mean to you that your great-grandmother
would be proud of you?

Peter: A lot.

M: Would you say a little about that?

Peter: Because of knowing she would be happy to be with
me. And because we're a bit the same. I’ve had a bit of a

[PAGE 270]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 259 er


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 259


hard time too. I haven't had the space that 1 needed to
have, but I’ve kept going and I’m making some headway.
I've got a way to go, but I can see that I’m getting to where
I want to be.


As this transcript illustrates, the distance that can be traveled in
these conversations is significant. By the end of this conversation, we
were a long way from the starting point, which was Peter's act of walk-
ing away from trouble at a time of acute frustration. By the end of this
interview, this act had become highly symbolic of themes of struggle
and of the right to manage one’s own life—themes around which
Peter was linked to the lives of his mother and great-grandmother.
This linking of the stories of people’s lives around shared and precious
themes contributes to rich story development. In this rich story devel-
opment the intentional understandings and the understandings about
what people give value to are developed and redeveloped, and they
become generalized themes about life and identity. This provides a
foundation for people to proceed with their lives, as a range of options
for actions that would be coherent with these themes becomes more
visible and available.
This excerpt also illustrates the unpredictable character of these
conversations. At the outset of this conversation I could not have pre-
dicted an outcome in which Peter would be experiencing his life
linked to the life of his mother and great-grandmother around these
themes. I could never have predicted that he would experience pro-
found validation, that witnessing developments in his life would have
reinforced his great-erandmothers sense that “her struggles were
worthwhile,” that his actions would bring her a “huge sense of relief,”
and that “she would feel really proud of Peter.” This recognition of
Peter's contribution to such a highly valued legacy constituted a most
powerful acknowledgment.
Finally, this conversation also illustrates the blurring of boundaries
of the maps of narrative practice. As I noted earlier, elements of re-
authoring, re-membering, and definitional ceremony practices are
present in this excerpt. For example, with regard to re-membering
conversations, Lillian’s contribution to Trudy’s life was richly


o

[PAGE 271]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 260 +


260 Maps of Narrative Practice


described, as was what she appreciated about Trudy's identity. As the
conversation evolved, conclusions were derived both about what these
developments in Trudy and Peters life would have contributed to
Lillian's life, and about how this would have touched on her sense of
what her existence was about. Among other things, it was determined
that Trudy and Peter's contribution would have been highly validating
of Lillian’s struggle to get her own life free and of her determination
to make a space for her own life. Aspects of this re-membering con-
versation were developed in the context of a therapeutic inquiry struc-
tured around definitional ceremony practices in which Lillian's pres-
ence as an outsider witness was evoked.
Peter did not again run amok, and he won an early release from the
detention center. Much of the conflict that had been characteristic of
Peter and Trudy’s relationship dissipated. Trudy decided to join a
group for women who'd been subject to trauma. Peter joined an asso-
ciated group for young people and, over several months, developed a
leadership role in this group. In providing this follow-up information,
it is not my intention to make any grand claims about the efficacy of
my one narrative conversation with Peter and Trudy. Peter was meet-
ing with, and continued to meet with, a skilled therapist, Melanie,
and there were others who also continued to provide him with support
and encouragement. However, I do believe that narrative conversa-
tions of the sort that I had with Peter and Trudy can play a significant
role in such outcomes, even when these conversations are restricted
to a single consultation.


Conclusion


In writing this chapter it was not my intention to include all that
might be said about the unique outcome concept or about therapeu-
tic practices that have the potential to render unique outcomes highly
significant. There are many other sources of extended discussion on
these subjects. My intention was rather to provide an overview of the
development of narrative conversations shaped by the second version
of the statement of position map. This map guides the shaping of a


Ze

[PAGE 272]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 261 +


Conversations That Highlight Unique Outcomes 261


therapeutic inquiry that has the potential to establish developments in
people’s lives as candidates for a unique outcome status and as points
of entry for rich story development.
It has at times been assumed that this focus on unique outcomes
gives rise to the sort of heroic accounts of life that reproduce highly
autonomous and independent conceptions of identity that are isolat-
ing of people and that obscure the social and relational fabric of their
lives. However, this assumption does not fit with what I know about
the results of these inquiries. To the contrary, it is my experience that
these conversations make it possible for people to redefine their rela-
tionships with each other in ways that acknowledge each other's
voices in the development of their own sense of identity. This redefi-
nition supports a more relational sense of identity. I believe that this
is clearly evident in my conversation with Peter and Trudy.
The map that I have presented in this chapter, like the others in
this book, is simply a construction founded upon my explorations of
practice and ideas; it is not a requirement for therapeutic conversa-
tions that contribute to the foundations of new possibility in people's
lives. However, should you, the reader, decide to use this map in the
context of your own practice, I hope that it will contribute to pleasure
in your work as it does in mine.

[PAGE 273]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 262 +

[PAGE 274]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 263 E


6
scaffolding
Conversations


eople consult therapists when they are having difficulty in pro-
ceeding with their lives. In these circumstances, they have usu-
ally been doing what is known and familiar to them in their
effort to address their predicaments and concerns: They have engaged
in actions that are in keeping with familiar conclusions about their
lives and relationships and with customary knowledges about life. The
gap between what is known and familiar and what might be possible
for people to know about their lives can be considered a “zone of prox-
imal development.”
This zone can be traversed through conversational partnerships
that provide the necessary scaffolding to achieve this—that is, the sort
of scaffolding that provides the opportunity for people to proceed
across this zone in manageable steps. In the context of therapeutic
practice, the therapist contributes significantly to the scaffolding of
the proximal zone of development and also recruits others to partici-
pate in this. This scaffolding makes it possible for people to incremen-
tally and progressively distance from the known and familiar and more
toward what it might be possible for them to know and to do.
It is in traversing this gap between the known and the familiar and
what is possible that people experience a newfound sense of personal
agency: a sense of being able to regulate one’s own life, to intervene in

[PAGE 275]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 264 +


264 Maps of Narrative Practice


one’s life to affect its course according to one's intentions, and to do this
in ways that are shaped by one’s knowledge of life and skills of living.


Petra


Petra, a young adult, sought consultation over the “mess” that her life
was in. After she had provided me with an account of the various
dilemmas, predicaments, and problems that she was “struggling with,”
I began to inquire about her experience.


M: And all of this has taken you to a place in which... .

Petra: Its a place of misery. I have come to see you
because I have been feeling pretty miserable. As you can
see, my life is in such a mess, it really is. And it’s been going
on like this for too long.

M: How long?

Petra: Pretty much forever. At least it feels like that.

M: Pretty much constant?

Petra: Yeah. Every now and then I think that I am starting
to get things together, but really it’s just an illusion.

M: So you have tried lots of things?

Petra: Yeah. Well, I sometimes think that I am trying
things, that I’ve got a new idea. But then it all just goes up
in smoke.

M: How do you mean?

Petra: | sometimes have the sense that I am working out a
new approach, you know, to sorting things out. But this
doesn't work, and then I realize that this wasn’t really much
different from anything that I’ve done before. It’s like I’m
going around and around in circles.

[PAGE 276]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 265 er


Scaffolding Conversations 265


M: Going around and around in circles?

Petra: Yeah, I wind up just complicating things. You would
think I'd learn, wouldn't you? You'd think I'd wise up,
wouldn't you? But I just keep falling into the same trap over
an over again. It’s so frustrating.

M: And this leaves you . . .

Petra: Feeling totally defeated.

M: Have you brought others into the picture about how
things are for your

Petra: A bit. But I dont think most people want to know.
Anyway, it’s my mess, and I’m responsible for it.

M: So there have been times when you've talked to others
about what you are going through?

Petra: A little, but there's no point. It really is my problem,
and I just feel embarrassed about the mess that my life is
in.


M: You have to find a way through this independently?

Petra: Well, yeah. It's my problem, and if I can’t do myself
a simple favor, who can? It is not up to others to pull me
out of this. I’m the one who's responsible. If I can’t do this
for myself then how irresponsible am I? It should be so
simple.

M: Irresponsible because it should be so simple to do
something about... . ?

Petra: Yeah, I tell myself this all of the time. I keep think-
ing that maybe I'll be able to motivate myself this way.

M: But this isn’t working?

Petra: Well I’m not making any headway, am I? I feel
pretty hopeless about the future. I’m not going anywhere in

[PAGE 277]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 266 er


266 Maps of Narrative Practice


my life, and I reckon that it’s not going to be any different.
In my future, I mean.

M: You have looked to the future, hoping to make a differ-
ence?

Petra: Yeah. That'd be something. But it shouldn't be so
hard, should it?


Personal Agency and Responsible Action


When people consult therapists about predicaments and concerns
that are longstanding, it is not unusual for them to express significant
frustration over the fact that their effort to address these predica-
ments and concerns have come to naught. For some, the frustration is
even more intense, for they believe that these very efforts to resolve
the problems have actually generated even more complications.
Under these conditions, is common for people to berate themselves
for lacking the sort of foresight and wisdom that would have enabled
them to grasp the inappropriateness of their problem-solving initia-
tives and to anticipate the development of these complications.
In these circumstances, people usually rebuke themselves for what
they discern to be manifest incompetence and inadequacy. Seeking
the assistance of a therapist is often taken as verification of this
incompetence and inadequacy, for it is a further confirmation of the
fact that they are unable to do what anyone else could be reasonably
expected to be able to do—that is, to be independently responsible for
sorting out matters that intimately affect one’s life and to be able to
influence the shape of one’s life according to what one gives impor-
tance to.

For Petra, conclusions of this sort were well-entrenched, and she
was mired in a sense of hopelessness and fatalism. She had become
certain that her future was simply going to be a reproduction of her
very unsatisfactory present life. And yet, despite this, she was still giv-
ing expression to the sentiment that doing something about her life
“should be so simple.”

[PAGE 278]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 267 +


Scaffolding Conversations 267


This begs the question: Is it so simple? Is having this sort of fore-
sight and wisdom that Petra laments the absence of a simple matter?
Is achieving a significant level of personal responsibility for one's own
life a simple matter? Is undertaking successful autonomous and inde-
pendent action in addressing the predicaments of one's life a simple
matter? And is shaping one's life according to what one gives impor-
tance to simple as well?
In the professional culture, the answer that is often given in
response to questions like these is a version of: “Yes, given the evolu-
tion of normal development, one can expect to have the capacity for
insight into one's own circumstances, to become responsible in rela-
tion to the intimate matters of one's own life, to be able to initiate suc-
cessful autonomous and independent action in addressing one’s
predicaments in living, and to influence the shape of one’s own life
according to what is important.” And the answer that is usually offered
in response to questions about why this does not seem obtainable to
many people is a version of: “Being unable to achieve this is a sign of
dysfunction, which is evident in a person’s inability to reflect and to
think about her or his life in abstract terms, in an inability to perceive
the consequences of her or his own actions, in a dependence on oth-
ers for resolving her or his problems, and in a failure to influence the
shape of her or his own life. And this dysfunction often has psy-
chopathology at its roots.”
However, it really does not appear to be that simple. In fact, these
ideas about dysfunction and psychopathology obscure the complexi-
ties associated with human action, many of which arise from the
actual contexts of people's lives. For example, many people find that
avenues for the expression of personal agency and responsible action
are very limited because they are subject to “traditional power rela-
tions” that are institutionalized in local culture. These include the
power relations of disadvantage, of race, of gender, of heterosexism, of
culture, of ethnicity, and more.
Such power relations are often a significant factor in the frustration
that people experience in their effort to influence the shape of their
lives according to what is important to them and in the generation of
conclusions about their incompetence and inadequacy. When this is


Ze

[PAGE 279]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 268 E


268 Maps of Narrative Practice


the case, it is important that people have the opportunity to fully rec-
ognize these power relations as a context of these negative experiences
and negative conclusions about identity, and to be supported in
addressing these power relations. It is also important that people have
the opportunity to question popular definitions of personal agency
and responsible action, for, within the context of these traditional
power relations, actions that are judged to be a reflection of personal
agency and responsible action are those that are founded upon access
to privilege.
An understanding of the operations of “modern power,”* in con-
trast to the operations of traditional power, is also important to any
consideration of people's experiences of inadequacy, incompetence,
and personal failure. In a system of modern power, social control is
established through the construction of norms about life and identity
and by inciting people to engage in operations on their own and each
others lives to bring their actions and thoughts into harmony with
these norms. For this reason, modern power is considered a system of
“normalizing judgement.” The very concept of “autonomous and inde-
pendent action”—and for that matter, of what it means to be a “real”
or “authentic” person—is founded upon these constructed norms, and
failing to reproduce these norms categorizes people as “personal fail-
ures” in their own and each other's eyes.
Many of the norms of contemporary Western culture venerate a
version of successful personhood that features the “encapsulated
self.” This concept emphasizes a form of autonomy and independence
that is characterized by self-possession, self-containment, self-
reliance, self-motivation, and self-actualization. Despite efforts to
reproduce these norms of successful personhood, most people expe-
rience a secret knowing that they are not quite as “together” as they
present themselves to others in everyday life. For many, this discrep-
ancy provides a foundation for conclusions about personal incompe-
tence and inadequacy. When this is the case, it is important that peo-
ple have the opportunity to place experiences of personal failure


* For an account of the rise of modern power and an analysis of the operations of this sys-
tem of power as a mechanism of social control, see Foucault (1973, 1980).


o

[PAGE 280]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 269 +


Scaffolding Conversations 269


within the context of this normalizing judgement and to find support
in subverting these operations of modern power.


Personal Agency, Responsible Action, and Concept
Development


I have discussed here three perspectives on personal agency and
responsible action: personal agency and responsible action as an
expression of the outcome of “normal development,” and that is an
expression of a core self that is given in human nature; personal
agency and responsible action as an expression of privilege in the con-
text of traditional power relations; and personal agency and responsi-
ble action as a construct of the norms of modern power.
It is not my plan to further discuss these perspectives on personal
agency and responsible action here, or the implications of these per-
spectives for therapeutic practice. This I have done elsewhere.
Instead I will present an alternative perspective on personal agency
and responsible action. According to this version, the experience of
personal agency and the capacity for responsible action are founded
upon a special form of social collaboration. This is a social collabora-
tion that assists people to traverse the space between what is known
and familiar to them, and what might be possible for them to know
about their lives and identities. This is a perspective that is first and
foremost informed by my own private research in the context of ther-
apeutic practice. In order to explicate this alternative perspective |
will reflect briefly on my conversation with Petra, starting with the rel-
atively straightforward observation that she seemed mired in what was
known and familiar to her about life and that, in her effort to address
the predicaments of her life, she was apparently reproducing this
known and familiar. Petra thus not only felt that she was going
nowhere in life, but also that these efforts were further complicating
things. She clearly experienced very little in the way of personal
agency and responsible action.
This observation provides the basis for some interlinked conclu-
sions about what might be necessary for Petra to successfully address


ee

[PAGE 281]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 270 er


270 Maps of Narrative Practice


the predicaments of her life and to derive a sense that her life is pro-
ceeding. It order to achieve this, it would be necessary for Petra to:


e Separate from aspects of what is known and familiar to her
about her life and her identity
e |nitiate movement toward what might be possible for her
to know about her life and her identity, and toward what
might be possible for her to do
e Successfully traverse the space between the known and
familiar and what might be possible for her to know and
do
e Find the sort of support that might be sustaining of her in
any initiatives that she might undertake to navigate her
way across this space
e Obtain assistance in the scaffolding of this space so that it
might be traversed in manageable steps
e Review her journey across this space in order to adjust its
trajectory

e Identify what she is learning about in terms of what is
important to her and what she accords value to in life as
she is traversing this space
e Begin to speculate about what steps she might take to
influence the shape of her life in ways that would be in
harmony with what she is learning about what is important
to her and with what she accords value to in life


If Petra were to find the sort of social collaboration that would pro-
vide support and that would contribute to the scaffolding across the
space between what is known and familiar to her and what it might
be possible for her to know about her life, she would probably find
herself in a position to initiate steps that would be effective in
addressing her predicaments and in shaping her own life. This out-
come would provide the sense of personal agency and responsible
action that Petra has found so elusive.
These terms—distancing, space, scaffolding, social collaboration,
personal agency, and responsible action—invoke the work of Russian


ee

[PAGE 282]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 271 +


Scaffolding Conversations 271


psychologist Lev Vygotsky (1986). Vygotsky was a developmental the-
orist who had special interest in early childhood learning. Although
my explorations of narrative practices were not originally informed by
Vygotsky’s thought, in recent years | have been drawn to many of his
ideas. This is principally because I find that these explorations of
practice confirm Vygotsky’s conclusions about learning and develop-
ment. I also find that his ideas contribute to new understandings of
processes of therapeutic change, lend clarity to what is significant in
the conversations of narrative therapy, and reinforce various narrative
practices. I am also finding that his ideas are contributing to the fur-
ther development of some of my narrative practices. I will briefly
review some of Vygotsky's ideas in the next section of this chapter.

The Zone of Proximal Development


Vygotsky was primarily interested in explorations of early childhood
development. In these explorations he determined that in a great
majority of cases, development is founded upon learning. This was a
challenge to much of the prevailing developmental theory of his time,
which asserted that development preceded learning and that, on this
basis, learning was the outcome of the unfolding of some genetic or
neurological imperative.
Vygotsky also emphasized that learning was an achievement not of
independent effort, but of social collaboration. In this social collabo-
ration, he observed that adult caretakers and more sophisticated peers
structure children’s learning in ways that make it possible for them to
move from what is known and familiar to them and from routine
achievements to what it is possible for them to know and achieve. He
described this as a movement across a zone of learning that he termed
the “zone of proximal development.” This zone is the distance
between what the child can know and achieve independently and
what is possible for the child to know and achieve in collaboration
with others.
‘Traversing this zone is a significant task in that it requires that the
child distance from the immediacy of his or her experience. According
to Vygotsky, this is not a task that children can achieve unless it is bro-
ken down into manageable portions. It is the caretakers and more


ee

[PAGE 283]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 272 er


272 Maps of Narrative Practice


sophisticated peers who contribute to the “scaffolding” of this zone of
proximal development. This scaffolding encourages the child to
“stretch” her or his mind and to “exercise” her or his imagination in the
achievement of these learning tasks, but not in ways that require
impossible or improbable leaps that would contribute to exhaustion
and a sense of failure.
Vygotsky proposed that this progressive and incremental distancing
from the known and familiar and from the immediacy of one’s experi-
ence is what makes it possible for children to develop “chains of asso-
ciation” that establish bonds and relations between what would other-
wise simply remain undifferentiated objects and events of their
worlds. He referred to this as the development of “complex thinking,”
and he demonstrated how the development of this complex thinking
provides the basis for the development of “concepts” about life and
identity. The development of concepts about life is the outcome of the
meaning development of words in which they are split off from sep-
cific concrete experiences and abstracted. For example, in young
Amy’s life, “friend” means Mary who lives next door, and there is little
that Mary might do that will disturb this definition. Over time, with
the meaning development of the word “friend,” friendship is
abstracted as a concept, and Amy may discern actions on Mary’s
behalf that are a transgression of friendship, and will be able to
respond accordingly.
It is this conceptual development that supplies the foundation for
people to regulate their lives: to influence their own actions in pur-
poseful ways, to intervene in their own lives to shape the course of
events, and to problem-solve. According to this understanding,
actions that are considered to be responsible and autonomous have
their foundation in social collaboration. The development of this self-
regulation is a reflection of what Vygotsky referred to as “self-mastery.”
He employed this term in a way that is synonymous with what I have
referred to as “personal agency.”
What follows is a summary of Vygotsky’s principal ideas about the
zone of proximal development and about learning. In seeking to reveal
the genesis of learning, Vygotsky's research brought him to the follow-
ing conclusions:

[PAGE 284]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 273 +


Scaffolding Conversations 273


e Learning is the outcome of social collaboration, not of
independent effort or of the unfolding of any “hard-wired”
biogenetic process. In this social collaboration, skilled
caretakers and sophisticated peers provide supported
learning tasks that are within the reach of the child but
that require the investment of significant effort on behalf
of the child.
e It is through these learning tasks that children have the
opportunity to distance from the immediacy of their expe-
rience of the world. This is a movement toward what they
might know and do in collaboration with others.
e This isa movement across a zone of learning referred to as
the “zone of proximal development.” This zone is formed
by the distance between what the child can know and
achieve independently and what is possible for the child to
know and achieve in collaboration with others. “To quote
Vygotsky (1986, p. 86), the zone of proximal development
is “the distance between the actual developmental level as
determined by independent problem-solving and the level
of potential development as determined through problem-
solving under adult guidance or in collaboration with more
capable peers.”
e In the movement across this zone, there is a shift from
gathering the objects and events of the world into
“heaps’”—from the uniting of diverse objects and events in
groups under a common family name—to gathering the
objects and events of the world into chains of association
or into complexes that establish bonds and relationships
between these objects and events.
e There are several levels in the development of these
chains of association and complexes, from the preliminary
unification of objects and events on the basis of maximum
similarity to the grouping of objects and events on the
basis of a single attribute (for example, only round objects
or flat objects).
e This development of complex thinking provides a foun-


o

[PAGE 285]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 274 er


274 Maps of Narrative Practice


dation for the development of “concepts.” To quote
Vygotsky (1986, p. 135), the development of a concept
“presupposes more than unification. To form such a con-
cept it is also necessary to abstract, to single out ele-
ments, and to view the abstracted elements apart from
the totality of the concrete experience in which they are
embedded.”
This conceptual development provides a foundation for
the child to intervene in shaping her or his own actions
and in the constitution of her or his own life. According
to Vygotsky, on account of this development, the child is
now able to operate with these concepts at will and as a
task demands—and with a consciousness of these oper-
ations, understanding them to be processes of a certain
kind. In his terms, it is this development that leads to
“self-mastery” in intellectual functions: For example, he
asserts that this concept development is the foundation
of “deliberate attention, logical memory, abstraction, the
ability to compare and to differentiate.” In terms that I
have employed in this chapter, this development of con-
ceptual thought can be considered the foundation of
“personal agency.” It is through the development of con-
ceptual thought that children begin to inhabit their own
lives.
Language and word-meaning evolution is crucial to this
conceptual development, the pathway to concept forma-
tion is the development of word meanings. To quote
Vygotsky (1986, p. 107) again: “When a new word has been
learned by the child, its development is barely starting; as
the child’s intellect develops, it is replaced by generaliza-
tions of a higher and higher type—a process that leads in
the end to the formation of true concepts... Real concepts
are impossible without words, and thinking in concepts
does not exist beyond verbal thinking. That is why the cen-
tral movement in concept formation, and its generative
cause, is a specific use of words as functional tools.”


ee

[PAGE 286]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 275 er


Scaffolding Conversations 275


The Zone of Proximal Development and Therapeutic
Practice


Although the focus of Vygotsky’s research was on early childhood
development, I have found his conclusions about learning and devel-
opment to be relevant to all stages and ages. And I have also found
these conclusions to be relevant to the further understanding and
development of effective therapeutic practices.
As I discussed at the beginning of this chapter, the “zone of proxi-
mal development” cannot be traversed without the sort of conversa-
tional partnership that provides a scaffolding that supports people in
proceeding in manageable steps. In the context of therapeutic prac-
tice, the therapist (and others recruited by the therapist) contributes
significantly to the scaffolding of the proximal zone of development.
The incremental and progressive distancing from the known and
familiar is not synonymous with a splitting off from one’s life. Rather,
it is distancing that provides a foundation for people to play a more
significant part in influencing the course of their own development
and, in so doing, to more fully inhabit their own lives.
Influenced by the ideas of Vygotsky, I have developed a “scaffold-
ing conversations” map that is structured by five categories of
inquiry.* This map can be utilized as a guide to the development of
therapeutic conversations that facilitate incremental and progressive
movements across the proximal zone of learning. The categories of
inquiry of this map establish specific learning tasks, which I define as:


e Low-level distancing tasks, which support the achievement
of a low-level distance from the known and familiar and
from the immediacy of one’s experience of the events of
one’s environment. These questions encourage the attribu-


* The “scaffolding conversations” map described here was developed at the interface
between practice and ideas. Although the categories of distancing tasks represented in this
map are shaped by Vygotsky’s thought, they were relatively arbitrarily formed. I have devel-
oped other versions of this map, some of which are more multilayered; for example, some
include “very low-level distancing tasks” that encourage people to discern specific events
of their environment that contradict what is known and familiar to them.

[PAGE 287]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 276 E


276 Maps of Narrative Practice


tion of meaning to the events of one's world that are either
unfamiliar or have gone unnamed. These questions
encourage the characterization of these events.
e Medium-level distancing tasks, which support the achieve-
ment of a medium-level distance from the known and
familiar and from the immediacy of one's experience of the
events of one's environment. These tasks encourage peo-
ple to bring into relationship specific events of their world
in the development of chains of association that establish
bonds and relationships between these events. These
tasks also foster the comparison and categorization of the
events of one's world and the drawing of distinctions with
regard to difference and similarity.
e Medium-high-level distancing tasks, which support the
achievement of a medium-high-level distance from the
known and familiar and from the immediacy of one's expe-
rience of the events of one's environment. These tasks
encourage people to reflect on, evaluate, and draw realiza-
tions and learnings from these chains of association.
e High-level distancing tasks, which support the achievement
of a high-level distance from the immediacy of one’s expe-
rience of the events of one’s environment. These tasks
encourage people to formulate concepts about life and
identity by abstracting these realizations and learnings
from their concrete and specific circumstances.
e Very high-level distancing tasks, which support the achieve-
ment of a very high-level distance from the immediacy of
one’s experience of the events of one’s environment. These
tasks encourage the development of proposals for proceed-
ing in life in ways that are in harmony with the newly
developed concepts about life and identity, the formula-
tion of predictions about the outcome of these proposed
actions, and the planning for and initiation of such
actions.


These categories of inquiry play a significant role in scaffolding the


ee

[PAGE 288]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 277 +


Scaffolding Conversations 277


zone between what is known and familiar and what is possible to
know and do. For example, what was known and familiar about Peter
(see Chapter 5) was that he was a young man who was generally inca-
pable of reflecting on his life, who was unable to foresee the conse-
quences of his actions, and who was relatively incapable of taking
responsibility. It was understood that he was a concrete thinker who
lacked the capacity to think in abstract terms. Over the course of the
first part of our conversation, which was shaped by version two of the
statement of position map, Peter and Trudy were provided with an
opportunity to distance from this known and familiar and to develop
an account of what might be known about Peter’s life and identity and
of what he might do.
The “negotiating an experience-near and particular definition of the
unique outcome” category of inquiry establishes a “low-level distanc-
ing task” by encouraging people to characterize events of their world
that are unfamiliar or have gone unnamed. The “mapping the effects
of the unique outcome” category of inquiry establishes a “medium-
level distancing task” by encouraging people to bring into relationship
specific events of their world in the development of chains of associ-
ation that establish bonds and relationships between these events.
The “evaluating the effects of the unique outcome” category of inquiry
establishes a “medium-high-level distancing task” by encouraging peo-
ple to reflect on, evaluate, and draw realizations and learnings from
these chains of association. And the “justifying the evaluation” cate-
gory of inquiry establishes a “high-level distancing task” by encourag-
ing people to form concepts about life and identity by abstracting
these realizations and learnings from their concrete and specific cir-
cumstances.

Figures 6.1 and 6.2 show my charting of the conversation with
Peter and Trudy (see Chapter 5) onto the scaffolding conversations
map that I have described in this chapter. It was in the context of the
scaffolding of this zone between the known and familiar about Peter's
life and identity and what might be possible for him to know and do
that Peter was able to conceive of a relationship between specific
actions and their consequences or potential consequences, to give
voice to some very significant reflections on his life, and to form con-


ee

[PAGE 289]



ddpaaenden
Figure 6.1 Scaffolding Conversations (Peter)

Possible to know

LO/ET/E
Very high-level distancing
task: plans for action
LEP

Wd
High-level distancing task:
abstraction of learnings &
realizations
ebed


Medium-high-level distanc- 8LZ@
ing task: reflections on
chain of association, learnings, & realizations

Medium-level distancing u summary
L * unique
task: uni outcome
hain of
—kept privileges of the
—avoided counseling consequences
taken into Chain 0 —avoided going wild & of this
association
wrecking things initiati
—walking away from trouble 5 > wate >
. . =stepping back summary of
Low-level distancing task: -figuring “who needs it” meanings attribCharacterizing the unique -figuring things out uted to exiting
outcome —not losing it the scene of

—keeping one's mind frustration
> f >


—"breaking the law can get
wae
you locked up”

Known & familiar —incapable of running own life
—can't take responsibility
>!


0 5 10 55 _.

Time in minutes


ej

[PAGE 290]



ddrızenden


Figure 6.2 Scaffolding Conversations (Peter)

Possible to know
LO/ET/E


Very high-level distancing
LE:H
task: plans for action

Wd


High-level distancing task:
abstraction of learnings & -to do something with life ebed
realizations —to “say what I want and do something about it” -right to manage own life
—able to make things happen -right to own space 6LZ7
Zn
ae


Medium-high-level distancing task: reflections on
—good to see —real positive
chain of association, learn-
—it's positive —happy to see
ings, & realizations -a good feeling
_ comfortable


Medium-level distancing -to improve life
task: unique outcome -stay out of detention center
—get ahead and get a good job
taken into chain of
=space to have own life
association
—space to move
Y

Low-level distancing task:
characterizing the unique
outcome managing
own life


Known & familiar


15 20 25

Time in minutes


3

[PAGE 291]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 280 er


280 Maps of Narrative Practice


cepts about life and identity by abstracting certain realizations and
learnings from their concrete, specific circumstances. This powerfully
contradicted what was known and familiar about his life and identity:
that he was unable to foresee the consequences of his actions, that he
was generally incapable of reflecting on his life, and that he was a con-
crete thinker.
These developments were not independent achievements; they
were the outcome of social collaboration between Peter, Trudy,
Melanie, and me. This supportive participation created a climate that
was conducive to addressing a range of learning tasks. The achieve-
ment of a capacity to foresee the consequences of one’s actions, to
reflect on specific developments of one’s life, and to develop concepts
about life and identity by abstracting learnings and realizations about
one’s life are dependent upon such social collaboration. And these
achievements are also dependent upon language.
Language is essential in this movement toward concept develop-
ment. For example, the word freedom was known to Peter, but it had
not been developed as a conceptual form. In my meeting with Peter
and Trudy, the “word meaning” of freedom was developed and rede-
veloped, and in this process it was abstracted from concrete and spe-
cific circumstances to become a guiding concept of life. It is this con-
cept formation that establishes what Vygotsky referred to as “self-mas-
tery in intellectual functions.” It is also the foundation of personal
agency and responsible action.
By this account, personal agency is not the simple outcome of
human nature and its liberation or the product of some developmen-
tal imperative. Rather, it is social collaboration in the development of
word meaning that is essential to the attainment of personal agency
and responsible action.


Therapist Responsibilities


I have proposed that Vygotsky's ideas about learning and development
have the potential to contribute to understandings of therapeutic
change generally, to lend clarity to what is significant in the conversa-


ee

[PAGE 292]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 281 +


Scaffolding Conversations 281


tions of narrative therapy, and to assist in the further development of
narrative practices. And I have put forward his assertion about the
social and relational origins of conceptual development, and about
this conceptual development as a foundation of “self-mastery” and
“self-regulation.” These considerations encourage us, as therapists, to
acknowledge and honour the special responsibility that we have to
provide the conditions for the development of personal agency for the
people who consult us.
Recognizing that it is our task as therapists to scaffold the proximal
zone of development is an important aspect of honoring this respon-
sibility. From this perspective, if a person’s response to therapeutic
inquiry is a not knowing response—| don't know the answer to that”;
“T don't know how to respond to that”—our attention will be drawn to
the responsibility we have to further scaffold the conversation. In
observing these responsibilities we might drop downa level in the ver-
tical dimension of our inquiry to give people the opportunity to further
develop a reflecting surface that will enable them to respond to the
next level of inquiry. Or we might provide opportunities for explo-
ration of the horizontal dimension, perhaps by inviting others to spec-
ulate about appropriate responses to the questions of this inquiry or
by providing accounts of how others in similar predicaments have
responded to such questions and inviting reflection on this.
We also have a responsibility to avoid falling prey to conclusions
that a person is “simply lacking motivation,” is “hopelessly irresponsi-
ble,” is “resistant,” is “incapable of foreseeing the consequences of her
or his actions,” is “unable to reflect on her or his behavior,” is “a con-
crete thinker,” or is “incapable of abstract thought.” In fact these con-
clusions can serve as a wake-up call. They reflect the extent to which
this person is mired in the known and familiar and is not experienc-
ing the sort of social collaboration that would support the scaffolding
of her or his zone of proximal development. Thus, we alert ourselves
to the fact that we have not been fully present with our scaffolding
skills or that we have reached the limits of these skills in our consul-
tations with particular people in relation to specific issues. If we
recognise that we have reached the limits of our skills, we will take
pause to explore ways of extending these limits.


Ze

[PAGE 293]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 282 +


282 Maps of Narrative Practice


Externalizing Conversations From the Perspective of the
Scaffolding Conversations Map


In the last section of this chapter, I will present an example of an
externalising conversation, and give an account of the evolution of this
from the perspective of the scaffolding conversations map. I find that
this second perspective extends my understanding of the processes
associated with externalizing conversations and serves as a guide in
the further development of these conversations.
I had agreed to meet with Jack, 13, his mother, Abby, and his
father, Neil, at the request of a social service worker. This social
service worker was from one of two agencies that had maintained
extended involvement with Jack and his family. Jack was in trouble
in virtually every domain of his life: with school authorities, with his
peers, with the police, with his siblings, and with his parents. One
crisis after another had been precipitated by Jack’s actions, and now
his parents were of the belief that the only viable avenue would be
to either find a suitable foster home for him or have him institution-
alized.
Many of these crises were triggered by Jack’s violence, which was
usually directed toward his mother and siblings, although recently
he'd also been threatening his father. Jack was widely considered to be
a boy who lacked insight into his behavior, who was incapable of tak-
ing responsibility for actions, who had limited verbal skills, and who
was unmotivated to do anything about his predicament.
From the outset of our meeting, Jack did not appear at all inter-
ested in engaging in conversation. During this time Abby and Neil
filled me in on their concerns, on the most recent crisis, and on the
questions they were now having about Jack’s tenure in the family
home. Abby reflected on how she felt like a failure as a mother and
expressed concern that Jack’s younger siblings would not have any
good memories of this time in their lives. She also talked about how
much she'd been hurt by Jack, both physically and emotionally. Neil
expressed strong frustration and spoke of the futility that he experi-
enced in his effort to temper Jack’s negative actions. He believed that
it was Jack’s intention to reject any initiatives in the development of a


ee

[PAGE 294]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 283 er


Scaffolding Conversations 283


positive father/son relationship.
Jack was unmoved by Abby and Neil’s account of these develop-
ments, although he did verify some of the details of this account. In
response to this I decided that I would try to engage Jack in a conver-
sation about how these acts of violence were affecting his own life. To
this end, I began to consult him about how these acts might be char-
acterized. After some exploration of this, he chose to define this vio-
lence as “aggro.”*
In terms of the statement of position map, this definition of vio-
lence was the outcome of “negotiating an experience-near and partic-
ular definition of the problem.” In the terms of the scaffolding conver-
sations map, this was a “low-level distancing task.”
Over the next 20 minutes or so, with my assistance, Jack deter-
mined that “agro” was among other things, destroying his education,
excluding him from his family, sapping his strength, dominating his
life in a variety of ways, and giving him a lost feeling in his heart.
According to the statement of position map, the links between “agro”
and these consequences were established by engaging Jack in “map-
ping the effects of the problem” through various domains of his life.
In terms of the scaffolding conversations map, these links were estab-
lished in response to the introduction of “medium-level distancing
tasks.” It was my understanding that bringing these acts of violence
into relationship with these other events of his life in the development
of a chain of association was, in itself, a significant achievement for
Jack.
I then encouraged Jack to reflect on and evaluate these conse-
quences. In terms of the scaffolding conversations map, this estab-
lished a series of “medium-high-level distancing tasks.” Following this,
Jack was invited to “justify these evaluations.” In the terms of the scaf-
folding conversations map, this established a series of “high-level dis-
tancing tasks.” It was my hope that this scaffolding would support
Jack in formulating intentional understandings about his life and
about what he accorded value to. Further, it was my hope that these


* “Aggro” is an abbreviation of the word aggression, and it is widely used in Australian pop-
ular culture.

[PAGE 295]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 284 E


284 Maps of Narrative Practice


understandings might be further developed as concepts about life and
identity. The following brief excerpt of the transcript of my meeting
with Jack and his parents illustrates the extent to which I was active
in the scaffolding of this conversation and the degree to which I
encouraged Abby and Neil to participate. This excerpt gives an
account of the scaffolding of medium-high-level distancing and high-
level distancing tasks. Figure 6.3 on page 288 shows my mapping of
the conversation onto the scaffolding conversations map.


M: From what I've heard here, it is my understanding that
the agro divides you from your family?

Jack: Yeah.

M: “Divides” is a word that your mum used. Does this word
work for you, or are there other words that would work bet-
ter?

Jack: Like what?

M: Like maybe “separates” you from the family. Or “splits
you off.” Or “destroys your connection.” Or...

Jack: Splits me off.

M: Why would you say “splits me off”?

Jack: Because things just get ripped up between me and
the rest.

M: The agro rips things up between you and the rest, and
this splits you off?

Jack: Yeah.

M: What’s this like for you?

Jack: What?

M: Do you mind being split off from the family? Is this
okay by your Are you comfortable about things being

[PAGE 296]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 285 $


Scaffolding Conversations 285


ripped up between you and your parents, and between you
and your brother and sisters?

Jack: It’s not so good.

M: It’s not so good. Are you comfortable about things being
not so good?

Jack: I do mind.

M: How come? Why would you want to be part of the fam-
ily?

Jack shrugs.

M: Well, it’s my guess that you've got your reasons. I just
don’t know what they are.

Jack: One of my mates is out of his family.

M: Is this a problem for him?

Jack: Dunno, but I wouldn't want his life.

M: Why is that?

Jack: Because he’s getting into lots of stuff that’s going to
bring him down in a big way. I don’t want that.

M: Okay. I understand that you don’t want a life like your
mate’s life. But I still don’t understand why you'd want to
be part of this family. Is there anything that you would be
losing in being split off from your family? Is there some-
thing you'd be leaving behind that is important to you?
Would something be gone from your life that you want?

Jack shrugs.

M: Would it be okay by you if I asked your mum and dad
for their thoughts about this?

Jack: That's okay.

[PAGE 297]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 286 $


286 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: What's your guess about this? About why Jack minds
being split off from the family?

Abby: Because there wouldn't be anywhere that he really
fitted in. There isn't anywhere else in his life where he'd
just be able to feel all right about just being himself.

M: Has this been important to you personally?

Abby: Sure it has. Feeling needed and wanted is just about
the most important thing that I can think of. This is
another reason that I get so sad to see what is happening to
Jack’s life.

M: Neil, what's your guess?

Neil: Well, I agree with Abby. If Jack wasn't part of the
family he just wouldn't belong anywhere. And that'd be
pretty miserable I reckon.

M: So, your idea is that not belonging could contribute to
feeling pretty miserable. What gives you this idea?

Neil: There have been some pretty tough times in my life
where I didn't feel that I had any place to belong, and it was
just about the worst feeling I ever had. Feeling that you
belong somewhere has to be something that anybodyd
want, in some way or another at least. Belonging some-
where has got be up there with number one.

M: Jack, what do you think about your parents’ guesses?

Jack: What dad said about belonging. That’s right.

M: Do you know why this word “belonging” fits for you?

Jack: Just fits I guess. Like being hooked up to something.

M: Belonging fits because .. . ?

Jack: I want a decent life.

[PAGE 298]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 287 er


Scaffolding Conversations 287


M: You'd say belonging is important to you because it is
important to be hooked up and this can give you a decent
life.

Jack: Yeah.

M: What’s a decent life?

Jack: Where there's some good quality.


Jack’s affirmation of “belonging” as a description of what he gave
value to signified a step in the meaning development of a word that he
had some familiarity with. This word was then revisited and reflected
upon over the course of our conversation, and its further meaning
development was illustrated late in this interview when I again invited
Jack to review the consequences of the “aggro.” At that time, his
response was that the aggro was “wrecking his belonging.” Here
“belonging” was clearly abstracted—it had been split off from the con-
crete and specific circumstances of his life—and it was on the road to
achieving conceptual status.
By the end of this interview Jack had given voice to several
accounts of what he intended for his life and of what he held pre-
cious. Over eight subsequent meetings, some of which were
attended by his entire family and a few of which included the partic-
ipation of outsider witnesses, the meaning development of these
words that defined what Jack intended for his life and what he gave
value to were further developed as concepts about life and identity.
These concepts were in the form of principles of living. This provided
Jack with a platform for reinterpreting some of the events of his
recent history and for speculating about actions that might be avail-
able to him—actions that would be congruent with these concepts
and would make it possible for him to address concerns about his vio-
lence and the predicaments of his life. Over the course of these
meetings Jack became more articulate about matters that concerned
his life and his relationships with others, developed a capacity to pre-
dict the consequences of his actions, became quite enthusiastic
about intervening in the shaping of his life, and developed a capacity

[PAGE 299]


v1I1PNAPN

dd
Figure 6.3 Scaffolding Conversations (Jack)

Possible to know

LO/ET/E
Very high-level distancing
v
task: plans for action
LE

Wd
High-level distancing task:
abstraction of learnings &
realizations ~belonging ebed
—a decent life

Medium-high-level distanc- 887
ing task: reflections on
chain of association, learn- —not so good
ings, & realizations Jack does mind

Medium-level distancing —divides Jack
task: unique outcome from family
taken into chain of =splits him off
association —rips things up


Low-level distancing task:
characterizing the unique
outcome
aggro


Known & familiar


0 15 30 45 —

Time in minutes


e

[PAGE 300]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 289 er


Scaffolding Conversations 289


to act on this. Among other things, his violence ceased, and he
became keen on making reparations. At the 18-month follow-up I
learned that apart from a couple of minor setbacks, these positive
developments had been enduring.
The scaffolding of these therapeutic conversations provided a
series of “learning tasks” that supported Jack and his parents in cross-
ing the zone between what was known and familiar about Jack’s life
and identity (that he was a boy who, among other things, lacked
insight into his behavior, was incapable of taking responsibility for his
actions, had limited verbal skills, and was unmotivated to do anything
about his predicament) and what was possible for them to know about
his life and identity and possible for him to do.


Conclusion


Inquiry into the nature of human agency and responsible action has
been the focus of this chapter. In this context I provided a brief
account of some of Vygotsky’s ideas about learning and development.
Although the subject of Vygotskys research was early childhood, I
believe that his notion of the “proximal zone of learning,” and the
importance given to the careful scaffolding of this zone, are relevant
to therapeutic conversations, regardless of the age and stage of devel-
opment of the people who are consulting us.
I discussed some of the implications of these ideas for therapeutic
practice, drew out a “scaffolding conversations map,” and transposed
this map onto both versions of the statement of position map. It is also
possible to transpose this scaffolding conversations map onto the
other maps of narrative practice that are the subject of this book, but
I have not illustrated this here.
At the outset of this chapter I raised a question about the charac-
ter of personal agency and responsible action and proceeded to
explore a version of these ideas that was informed by Vygotsky's ideas
about learning and development. According to this version, the expe-
rience of personal agency and the capacity for responsible action are
founded upon a special form of social collaboration that contributes


ee

[PAGE 301]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 290 E


290 Maps of Narrative Practice


to the scaffolding of the proximal zone of learning. This understand-
ing of the development of personal agency and responsible action con-
sistently sustains my optimism about the possibilities that can be sup-
ported in therapeutic conversations with people who consult me
about a range of problems and predicaments for which there appears
to be no solution.

[PAGE 302]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 291 +


Conclusion


he writing of this book has been a journey in itself. I set out with
the aim of bringing together many of my therapeutic explorations
of the past two decades or so into a single volume. I hoped to do
this in a way that would successfully represent the particularities of
these explorations and that would bring them vividly alive in print. I
wanted to achieve this in a manner that would give an account of the
spirit in which these explorations have been undertaken and in a way
that readers would find directly relevant to their own day-to-day thera-
peutic practice. I also wanted to introduce readers to some of the chil-
dren, women, and men I've met with in therapeutic consultations and
to provide some illustration of the rich conversations we've shared.
The writing of a book is a significant endeavor—one that can be
quite daunting at the outset. I began this journey with a blank page, a
roughly drawn itinerary in mind, and many hopes and aspirations. |
soon found that my head was overcrowded with ideas that wouldn't
pour out neatly onto the page, and that took me far past where I could
be with the written word. I explored many routes in the expression of
what I wanted to say, some of which I subsequently abandoned and
others of which I saw through to preferred destinations. There were
periods when I found myself in culdesacs, wracking my mind for a
way forward. At other times I found myself on thoroughfares, speed-

[PAGE 303]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 292 er


292 Maps of Narrative Practice


ing toward my goal with a sense of excitement and exhilaration. There
were occasions, along the way, when I teetered on the brink of con-
cluding that my objectives in writing this book were too broad and
when I seriously contemplated abandoning elements of the itinerary
I'd set and foreshortening the journey. However, I stayed the course,
and now, suddenly, and with some surprise, I find that I have arrived
at the last pages of this book.
The sense that I have of arriving at the conclusion of this book is
akin to the sense that I’ve had on many occasions when I am on my
bicycle and approaching the finish line after a long race through hilly
terrain. At this time every contour of the territory I’ve ridden through is
indelibly imprinted on my mind. I am experiencing relief at getting
through the more challenging aspects of the course, including the
steep ascents and testing weather conditions, and still savoring the
exhilaration of the fast descents and of race-lining along the flatter sec-
tions in the company of friends. Then, the moment of crossing the fin-
ish line is always one of special joy, regardless of my finishing position.
Before I cross the finish line in the writing of this book, there are
some further acknowledgments to be made. The first of these is to
acknowledge the people who decided to contribute to this book proj-
ect through the inclusion of their stories and their words. Without this
contribution, this text would not constitute a book, but would simply
exist as a chronicle of diffuse ideas about therapeutic practice. I cant
thank you enough for this contribution. The second is to acknowledge
all of the people who have sought my assistance over the years. | view
all the therapeutic practices described in these pages as having
evolved from our co-research. In the course of therapeutic consulta-
tions, I regularly solicit feedback from people about which avenues of
conversation are working for them and which are not, and, at the
finale, I initiate a review of what was helpful and what wasn’t helpful
to our effort to address the predicaments and concerns of their lives.
This feedback and these reviews have been instrumental in shaping
my practice and fundamental to the development of the ideas and
maps presented in this book. In concluding this book I give heartfelt
thanks to all of you for these contributions, which I remain ever-con-
scious of in my work and my life.


aoe

[PAGE 304]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 293 er


suggested
Reading


Other Books by Michael White on Narrative Therapy

White, M. (1995). Re-authoring lives: Interviews and essays. Adelaide, Australia:
Dulwich Centre Publications.

White, M. (1997). Narratives of therapists’ lives. Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich
Centre Publications.

White, M. (2000). Reflections on narrative practice. Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich
Centre Publications.

White, M. (2004). Narrative practice and exotic lives: Resurrecting diversity in
everyday life. Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.

White, M. & Epston, D. (1990). Narrative means to therapeutic ends. New York:
W. W. Norton.

White, M. & Epston, D. (1992). Experience, contradiction, narrative, and imagi-
nation: Selected papers of David Epston and Michael White, 1989-1991.
Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.

White, M. & Morgan, A. (2006). Narrative therapy with children and their fami-
lies. Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.


For further information, articles, and publications about narrative therapy, please
consult Dulwich Centre’s two Web sites: www.dulwichcentre.com.au, www.narra-
tivetherapylibrary.com

[PAGE 305]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 294 +


294 Suggested Reading


Books by Other Authors on Narrative Therapy

Note: There are many books that are readily available on the subject of narrative
therapy, and the list below represents just a sample of these.


Denborough, D. (Ed.) (2006). Trauma: Narrative responses to traumatic experi-
ence. Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.

Freedman, J. & Combs, G. (1996). Narrative therapy: The social construction of
preferred identities. New York: W. W. Norton.

Freedman, J. & Combs, G. (2002). Narrative therapy with couples .. . and a whole
lot more! Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.

Freedman, J., Epston, D., & Lobovits, D. (1997). Playful approaches to serious
problems: Narrative therapy with children and their families. New York:
W. W. Norton.

Monk, G., Winslade, J., Crocket, K., & Epston, D. (Eds.) (1997). Narrative ther-
apy in practice: The archaeology of hope. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.

Morgan, A. (2000). What is narrative therapy? An easy-to-read introduction.
Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.

Payne, M. (2000). Narrative therapy: An introduction for counselors. London:
Sage.

Russell, S. & Carey, M. (2004). Narrative therapy: Responding to your questions.
Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.

Smith, C. & Nylund, D. (Eds.) (1997). Narrative therapies with children and ado-
lescents. New York: Guilford.

Zimmerman, J. & Dickerson, V. (1996). If problems talked: Narrative therapy in
action. New York: Guilford.

[PAGE 306]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 295 er


References


Andersen, T. (1987). The reflecting team: Dialogue and meta-dialogue in clini-
cal work. Family Process, 26, 415-428.

Bachelard, G. (1969). The poetics of space. Boston: Beacon.

Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of Meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Derrida, J. (1973). Speech and phenomena, and other essays on Husserl's theory of
signs. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.

Derrida, J. (1976). Of grammatology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.

Derrida, J. (1978). Writing and difference. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Foucault, M. (1965). Madness and civilization: A history of insanity in the age of
reason. New York: Random House.

Foucault, M. (1973). The birth of the clinic: An archaeology of medical perception.
London: Tavistock.

Foucault, M. (1980). Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings.
New York: Pantheon.

Goffman, E. (1961). Asylums: Essays in the social situation of mental patients and
other inmates. New York: Harper.

Griemas, A. & Courtes, J. (1976, Spring). The cognitive dimension of narrative
discourse. New Literary History, 7, 433-447.

Iser, W. (1978). The act of reading. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

[PAGE 307]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 296 er


296 References


Kermode, F. (1980, Fall). Secrets and narrative sequence. Critical Inquiry, 7(1),
83-101.

Myerhoff, B. (1982). Life history among the elderly: Performance, visibility, and
remembering. In J. Ruby (Ed.), A crack in the mirror: Reflexive perspective
in anthropology (pp. 99-117). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press.

Myerhoff, B. (1986). Life not death in Venice: Its second life. In V. Turner & E.
Bruner (Eds.), The anthropology of experience (pp. 261-286). Chicago:
University of Illinois Press.

Todorov, T. (1977). The poetics of prose. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

White, M. (1984). Pseudo-encopresis: From avalanche to victory, from vicious to
virtuous cycles. Family Systems Medicine, 2(2), 150-160.

White, M. (1988, Spring). Saying hullo again: The incorporation of the lost rela-
tionship in the resolution of grief. Dulwich Centre Newsletter, 7-11.

White, M. (1995). Reflecting teamwork as definitional ceremony. In M. White
(Ed.), Re-authoring lives: Interviews and essays (pp. 172-198). Adelaide,
Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.

White, M. (2000). Re-engaging with history: The absent but implicit. In M.
White (Ed.), Reflections on narrative practice: Essays and interviews (pp.
35-58). Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.

White, M. (2003). Narrative practice and community assignments. The Inter-
national Journal of Narrative Therapy and Community Work, (2), 17-55.

White, M. (2004). Narrative practice, couple therapy and conflict dissolution. In
M. White (Ed.), Narrative practice and exotic lives: Resurrecting diversity in
everyday life (pp. 1-41). Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.

White, M. (2006). Narrative practice with families and children: Externalising
conversations revisited. In M. White & A. Morgan (Eds.), Narrative ther-
apy with children and their families (pp. 1-56). Adelaide Australia: Dulwich
Centre Publications.

[PAGE 308]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 297 +


Index


An “m” after a page number indicates a narrative map. An *n” indicates a footnote.


abstraction, 271-75, 277 anonymity, 217
abuse history, 37, 62, 114, 130-35 anorexia, 38, 107-17, 168-77, 193m,
acknowledgment 198
of client, 141-44, 161, 165 art, 14-19
and other voices, 261 association of life, 129, 136-39
of true responsibility, 240-48 attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
and witnesses, 166, 187—95, (ADHD), 10-23, 34, 40, 46,
199-201, 204 55m, 56m
adolescents attitude, 99
anorexic, 168—77 audience, see witnesses
incarcerated, 220—32, 234, audiotaping, 216
239-48, 244m, 245m, 249m, auditory hallucinations, 28
251-59, 277 authenticity, 180-84
independent, 45, 51-53, 58m
suicidal, 62-75, 84-98, 105-6 Bachelard, G., 194
troublesome, 235 belonging, sense of, 286
violent, 282-89, 288m Bruner, J., 75-79, 99n, 100, 103-4,
adversarial metaphor, 34 128
agency, see personal agency
agoraphobia, 107—17 categories of inquiry
Andersen, T., 185 for scaffolding, 275-80, 278m,
anger, 145 279m
anguish, 208-12 for unique events, 234-43

[PAGE 309]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 298 S


298 Index


categories of inquiry (continued) and identity, 25, 137, 180-84
for witnesses, 189-98, 193m intentions, 53, 78
see also questioning techniques and personal agency, 267
catharsis, 194-96, 199-201, 208 power, 267—69
change rituals, 165
in increments, 275-80, 283-89, and understanding, 101—6
288m cutting, 26, 44, 46-51, 57m
and narratives, 4
supporting, 263-66, 270 definitional ceremonies
zone of proximal development, anorexia example, 166—77
271-75 benefit, 165
childhood, see abuse history; re-mem- client telling/re-retelling, 185,
bering conversations 196-99
children embedded, 257-59
with ADHD, 10-23, 34, 40, 46, ethics, 217
55m, 56m extensions, 198-201
challenged, 35 origin, 180-84

with eating disorder, 38 telling stage, 185
with encopresis, 23, 33-34, 41, and therapist, 188-90, 204, 215,
54 218

fear, 35-37 toy example, 166-76
and outsiders, 178 witness role, 169-77, 186—96,
problem impact, 44-54 193m, 198, 209m, 214m,
questioning method, 54, 242 216

troublesome, 118-27 depression
zone of proximal development, externalizing, 26, 44, 46-48,
271-75 49-51, 57m
circumstances, 77-80, 84-95 re-authoring, 62-75
clients, former, 147-53, 166—77 Derrida, J., 210
see also witnesses desires, 101
conceptualization, 271-75, 277-80 development, 271-75
confidentiality, 217 dispositions, 101
consciousness, landscape of, 78-84 domestic violence, 62-75
consequences, 277, 281, 283, 287 drawing, 14-19
context, 210-13 drives, 101
coping, 104
Courtes, J., 77 eating disorders, 38, 107-17, 168-77,
cultural factors 193m, 198

and acknowledgment, 165 editorials, 46, 53, 238
and audience, 179 encapsulated self, 136-39, 268
either/or, 35 encopresis, 23, 33-34, 41, 54
folk psychology, 103-4 Epston, D., 178
gender role, 170, 176 ethics, 82, 188-90, 217

[PAGE 310]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 299 er


Index 299


events, 77-80, 110 Foucault, M., 25, 102n, 268n
see also landscape of action; frustration, 210-13, 221-31, 234,
unique outcomes 263-68

exceptional circumstances, 61
see also unique outcomes gaps, 80
exceptions, 61 goals, 4
expectations, 170, 176 Goffman, E., 181, 232
see also hopes Greek tragedy, 194-96
expression, 190-94, 197, 208-12 grief, 133-35
externalizing conversations Griemas, A., 77
ADHD example, 14-22 guessing games, 54, 242
contraindication, 59 guilt, 243-48, 249m, 251-60
and fears, 35-37
of hopes, 35 hallucinations, 28
inquiry, 27-31 heroic identity, 208
maps, 55-58 hopelessness, 263-66
metaphors, 30-34, 37 hopes
and scaffolding, 282-89, 288m and anorexia, 172, 176
theoretical basis, 9, 24-27, 59 for challenged child, 35
therapist role, 27-31, 33 re-membering, 143
of single parent, 252
fabula, 78 human nature, 102, 141-43, 182
failures, 268
familiar situations identity
adherence to, 263—75, 281 and association of life, 129,
incremental distancing, 275—80 136-39

family members, 201-4, 235 cultural factors, 25, 137,
family therapy 180-84
ADHD, 10-23, 34, 40, 43, 46, 48, definitional ceremonies, 180—84,
55m, 56m 208

adolescent supervision, 45, 51—53, intentional understanding, 103-6,
58m 241

anorexia, 168—77 internal understanding, 25, 1013,
encopresis, 23, 33-34, 41, 54 105

suicide attempt, by mother, and maps, 5
147-61 and narratives, 165
troublesome child/adolescent, negative views, 26
118-27, 235 neglected aspects, 61
violent son, 282-89, 288m and problem, 9, 24-27, 59
fear, 35-37 and re-authoring conversations,
former clients, 147-53, 166-77 107-17
see also witnesses reconstruction, 75-83, 84-97m,
former therapist, 141-43 162m, 158-62

[PAGE 311]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 300 er


300 Index


internal understanding (continued) Kermode, F., 77
and re-membering, 129-36,
158-62, 163m landscape of action, 233
and unique outcomes, 261, charting, 84-86m, 88m, 91-93m,
277-80 95-96m, 126-27m
and values, 85-88, 101, 161 and identity, 98, 110, 233
“why” questions, 49-51 in literary theory, 77—80
see also landscape of identity landscape of consciousness, 78-84
image landscape of identity, 78-84, 84m,
of self (see re-authoring 87m, 94m, 97m, 98, 106, 110
conversations) language, 274, 280
as witness focus, 190-98 letters, 200
incarcerated adolescent, 220-32, 234, literary theory, 75-80
239-48, 244m, 245m, 249m, loss, 35, 133-35
251-59, 277
indeterminacy, 79 maps


initiatives, 232, 234, 235, 243 analogy/metaphor, 3-7, 76, 78
instincts, 101 boundaries between, 250-59
intention, 51, 53, 78, 251-53 therapeutic value, 4-6
see also landscape of identity see also externalizing conversations;
intentional state understanding, re-membering conversations;
103-6, 241 scaffolding conversations; state-
internal state understanding, 25, ment of position maps; unique
101-3, 105 outcomes

investigative reporter metaphor, meaning-making, 40, 80-83, 219, 234
27-31 memories, 129
Iser, W., 79 metaphors
isolation, 105, 130, 180-84, 261 of client, 190, 198
see also encapsulated self of contest, 30-34, 37
investigative reporter, 27-31

journey metaphor, 3-7, 76 of journey, 3-7, 76
judgmentiveness motivation, lack of, 281
dualism, 35 mourning, 133-35
and questions, 49 Myerhoff, B., 136-37, 169, 180-84
and unique outcomes, 236
and witnesses, 165, 187—89 narratives

see also normalizing judgment audience role, 178-79
justification, 48-54 as definitional ceremonies, 165
justifying evaluation, 43-48, 239-48, and identity, 165
244m, 245m, 249m, 283 scaffolding, 275-80
structuring, 250—59
katharsis, 194-96, 199-201, 208, see also maps; storylines
211-13 negativity, 27, 34-37, 46


aoe

[PAGE 312]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 301 $


Index 301


normalizing judgment, 25, 102, 134, and hallucinations, 28
267-69 modern versus traditional, 267-69
and self-hate, 27
objectification, 9, 25, 26 and witnesses, 188
out-of-phase experiences, see unique presupposition, 79
outcomes previous clients, 147-53, 166-77
outsider witnesses, see witnesses problems
objectification, 26
painful experiences, 210-13 personalization, 41-43
parenting reemergence, 31
abusive father, 62 totalization, 34-37
ADHD child, 10-23, 46 problem-solving
anorexic daughter, 170-73, 176 complexity, 46-48
challenged child, 35 definitional ceremonies, 187
and change, 271-75 scaffolding, 263-74
child with encopresis, 41-42, 54 and self, 9, 24-28, 59
estranged father and son, 211-13 timing, 28, 30
gender expectations, 170, 176
of incarcerated adolescent, questioning techniques
220-32, 239-48, 244m, 245m, for child clients, 54, 242
249m, 251-59 definitional ceremonies, 169-75,
independent adolescent, 45, 186-93, 205-8
51-53, 58m, 62 externalization, 27-31, 44, 48-54
of reluctant client, 63 re-authoring, 61-62, 84-97m,
single parent, 147-61, 220-32 98-100, 110
tyrannical stepfather, 240-49 re-membering, 130-33, 135,
past, 129, 136-39 143-44, 159-61
perfectionism, 170, 176 unique outcomes, 236—43
personal agency see also categories of inquiry
cultural factors, 267
development, 271-75 re-authoring conversations
intentional understanding, 103-6 agoraphobic anorexic, 109-17,
and katharsis, 199 116-17m
and metaphors, 37 embedded, 256-538
and re-membering, 131-33 intentional understanding, 104,
responsibility, 269-80 241

scaffolding, 263-74 literature analogy, 75-83
see also landscape of action mapping, 84-98

personality traits, 101 suicidal teen, 64-75, 105-6
personalization, 14-22, 41-43 timing issues, 51, 98, 118
perspectives, 75-77 troublesome child, 118-27,
pets, 129 126-27m
power and unique outcomes, 233-43

[PAGE 313]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 302 $


302 Index


reclamation, 34 scaffolding conversations
reflecting-team, 185 for change, 263-66
see also witnesses for development, 275-81, 278m,
reflection, 46, 84, 99, 236 279m
reframing, 187 and externalizing, 282-89, 288m
relationships schizophrenia, 28-30
and audience role, 179 self
between events, 277 and association of life, 129
and externalizing conversations, authenticity, 180-84
59 encapsulation, 136-39, 268
with former therapist, 141-43 and grief, 134
with hallucinations, 29 internal understanding, 25, 101-3,
and intentional state understand- 105
ings, 105 negativity, 26

with problem, 26, 30-32, 34 and problem-solving, 9, 24-28
re-membering, 130-33, 136-39, of witness, 208
140m, 155-62, 251-55 self-belief, 109-17
and self, 9, 25, 129 self-hate, 26, 44, 46-48, 49-51, 57m
social collaboration, 269-80 self-image, see re-authoring conversa-
see also acknowledgment; parent- tions
ing; power self-injury, 44, 46-51, 57m
re-membering conversations self-mastery, 280
embedded, 251-55 self-talk, 44
and grief, 133-35 self-worth, 161
and identity, 129-36, 158-62, social collaboration, 269-80
163m social control, 102, 107, 165
map, 140m see also normalizing judgment
son of suicide mother, 144-62, statement of position maps
163m justification of evaluation, 43-48,
theory, 136-39, 162 239-49, 283
resistance, 281 problem consequences, 43—44
resonance, 191, 205-8, 211 problem definition, 40-43
responsibility problem effect, 43-48
for agency, 269-80 and unique outcomes, 233-49
for anorexic daughter, 170 use and description, 38-40, 54
and incarcerated son, 220, 277 and violent adolescent, 283
for problem solution, 26 stepfather, 240-49
for stepfather, 240-48, 244m, storylines
245m, 249m, 251-60 alternative, 61, 219
of therapist, 281 and audience, 178—79
for witnesses, 188—90, 204, versus single event, 110
215 subordinate, 93-97m, 98—100, 128
Rosen, M., 180 underlying theme, 78


e

[PAGE 314]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 303 E


Index 303


unpredictability, 250-59 toys, 129, 167—76
strengths, 38, 101 transport, 191—96, 199
subjectivity, 99 trauma history, 199-201
subjunctive stance, 100 truths, 24-28, 44
suicidal persons
and abuse history, 130 unconscious, 81, 102
adolescent client, 62-75, 84-98m, understanding, 25, 100-106
105-6 see also intention; landscape of
near relative, 114, 144-62 identity
supposition, 99 unique outcomes

evaluation stage, 236-39
telephone, 216 example, 220-32
televising, 198 negotiation stage, 234, 277
therapist statement of position maps,
author analogy, 82 233-48, 244m, 245m, 249m
in definitional ceremonies, theoretical basis, 232—43, 261
188-90, 204, 215, 218 therapist role, 219, 233
engagement level, 29-31, 39, 82, unpredictability, 250-60
233

in externalization, 27-31, 33, values
38-40 belonging, 287
former, 141-43 and expression, 190
investigative role, 27-29, 45 (see and identity, 85-88, 101, 161
also questioning techniques) and intentional understanding,
metaphor choice, 33-37 103-6, 241
and narrative structuring, and unique outcomes, 233
250-59 videotaping, 216
scaffolding role, 281, 283-89 vocabulary, 100, 274, 280, 287
and unique outcomes, 219-20, voices, 28

233 Vygotsky, L., 271-75, 280
and witnesses, 188-90, 204-15
timing White, M., 23, 167, 199, 204
definitional ceremonies, 198—99 witnesses

initiatives, 243-49, 244m, 245m anguish, 208-12
in mapping, 84-97m anonymity, 217
problem resolution, 28, 30 autobiography, 205-8
for re-authoring conversations, 51, deceased grandmother, 257-59
118 in definitional ceremony, 186—96,
in re-authoring conversations, 98 193m, 209m, 214m
scaffolding, 278m, 279m examples, 147-53, 166-77
witness role, 169 extended performances,
Todorov, T., 99n, 100 199-201

totalization, 34-37 family members, 201—4, 235

[PAGE 315]

MapNarr4PP 3/13/07 4:37 PM Page 304 er


304 Index


witnesses (continued) in training course, 235
preparation, 189-96 words, 100, 274, 280, 287
responsibility for, 188-90, 204, worldview, 104
215

with special knowledge, 215 zone of proximal development
technology use, 198, 216 application, 275-89
theory, 178-85 description, 271-75
