[PAGE 001]

2
Re-Authoring
Conversations


When people consult therapists they tell stories; they speak about
the history of the problems, predicaments, or dilemmas that have
brought them to therapy, and they provide an account of what led to
their decision to seek help. In doing this, people link the events of
their lives in sequences that unfold through time according to a
theme or plot. These themes often reflect loss, failure, incompetence,
hopelessness, or futility. Along with this, people routinely refer to the
figures or protagonists that feature in the story, and they share with
therapists their conclusions both about the identity of these figures or
protagonists and about their motives, intentions, and personal
characteristics. Re-authoring conversations invite people to continue
to develop and tell stories about their lives, but they also help
people to include some of the more neglected but potentially
significant events and experiences that are "out of phase" with their
dominant storylines. These events and experiences can be
considered “unique outcomes" or "exceptions."
It is these unique outcomes or exceptions that provide a starting
point for re-authoring conversations. They provide a point of entry to
the alternative storylines of people's lives that, at the outset of these
conversations, are barely visible. The therapist facilitates the
development of these alternative storylines by introducing
questions that

[PAGE 002]

62 Maps of Narrative Practice


encourage people to recruit their lived experience, to stretch their
minds, to exercise their imagination, and to employ their meaningmaking resources. People become curious about, and fascinated with,
previously neglected aspects of their lives and relationships, and as
these conversations proceed, these alternative storylines thicken,
become more significantly rooted in history, and provide people with
a foundation for new initiatives in addressing the problems,
predicaments, and dilemmas of their lives.


Liam and Penny

Penny called for an appointment for her son, Liam, age 15, whom she
was very concerned about. She'd had these concerns for many years,
but they had been significantly exacerbated by events of the last
several months. Liam had dropped out of school 4 months ago, had
become more withdrawn and rarely emerged from his bedroom, and
was now quite noncommunicative and morose. On the day prior to
calling for an appointment, Penny had happened across his diary. She
initially experienced a dilemma about whether or not to read it, but
the magnitude of her concern for him resolved this dilemma for her.
Upon reading some recent entries, Penny found her worst fears
confirmed. The diary entries were saturated with the theme of
suicide— in fact, they suggested that Liam had already made two
suicide gestures. She also learned that Liam considered himself to be
messed-up and damaged, and that he felt socially and emotionally
paralyzed.
Penny was now desperate and had called me on the advice of her
general practitioner. She said that she was losing hope for Liam's life.
She had hoped that Liam would improve following their escape from
his father, a highly abusive man, some 2 years ago. Liam's father had

subjected both Liam and Penny to regular assault, and he had been very
skilled at controlling both of them and at cutting off any escape routes.
Penny explained that she'd tried many times to free herself and her son
from this situation, but Liam's father had always managed to
circumvent these efforts through acts of intimidation and threats of
retribution. These threats of retribution were principally against Liam's
life.

[PAGE 003]

Re-Authoring Conversations 63


Penny described a little of the nightmare that she and Liam had
endured, and she talked of the guilt that she harbored over what Liam
had gone through during this time. She also spoke of the rising hopes
and expectations that she had experienced upon finally escaping the
violence of this man. However, to her dismay, things did not improve
for Liam as she had expected they would. Liam remained
disinterested in life. He had become increasingly isolated and
increasingly convinced that the future held nothing for him. He could
now see no horizons of possibility in his life.
I said that I would clear a space in my schedule to meet with Liam,
and I wondered aloud how Penny might succeed in getting him to see
me. Penny said that this would not be easily achieved, as Liam was
likely to be resentful about her taking this initiative without
consulting him and would be furious with her if he sensed that she
had read his diary. When I asked Penny about what she thought the
consequences of this fury would be, she predicted that Liam would
not surface from his room for a few days, and that even when he
did he would only speak to her grudgingly for several more days. She
was worried that making this appointment without consulting him
would contribute to his negative frame of mind and lessen the
chances that he would agree to talk with me. But she was also sure
that if she did consult Liam about making an appointment, he would
veto the idea.
Penny wanted my thoughts about how she might encourage Liam
to attend this appointment. I suggested that she ask him to join her in
this meeting with me for her sake. Penny could honestly tell him that
she had become increasingly preoccupied with worry about recent
developments in his life, and that this preoccupation was now quite
pervasive. She could let him know that it was making it virtually
impossible for her to concentrate on the tasks that were required of
her in her workplace, to engage in any semblance of a social life, and
to feel emotionally present in her connections with others. She could
also explain that it was interfering with her sleep and her appetite, and
that she was now at a crisis point and in desperate need of help.
Penny thought that there was a good chance that Liam would
respond to this request by agreeing to come with her to the.
appointment. By the end of our telephone conversation she had
decided to

[PAGE 004]

64 Maps of Narrative Practice


tell him about reading his diary, explaining that she'd felt driven to do
so by these preoccupying concerns. Penny thought that she'd be able
to weather the storm provoked by this admission, and she requested
an appointment in 4 or 5 days time.
Five days later I met with Penny and Liam. Liam made it clear that
he was attending this meeting for his mother's sake, and that he would
not have come on his own account. For the present, he'd "agreed to
come along for the ride" and would reserve his judgement about the
value of this exercise. However, he did confirm that he'd concluded
that his life was pointless, that it wasn't worth trying anything, that he
was messed up, and that he had no future. Following is a transcript of
our conversation, taken from a point about 15 minutes into our first
meeting.


Liam: So my mum's told you about what we went through.
But it was worse for her than it was for me.

M: It was worse for her than it was for you. In what way?

Liam: He gave me a pretty hard time, but it was more
painful for my mother.

M: Were you concerned about what she was being put
through?

Liam: What do you think?!

M: Sometimes people get a bit desensitised to violence,
and even though it still has a devastating impact on their
lives and on the lives of others they become a bit oblivious
to this.

Liam: Well, I wasn't oblivious to this. Of course I was
concerned about what he was doing to her. It was terrible.

M: Tell me, were you more concerned for yourself or your
mother? Or were you concerned about yourself and your
mother equally?

Liam: Mum, of course.

[PAGE 005]

Re-Authoring Conversations 65


M: Penny, does it surprise you to hear this?

Penny: Which part?

M: That through all this time Liam was more concerned
for you than he was for himself.

Penny: Well, no. It doesn't surprise me at all.

M: Liam was more concerned for you than he was for
himself. What did this suggest to you about what was
important to Liam? Or about what was precious to him?

Penny: Well ... I know we've had our ups and downs, and
recently Liam hasn't seemed to want me in his life much.
But I have still always known that I was precious to him.

M: How did you know this?

Penny: A mother just knows these things about her son.
These are just the things that a mother knows.

M: Are there any stories that you can tell me about Liam's
actions that would be a reflection of what was precious to
him? Of what he held precious? Are there any stories you
can tell me about him that would help me to understand

how you knew this about him?

Penny: There's probably lots of things that I could tell you.

But I don't really know where to start right now.

M: Any starting point would be fine. If you could think of

some story that you could tell me about Liam's actions that

reflect the extent to which he held your life precious, that
would be helpful to me.

Penny: Okay. Maybe I could start by telling you about

something that happened when he must have been, let's
see, about 8 years old. It was on a Sunday morning. I
distinctly remember that. And his father was hitting me
for some reason or other. I always tried to protect Liam
from

[PAGE 006]

66 Maps of Narrative Practice


seeing these things, but it wasn't always possible to do this.
Anyway, suddenly I heard glass smashing. This interrupted

his father, and we went into the living room and I saw that
someone had thrown a rock through the front window.
There was broken glass all over the carpet. I looked out the
window, and guess who I saw running off down the street?
It was Liam. His father took off after him and Liam copped
a thrashing for this. I tried to stop it. It was one of those
really terrible situations. I felt torn apart by it.

M: Liam distracted his father when he was hitting you?

Penny: Yes, he distracted his father. He did this even

though he would have known that he was going to cop a
belting for it.

M: Liam, do you remember this?


Liam: Nope.

M: Penny, what sort of step was it that Liam took on that

Sunday all of those years ago? How would you name this
action of Liam's?

Penny: I don't really know, I haven't thought much about
it. I guess that I even tried to put it out of my mind because
of what happened to Liam. And because I wasn't able to do
anything. It was horrible. I wouldn't be talking about this if
you hadn't asked about it.

M: Did Liam's action fit with that sense of pointlessness
about life that he was just talking about? Was this an
example of Liam just accepting what life was serving up to
him?

Penny: No, no. Of course not. There's no way that it fits
with that.

M: Okay, so what does it fit with? What might be a good
way of naming this action that Liam took in throwing a rock
through the window?

[PAGE 007]

Re-Authoring Conversations 67


Penny: Well, like I said, I haven't really thought about this.

But I suppose when I think about it, yes, the word that I
would use is that he was "protesting." He was protesting
what I was being put through.

M: So "protest" might be a good name for this step.


Penny: Yeah. For sure. This would fit.

M: Liam, can you relate to this way of describing what you

did?

Liam: Nope. Not really.

M: Penny, you witnessed Liam protesting what you were
being subject to when he was just 8 years old. What did
this suggest to you about him? What's your guess about
what this reflects in terms of what Liam values?

Penny: It told me that he was a very brave little boy. That

he had lots of courage. Now when I think back, it just
seems even more amazing to me that he did such a thing.

M: It told you that he was a brave little boy. And what did

it say to you about what might be important to him? About
what he values?

Penny: Well, I guess it says a lot to me about what was

important to him about fairness. Which, when I think
about it, is surprising, isn't it, because he'd seen so much
that was unfair.

M: So it suggested courage and fairness. Can you relate to
what you're hearing, Liam?

Liam: Nope. Not that bit about courage. And not really
that stuff about fairness either.

M: Okay. You don't relate to this. Can you see how your
mother might have arrived at those conclusions about
courage and fairness?

[PAGE 008]

68 Maps of Narrative Practice


Liam: Well, yeah. I guess so. I suppose I can see how she
would get this idea about me.

M: Penny, were you surprised to see that it was Liam
running off down the street? Did the action that Liam took
on the basis of where he might have stood on fairness
surprise you?

Penny: No, of course not. I think that I would have always
known this about Liam.

M: How would you have known that?

Penny: It's just another one of the things that a mother
knows, I guess!

M: Is there anything that you could tell me about Liam,
when he was younger still, that would have confirmed what
you knew about him? That would fit with what you
understood about how important fairness was to him?

Penny: Okay. Let's see. Well, yes, there is something.
Probably lots of things. Liam must have been about 6 and

he was in his second semester in first grade at school.
There was this development where he started to come
home from school ravenous. He was just so hungry. He'd

raid the pantry and the fridge. So I'd give him some extra
treats for his lunch. This went on for nearly 2 weeks and by

the end of this time he was taking a truckload of food to
school! So I spoke to his teacher about this. She didn't
know what was going on, but she said that she'd put him
under observation. Guess what she discovered? You
remember, Liam. I told you about this before.

Liam: I don't remember hearing this before.

Penny: What the teacher discovered was that Liam was
sitting with three other kids at lunchtime. Two of these
kids were very sad because they were missing their
mothers. The other kid was being terribly teased and was
also

[PAGE 009]

Re-Authoring Conversations 69


really sad and crying a lot. And what did Liam do? He was
sharing his treats with them to make them all feel better.

Liam: I don't remember this.

M: What was it like for you as Liam's mother to hear this
about him?

Penny: Mostly I just felt so proud of him for this. So proud

of my son that he could do this for these other kids despite
all of the heartache we were going through at home.

M: Penny, I'll ask you to paint the scene a bit more for

Liam as you drive home after this meeting. Maybe you
could describe the lunchroom, tell him what you know
about these other kids, remind him about what this teacher
looked like. Anything that might help him to remember
this.

Penny: Okay, I'd be glad to.

M: What sort of step was this? You told me that you
thought Liam felt paralyzed in life. It doesn't sound like
this fits with paralysis, or with being messed up.

Penny: No, it's definitely not about that. I'm trying to think
of a good word. Let's see. Perhaps rescuing. Yes, I think you
could say that he was rescuing these boys.

M: Rescuing these other children. Can you relate to that,
Liam?

Liam: I suppose so.

M: Can you think of another name for what you did?

Liam: No. Rescuing will do.

M: Penny, when I asked you about Liam throwing a rock
through the window, about what this said about him, you
said that it told you about his courage and about what was
important to him in terms of fairness. Thinking back on

[PAGE 010]

70 Maps of Narrative Practice


these events when he was 6 years old, how did this act of
rescuing other children shape your picture of him as a
person?

Penny: Let's see. Well, I know it said a lot about where he
stood on injustice, even as a little boy.

M: About where he stood on injustice. Anything else?

Penny: Like what?

M: Just about anything else that might have been
important to him, or about what life was about for him.

Penny: Maybe about the sort of ideas that Liam had about
what life should be about. Maybe about the dreams of a
little boy. Yeah, that's it. And about how he wouldn't let
those dreams go.

M: Liam, I keep asking you the same question. Can you
relate to what your mum just said about justice and about
the dreams ofa little boy?

Liam: Yeah, I guess. I suppose I can. Yeah, I guess it fits.

M: Let me get this clear. Are you saying that you can relate

to this bit about justice and about what you thought life
should be about? About the dreams of this little boy?

Liam: Yeah. Yeah, I guess so.


M: Just a guess?

Liam: No, not just a guess. It adds up.


M: I'd like to understand how it is that you're able to relate
to what you're hearing from your mum about these stories
of your history, and about the conclusions that she has
reached about who you are in light of these stories.

Liam: Okay.

M: So, the question is: How is it that you are able to relate
to what you are hearing? Is there anything that's happened

[PAGE 011]

Re-Authoring Conversations 71


in your life in more recent years that would fit with what

we are learning about you? With what I am hearing about
where you stand on what is fair and just, with what your
mother is telling me about what's important to you, about
the dreams of this little boy?

Liam: I don't know. What do you think, Mum?


Penny: Maybe when you spoke to your cousin Vanessa.

Liam: Yeah. That's probably it.


M: What?

Liam: Well, just before we got away from my dad I told my
cousin what I was going through because I thought it was
a bit like the same for her. Like, Vanessa's dad is my dad's
brother, and he's pretty rough, and I thought that she was
probably having a hard time. Anyway, she did tell me about

some of the bad things that were happening to her, and it
was appalling. She'd never told anybody else.

M: What happened then?


Penny: About 8 months after Liam reached out to her the
child-protection people got involved. And this was all
because of what Liam did.

M: Your mum's words were that you "reached out" to your

cousin. Would this be a good name for this step, or would
some other name fit better?

Penny: No, that works. "Reaching out" works.

M: I've learned about actions in rescuing. I've learned

about actions that have to do with protest. And I've learned
about actions that have to do with reaching out. All of these
are part of your history. Putting these actions together,
what's this all about?

Liam: What do you mean?

[PAGE 012]

72 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: If these were all part of a direction in life, or part of a
project in life, or a particular pathway that you have been
taking in life, what might be a good name for this?

Liam: Well, I suppose .. . Do you mean, well, something
like . . . well, like salvaging something. Maybe "salvaging
life" or something?

M: Yeah, yeah. Salvaging life.

Liam: Maybe it's more like... No, that will do.

M: Okay. It's about salvaging life. Okay, this says a lot to
me. Penny, what's your guess about what this suggests to
me about what Liam is aspiring to?

Penny: Well, it might be saying something to you about a
young man who's had strong beliefs about what's okay and
what's not. Maybe it would be saying something to you
about a young man who knows something about what
makes life worthwhile.

M: Yeah, that fits with my image. Liam?

Liam: I don't know. It's a bit hard for me to... Maybe
you'd be thinking about that stuff about what Mum said
about my dreams and things. You know, what she said.

M: About your dreams about what life should be about?

Liam: Yeah.

M: And about how you held onto those dreams despite
everything?

Liam: Yeah, I guess so. I guess that would be it.

M: That fits too. I have a question. The things that we've
been learning about you, about what's important to you,
about what you've held onto despite what you've been
through, about dreams about what life should all be about,
about how this is all about salvaging life. If you were able

[PAGE 013]

Re-Authoring Conversations 73


to keep this knowledge about your life close to you, to draw
support from this, what's your guess about what this would

make possible for you? What is your guess about what this
would make possible for you to do? What steps could you
take that would fit with this?

Liam: Phew! That's a big one.

M: Sure it is. But we've got lots of time.

Penny: Maybe you could try contacting that guy Daniel

who used to be your friend. You haven't seen him for ages.
Daniel's also had some pretty hard times, didn't he?

Liam: Yeah. He's been througha lot.

M: What do you think of Penny's idea about contacting
him?

Liam: I reckon I could do this. I could give him a buzz and

maybe catch up with him.

M: What sort of step would this be if you took it? Would
you say it was a step in rescuing, protesting, or reaching
out? Or something else?


Liam: I dunno. Probably reaching out.

Penny: Yeah, it would be an example of that. I know that

this boy Daniel is still having a pretty hard time.

M: Penny, if you witnessed Liam taking this step to contact
Daniel, what would this suggest to you about his purposes
in doing this?

Penny: Maybe something about him wanting to get more

connected to his hopes. Yeah, something about picking
these hopes up again.

M: How would that be for you, to witness Liam picking up
these hopes again?

[PAGE 014]

74 Maps of Narrative Practice


Penny: Brilliant. Just brilliant.

M: Liam?

Liani: Yeah. She's right. It would have to be about picking
up the hopes again.

M: Okay. It would be to pick up the hopes again. I'd like to
ask a few questions about what you've been learning about
yourself as we've been piecing together the steps that
you've been taking in salvaging your life. What do you think
this reflects about your plans for your future?

Liam: Well, I guess...


Liam did contact Daniel. This was the first of many steps that he
subsequently took that were in harmony with the conclusions about
his life and his identity that were developed and redeveloped in my
conversations with him and his mother. Liam became increasingly
engaged in these conversations, and in our fourth meeting he
announced that he'd realized that the depression he'd been struggling
with for so long was "fake depression." In stating this, he was not
implying that he had been "faking it" or that he still didn't have a
significant struggle with this depression. Rather, he had reached this
understanding on the basis of a realization that he wasn't messed up:
"How could you have real depression if you weren't messed up?" Liam
went on to say that "even fake depression is pretty bad, but at least
you know that you are going to recover from it, and that makes a big
difference."
In the course of our meetings there were many other dimensions to
the development of this storyline of Liam's life. In one of these, he
experienced his life linked to the stories of his great uncle's life around
shared themes, intentions, and values. This great uncle was a man
who had played a vitally important role in rescuing Penny from the
abuses that she was subject to in her family of birth.
At the eighth and final meeting, I'd been reviewing with Liam many
of the initiatives he'd been taking in recent months. Not all of these

[PAGE 015]

Re-Authoring Conversations


had been well received by others. For example, some of Liam's
initiatives in reaching out had been rejected by others. Upon
inquiring about how he had responded to these rejections and about
why they hadn't discouraged further initiatives, Liam said that he was
a veteran of rejection, and that, on account of this, there wasn't much
new to him to experience in terms of rejection. Further, he said that he
was "probably much better equipped to cope with rejection than
other kids who were from more normal families and who might not
have experienced the rejections that I've been through."
When I asked him about the implications of this for his future,
Liam concluded that future rejections were less likely to be a
hindrance to him than they might be for many others. This constituted
a realization for Liam that was particularly important to him—that he
was uniquely abled on account of all that he had been through, rather
than disabled. Although we would continue to lament the abuses he'd
been subject to for a good part of his life, we were all able to celebrate
these conclusions about Liam's uniquely abled status.


The Structure of Re-authoring Conversations

This chapter is about a map for narrative practice that I refer to as "reauthoring conversations map." It has been a mainstay of my therapeutic
practice for many years. In the original development of this map I
drew significantly from Jerome Bruner's (1986) exploration of the
narrative metaphor, specifically from his analysis of literary texts. In
this analysis it was his goal to develop further understandings of the
meaning-making activities that people engage with in everyday life.


I was drawn to this because I perceived parallels between the
activity of writing literary stories and therapeutic practice. It was my
perception that just as "great storytelling ... is about compelling
plights that . . . must be set forth with sufficient subjunctivity to
allow them to be rewritten by the reader, rewritten so as to allow
play for the reader's imagination" (Bruner, 1986, p. 35), effective
therapy is about engaging people in the re-authoring of the compelling
plights, of their

[PAGE 016]

76 Maps of Narrative Practice


lives in ways that arouse curiosity about human possibility and in ways
that invoke the play of imagination.
In describing the participation of readers in the construction of the
storyline of the text, Bruner referred to the "journey" metaphor and to
the "mapmaking" analogy. This resonated for me strongly. This
metaphor and this analogy seemed clearly pertinent to therapeutic
practice. Bruner (1986) made the following observation about the
reader's engagement with texts:


. as they begin to construct a virtual text of their own, it
is as if they were embarking on a journey without maps—
and yet, they posses a stock of maps that might give hints,
and besides, they know a lot about mapmaking. First
impressions of the new terrain are, of course, based on
older journeys already taken. In time, the new journey
becomes a thing in itself, however much its initial shape
was borrowed from the past. (p. 36)


Similarly, when people first engage in therapeutic conversations in
which they reconstruct the stories of their lives, it often seems that
they are departing from the familiar and embarking on journeys to
new destinations without maps. And yet, as this reconstruction
gathers pace, it quickly becomes clear that these people are drawing
from a stock of maps relevant to journeys already taken, and that they
knowa lot about mapmaking. In the course of these conversations, the
"new journey" becomes a "thing in itself, however much its initial
shape was borrowed from the past."
With literary texts, the narrative mode "leads to conclusions not
about certainties in an aboriginal (original and objective) world, but
about the varying perspectives that can be constructed to make
experience comprehensible" (Bruner, 1986, p. 37). Bruner proposed
that this contribution to increasing the options available to the reader
to render experience comprehensible is the great writer's gift: "The
great writer's gift to a reader is to make him a better writer" (Bruner,
1986, p. 5). In a similar vein, in therapeutic contexts the narrative
mode can

[PAGE 017]

Re-Authoring Conversations 77


open space for "varying perspectives that can be constructed to make
experience comprehensible," and skillful practice can assist people to
have a fuller participation and stronger voice of authorship in the
construction of the stories of their lives.

Texts and Dramatic Engagement


According to Bruner (1986):


Stones of literary merit, to be sure, are about events in the
real world, but they render that world newly strange,
rescue it from obviousness, fill it with gaps that call upon
the reader, in Barthes's sense, to become a writer, a
composer of a virtual text in response to the actual. In the
end it is the reader who must write tor himself what he
intends to do with the actual text. (p. 24)


Well-structured novels are highly absorbing of the reader. This is
because the authors of these novels exercise an array of options in
fostering dramatic engagement in the reading of the text. This
provides readers with many invitations to contribute to the
development of the storyline and to live out the drama of it. For
example, well-structured novels have many gaps in the storyline that
must be filled in by the reader. Good writers do not spell everything
out, and the reader is required to participate in putting two and two
together to make four, in bringing together specific events into
sequences unfolding across time in the revealing of the plot, and in
reconciling this with the underlying theme of the story. Thus, the
reader is given the task of developing and reconciling what Frank
Kermode (1981) referred to as sjuzet (the linear events that make up
the plot) and fab-ula (the timeless underlying theme) in the "fusion
of scandal and miracle."
But it is not just the sjuzet and the fabula that are further developed
and reconciled in the reading of literary texts. Bruner, borrowing
significantly from the literary theorists Griemas and Courtes (1976),
proposed that stories are principally composed of two
landscapes—a

[PAGE 019]

78 Maps of Narrative Practice


"landscape of action" and a "landscape of consciousness." The
landscape of action is the "material" of the story and is composed of
the sequence of events that make up the plot (sjuzet) and the
underlying theme (fabula). The landscape of consciousness is
composed of "what those involved in the action know, think, or feel, or
do not know, think or feel" (Bruner, 1986, p. 14). This landscape
features the consciousness of the protagonists of the story and is
significantly composed of their reflections on the events of the
landscape of action—of their attribution of meaning to these events,
of their deductions about the intentions and purposes that are shaping
of these events, and of their conclusions about the character and
identity of the other protagonists in light of these events. Like the
development of the plot of the landscape of action, the development
of the landscape of consciousness must be reconciled with the fabula,
the timeless underlying theme of the story:


In any case the fabula of a story—its timeless underlying
theme—seems to be a unity that incorporates at least three
constituents. It contains a plight into which characters
have fallen as a result of intentions that have gone awry
either because of circumstances, of the "character of
characters," or most likely of the interaction between the two
... What gives the story its unity is the manner in
which plight, characters, and consciousness interact to
yield a structure that has a start, development, and a
"sense of ending." (Bruner, 1986, p. 21)


Just as there are gaps in the landscape of action to be filled in by
the reader, there are gaps to be filled in the landscape of
consciousness. Although this landscape of consciousness is partially
developed through the author's representation of the consciousness of
the protagonists, and at times through a representation of the author's
own consciousness, the reader's contribution to the landscape of
consciousness is a significant factor in the unification of the text,
and in its thick or rich development.

[PAGE 020]

Re-Authoring Conversations 79


In entering this landscape of consciousness, the reader attributes a
range of intentions and purposes to the actions of the protagonists and
reaches conclusions about their character and identity. The term
landscape of consciousness is apt, for it not only represents the
consciousness of the protagonists and of the author of the story, but
also is significantly filled out by the reader's consciousness.
Numerous mechanisms are employed by good writers to draw the
attention of readers to these gaps in the landscapes of action and
consciousness, and to encourage them to step into these gaps with
their imagination and lived experience. For example, authors rely
significantly on the triggering of presupposition to achieve this. They
also take care in the arrangement of these gaps: For instance, good
writers ensure the provision of adequate clues and structure the text to
invoke the curiosity and fascination of the reader. Good writers
arrange these gaps to ensure that they are not so large as to exhaust
the reader's meaning-making resources in their efforts to fill them,
and not so insignificant as to lose the interest of the reader. It is
mechanisms like these that provide the reader with a foundation for
dramatic engagement with the text, that give readers "a good workout"
in the development of a virtual text that invariably exceeds the actual
in significant aspects. Bruner quoted Iser (1978), who employed the
term indeterminacy to describe this characteristic of the literary text:


. It is the element of indeterminacy that evokes the text
to communicate with the reader, in the sense that they
induce him to participate both in the production and the
comprehension of the work's intention, (p. 61)


In summarizing Iser's understanding of the function of this
indeterminacy, Bruner (1986) observed that:


It is this "relative indeterminacy of a text" that "allows for a
spectrum of actualizations." And so, "literary texts initiate
performances of meaning rather than actually formulating
meanings themselves.' (p. 24)

[PAGE 021]

80 Maps of Narrative Practice


Texts and Life


I was quite drawn to this dual landscape conception of story structure
on account of my interest in the narrative metaphor and in the
activity of meaning-making. My interest in the narrative metaphor
is founded on the assumption that people give meaning to their
experiences of the events of life by taking them into frames of
intelligibility, and on the conclusion that it is the structure of narrative
that provides the principle frame of intelligibility for acts of meaningmaking in everyday life. This assumption is associated with a
premise that it is in the trafficking of stories about our own and each
others' lives that identity is constructed. The concepts of landscape of
action and landscape of consciousness bring specificity to the
understanding of people's participation in meaning-making within the
context of narrative frames.
In borrowing this dual-landscape conception from literary theory, it
is not my intention to propose that life is simply a text. But I do
believe, as do many others, parallels can be drawn between the
structure of literary texts and the structure of meaning-making in
everyday life. The concepts of landscape of action and landscape of
consciousness seem relevant to an understanding of people's meaningmaking activities in life, of the construction of personal narratives,
and of the constitution of people's identity through everyday acts of
life. Further, these concepts seem particularly relevant to the
therapeutic task, which I believe to be principally about the
redevelopment of personal narratives and the reconstruction of
identity.

Implications for Practice


Further parallels can be drawn between the structure of literary texts
and the structure of therapeutic practice. The authors of texts call the
attention of the reader to gaps in the storyline and encourage readers
to fill in these gaps by stretching their minds, by exercising their
imagination, and by recruiting their lived experience. Rich story
development is the outcome. Therapists who prioritize rich story
development in their consultations with people do the same. These
therapists draw people's attention to gaps in the storylines of their
lives—usually these

[PAGE 022]

Re-Authoring Conversations 81


are gaps in what might be called the "subordinate" storylines of
people's lives—and encourage them to fill in these gaps by
stretching their minds, exercising their imagination, and recruiting
their lived experience. And just as good writers give considerable
thought to the arrangement of these gaps, so too do therapists who
have a focus on rich story development. These therapists take care in
constructing the scaffolding of these gaps, ensuring that they are not
so large as to exhaust people's meaning-making resources in their
effort to fill in the gaps and not so insignificant as to lose people's

interest. The outcome of this is that people experience a good workout
in the context of therapeutic conversations and become dramatically
engaged with many of the neglected events of their own lives.
I have found these concepts of landscape of action and landscape
of consciousness to be invaluable in the development of my practice.
They have provided me with a foundation for the refinement and
further development of therapeutic conversations that contribute to
rich story development, and they have offered a map for the shaping
of, and for the charting of, these therapeutic conversations. These are
conversations that invariably contribute to the rich development of
some of the alternative storylines of people's lives, the traces of which
are ever-present in people's expressions of living. In these
conversations, people's lives become more evidently multistoricd as
these traces are identified and thickened. In this chapter I give
illustrations of these conversations and reflect on the significance of
the concepts of landscape of action and landscape of consciousness in
the shaping of them.

In describing the relevance of these concepts to therapeutic
practice, I have substituted the term identity for consciousness. I made
this substitution because of the confusion that arose around my use of
this term. At times, the mention of consciousness was taken to denote
an awareness of injustices. At other times this term was taken to
denote the mechanism of the mind that is engaged when making
choices. At Vet other times it was taken to denote actions in life that
were conscious in contrast to actions that were products of "the
unconscious." because of this confusion, I will substitute "landscape
of ide.ntity" for

[PAGE 023]

82 Maps of Narrative Practice


"landscape of consciousness" in this chapter, while acknowledging
that the term identity represents only part of what is intended in the
term consciousness as it is applied to the analysis of literary texts and
as it might be applied to the understanding of rich story development
in therapeutic contexts.
Apart from dispelling this confusion, the term landscape of identity
does have benefit in the emphasis that it gives to the significance of
the therapeutic endeavour—1t emphasizes the irreducible fact that
any renegotiation of the stories of people's lives is also a renegotiation
of identity. Awareness of this encourages a fuller engagement on
behalf of therapists with the sort of professional ethics that are
associated with an acknowledgment of the life-shaping aspects of
therapeutic practice and a greater awareness of the responsibility that
we have for what we say and do in the name of therapy.
In drawing parallels between the structure of literary texts and the
structure of therapeutic practice, I am not proposing that the activity
of the author of a literary text and the therapist's role in therapeutic
conversations are synonymous. For one thing, the author of a literary
text invites the reader to enter into a storyline, the fundamental
shape of which is provided by the author. Therapists, on the other
hand, are not the originators of the storyline that is developed in the
therapeutic conversation. Although they may be acquainted with
many possible stories about life (which makes it possible for them to
draw people's attention to significant events that stand outside of the
dominant storylines), they are not the primary author in the sense
that the author of a literary text is. Rather, therapists privilege the
voices of the people consulting them in the attribution of meaning to
selected events of their lives, in their interpretation of the links
between these events and the valued themes of their lives, in their
deduction about what this reflects in terms of what is important to
them, and in their conclusions about what this suggests about their
own and each other's identities. Whereas the author of a literary text
is quite centered in the development of the storyline, the therapist is
displaced from the center.
To summarize, in therapeutic conversations that are oriented by re-

[PAGE 024]

Re-Authoring Conversations 83


authoring conversations, the concepts of landscape of action and
landscape of identity assist the therapist in building a context in
which it becomes possible for people to give meaning to, and draw
together into a storyline, many of the overlooked but significant events
of their lives. These concepts also guide the therapist in supporting
people to derive new conclusions about their lives, many of which will
contradict existing deficit-focus conclusions that are associated with
the dominant storylines and that have been limiting of their lives.


Mapping the Re-Authoring Conversation With Liam and
Penny

The following review of my conversation with Liam and Penny
provides a practical illustration of the therapeutic implications of the
concepts of landscape of action and landscape of identity. This review
is accompanied by diagrams that chart the therapeutic conversation
onto the re-authoring conversations map, which consists of two
horizontal timelines—a landscape of action and a landscape of
identity (consciousness).

[PAGE 025]

M: (Figure 2.1) Liam was more concerned for you than he was
for himself, what did this suggest to you about what was
important to Liam? Or about what was precious to him?
Expressions that in some way contradict dominant themes can
provide clues to the alternative stories of people's lives. Resignation
and the futility of existence were dominant themes in Liam's
account of his existence, and yet here Liam expressed significant
concern for his mother. I first responded to this contradiction with
questions that facilitated the further expression of this concern. I then
asked a question that encouraged Penny to reflect on Liam's concerns
and to give voice to what this suggested was important to him. This
was a landscape of identity question.


Figure 2.2 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)

[PAGE 026]

M: (Figure 2.2) Are there any stories that you can tell me
about Liam's actions that would be a reflection of what was
precious to him? Of what he held precious? Are there any
stories you can tell me about him that would help me to

understand how you knew this about him?
Penny asserted that Liam's expression of concern reflected the high
value that he gave to her life—that he held her precious. This account
of what Liam gave value to can be considered a conclusion about
identity. In response to this, I asked Penny for a story about Liam's
actions that would reflect this conclusion. This was a landscape of
action question, as it triggered an account of specific events of Liam's
history that exemplified this conclusion about what he gave value to.

[PAGE 027]

M: (Figure 2.3) Penny, what sort of step was it that Liam took
on that Sunday all of those years ago? How would you name
this action of Liam's?
Upon hearing the story about Liam's distracting his father by
pitching a rock through the window, I asked Penny about what sort of
name she would give to this action. Although this event was available
to her conscious memory, it hadn't been characterized. My question
was the first of several that provided the context for the naming of
this action as "protest." This was a landscape of action question about
the depiction of a neglected but significant event of Penny and Liam's
history.


Figure 2.4 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)

[PAGE 028]

M: (Figure 2.4) Penny, you witnessed Liam protesting what
you were being subject to when he was just 8 years old. What
did this suggest to you about him? What's your guess about
what this reflects in terms of what Liam values?

Seven years after the event itself, Liam's act of pitching a rock
through the window is defined as "protest." Penny led the way with
this naming, and at this time Liam was unable to relate to the
meaning that she gave to his action. The question about what this
action may have reflected about his personhood and about what he
valued was one of several landscape of identity questions that provided
a foundation for the verification of his bravery and for the voicing of a
conclusion about the importance of fairness to Liam.

[PAGE 029]

M: (Figure 2.3) Penny, what sort of step was it that Liam took
on that Sunday all of those years ago? How would you name
this action of Liam's?
Upon hearing the story about Liam's distracting his father by
pitching a rock through the window, I asked Penny about what sort of
name she would give to this action. Although this event was available
to her conscious memory, it hadn't been characterized. My question
was the first of several that provided the context for the naming of
this action as "protest." This was a landscape of action question about
the depiction of a neglected but significant event of Penny and Liam's
history.

[PAGE 030]

M: (Figure 2.4) Penny, you witnessed Liam protesting what
you were being subject to when he was just 8 years old. What
did this suggest to you about him? What's your guess about
what this reflects in terms of what Liam values?
Seven years after the event itself, Liam's act of pitching a rock
through the window is defined as "protest." Penny led the way with
this naming, and at this time Liam was unable to relate to the
meaning that she gave to his action. The question about what this
action may have reflected about his personhood and about what he
valued was one of several landscape of identity questions that
provided a foundation for the verification of his bravery and for the
voicing of a conclusion about the importance of fairness to Liam.

[PAGE 031]

Figure 2.5 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)

Landscape of Identity Accords value to: fairness
—intentional understandings ' age

accorded value Pi A
—understanding about what is ;

internal understandings landscape of action
—realizations, learnings, question (referenced to
knowledges RE in the
landscape of identity of B.
Landscape of Action the subordinate storyline) Fiir a
—events yS
—circumstances
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


M: (Figure 2.5) Is there anything that you could tell me about
Liam, when he was younger still, that would have confirmed
what you knew about him? That would fit with what you
understood about how important fairness was to him?
Liam was now more engaged in the development of the
subordinate storyline of his life. This was reflected in his willingness to
entertain an understanding of how his mother reached these
conclusions about his bravery and about the value that he gave to
fairness. This question about events in his younger lire that might
bear out his mother's knowledge about his bravery and his valuing of
fairness was a landscape of action question that aroused, in Penny's
memory, the story of the school lunchroom.


Figure 2.6 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)

Landscape of Identity ords value to: fairne:
— intentional understandings Inte anding: cou
understanding about what is
accorded value
internal understandings
—tealizations, learnings,
knowledges


of Action
Landscape

[PAGE 032]

M: (Figure 2.6) What sort of step was this? You told me that
you thought Liam felt paralyzed in life. It doesn't sound like
this fits with paralysis, or with being messed up.
This was a landscape of action question. Penny responded to it by
defining Liam's support of other children as acts of "rescue." Liam was
now participating more actively in the development of the subordinate
storyline, on this occasion more immediately relating to this naming
of his 6-year-old actions.

[PAGE 033]

Figure 2./ Gnarting Ke-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
Landscape of Identity of what life should be about Accords value to: fairness
—intentional understandings Accords value to: justice Internal understanding: co
—understanding about what is A A
_accorded value landscape of identity question
—internal understandings (referenced to developments in
—realizations, learnings, the landscape of action of the
knowledges subordinate storyline)
Landscape of Action Initiative characterized as: Initiative €
— events act of reseue act of

—circumstances FE
— sequence Account of; school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


M: (Figure 2.7) Penny, when I asked you about Liam throwing
a rock through the window, about what this said about him,
you said that it told you about his courage and about what was
important to him in terms of fairness. Thinking back on these
events when he was 6 years old, how did this act of rescuing
other children shape your picture of him as a person?
The naming of these 6-year-old actions provided a solid foundation for
this question about how this shaped Penny's image of her son. This was a
landscape of identity question, and it gave rise to conclusions about
Liam's position on justice and his dreams about how life should be. These
conclusions were in accord with the emergent storyline and as such were
thickening of it. At this point, Liam not only acknowledged that he could
relate to these conclusions, but he also actually verified them.


Figure 2.8 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
Landscape of Identity of what life should be about Accords value to; faimes:
—intentional understandings Accords yalue to: justice Internal understanding: coun
— understanding about what is A A
accorded value landseap
—internal understandings L question (f
—realizations, learnings, opn
knowledges landscape:
Initiative characterized as: the
Landscape of Action uct of rescue
—events a
—circumstances .
SETS Account of: school Account
of: pitching

= aa i ‘a 5
= a

[PAGE 034]

Accords value
to: Penny's life


Account of: Liam's
expression of concern


Recent History Present Near Future


M: (Figure 2.8) So, the question is: How is it that you are able to relate to
what you are hearing? Is there anything that's happened in your life in more
recent years that would fit with what we are learning about you? With what
I am hearing about where you stand on what is fair and just, with what your
mother is telling me about what's important to you, about the dreams of this
little boy?
As Liam had now verified positive conclusions about his identity that were not on his
map at the outset of the interview, I sensed that the time was ripe to directly consult
him in the further development of the subordinate storyline. This question, which was
addressed to Liam, encouraged him to review events in more recent history that might
exemplify this conclusion about his position on justice. This was a landscape of action
question, and it brought to mind the action he took in talking to his cousin about his
history of abuse by his father. This initiative was an expression of his concern for her.


Accords value
to; Penny's life


Account of: disclosure Account of: Liam’s
to cousin expression of concern

[PAGE 035]

M: (Figure 2.9) Your mum's words were that you
"reached out"
to your cousin. Would this be a good name for
this step, or
would some other name fit better?
Penny had joined Liam in the recounting of the story
about the
initiative he took with his cousin, and in the contex
t of this she had
named it as an act of "reaching out." This questio
n was a landscape of
action question that encouraged Liam to participate in
this naming.

[PAGE 036]

Accords value
to: Penny's life


Initiative characterized as:
reaching out


Account of; disclosure Account of: Liam's
to cousin expression of concern


Recent History Present Near Future


M: (Figure 2.10) I've learned about actions in rescuing. I've
learned about actions that have to do with protest. And I've
learned about actions that have to do with reaching out. All of
these are part of your history. Putting these actions together,
what this all about?
By this time Penny and Liam had recounted several stories about
his actions that were congruent with these positive conclusions about
his identity This question was a landscape of action question that
encouraged Penny and Liam to link these stories to a theme and that
called for a naming of this theme. The "salvaging life" theme that
Liam gave voice to constituted a counterplot, as it contrasted
significantly with the plot of the dominant storyline: paralysis in life.


Accords value
to; Pennys life


Initiative characterized as:
reaching out


“Account of: disclosure
i
Account of: Liam's
to cousin expression ol concern


Recent History Present Near Future

[PAGE 037]

M: (Figure 2.11) Okay. It's about salvaging life. Okay, this says
a lot to me. Penny, what's your guess about what this suggests
to me about what Liam is aspiring to?

This was a landscape of identity question that encouraged further
reflection on the counterplot of Liam's life in the generation of more
of the sort of identity conclusions that were emergent in the
subordinate storyline development. The response to this question
established that Liam had strong beliefs about what is not okay that
he had a knowledge about what makes life worthwhile. This
allowed his dreams about what life should be about to become
more clearly defined.

[PAGE 038]

fentional understanding: dreams
of what life should be about ;
value to: beliefs about what is okay Accords value
dee of: what makes life worthwhile to: Penny’s life

A PAS
Mo developments in the landscape
on of the subordinate storyline)


Account of: disclosure Account of: Liam's
to cousin expression of concerm


Recent History Present Near Future


M: (Figure 2.12) That fits too. I have a question. The things that we've been
learning about you, about what's important to you, about what you've held
onto despite what you've been through, about dreams about what life should
all be about, about how this is all about salvaging life. If you were able to keep
this knowledge about your life close to you, to draw support from this, what's
your guess about what this would make possible for you? What is your guess
about what this would make possible for you to do? What steps could you
take that would fit with this?
In this question I summarized the identity conclusions that had been named in
the course of our conversation, and I invited Liam and Penny to speculate about
possibilities for action in his life that would be in harmony with these conclusions.
This was a landscape of action question that encouraged the sketching of the
subordinate storyline into the near future. In response to this, Liam embraced a
proposal to contact Daniel, an old school friend whom he'd not seen for 18
months.


itional understanding: dreams
what life should be about
gue to; beliefs about what is okay Accords value
d of what makes life worthwhile to: Penny's life


landscape of action
question (referenced to
mn des elopments in the
landscape of identity of
the subordinate
sturvline en


"Account of: disclosure Account of: Liam's Account of: proposal
to cousin expression of concern to contact Daniel

Recent History Present Near Future
J

[PAGE 039]

Figure 2.13 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding: dreams
Landscape of Identity of what life should be about Accords value to: fai
—intentional understandings Accords valueto: justice Internal understanding:
—understanding about what is A
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges ES 2
Initiative characterized as:
Landscape of Action act of rescue
—events eo
—cireumstances y
—sequence Account of: school Account of: pitching
—time lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History


M: (Figure 2.13) What sort of step would this be if you took
it? Would you say it was a step in rescuing, protesting, or
reaching out? Or something else?
This was a landscape of action question that invited Liam to name
the step that Penny had proposed and that he had embraced. This was
distinguished as a further step in reaching out.


Figure 2.14 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Liam)
Intentional understanding:
2 drearns
Landscape of Identity of what life should be about Accords value to: fai
— intentional understandings Accords value to; justice Internal understanding: cou
A
accorded value
—understanding about what is

— internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges
id Initiative characterized as:
Landscape of Action ack pe Initiative
—events Pad act ol m
—circumstances 4
— sequence Account ol; school Account of: pitching
—Aime lunchroom episode rock through window
—plot
Remote History Distant History

[PAGE 040]

understanding: dreams
e should be about
tii: beliefs about what is okay Accords value
makes life worthwhile to; Penny’s life


Proposd initiative characterized


sunt of: disclosure Account of; Liam's Account of: proposal
to cousin expression of concern to contact Daniel

nt History Present Near Future
1 =


M: (Figure 2.14) Penny, if you witnessed Liam taking this step
to contact Daniel, what would this suggest to you about his
purposes in doing this?
This was landscape of identity question that invited reflection on
the reaching-out initiative that had been proposed. This question
engaged Penny in the generation of more of the sort of positive
identity conclusions that characterized the subordinate storyline.


® understanding: dreams Intentional understanding;
hat life should be about «wanting to be more connected
ne to: beliefs about what is okay Accords value with hopes
of what makes life worthwhile
«a


to: Penny’s life —plans for the future
7

landscape of identity question
(referenced to deveiopments in the land-
scape of action of the subordinate storyline)

Proposd initiative characterized
as reaching out


t of: disclosure Account of: Liam's Account of: proposal
to cousin expression of concern to contact Daniel

Recent History Present Near Future
Y

[PAGE 041]

98 Maps of Narrative Practice


This zigzagging movement through time is characteristic of reauthoring conversations. In the context of this movement,
subordinate storylines become deeply rooted in history and are
thickened.
There is a regularity in this example that is not found in all reauthoring conversations; landscape of action and landscape of identity
questions do not always follow each other in such an orderly fashion.
There were many other options for rich story development in this
conversation with Liam and Penny, and I believe that at various points
it would have been equally viable for me to ask a series of landscape of
action questions before another landscape of identity question. For
example, I might have asked more questions about precursors to the
rock-throwing incident that might have provided an account of the
foundations of this action. Perhaps this would have provided another
route to the story of the school lunchroom. I might have also initiated
an inquiry into the specific links between the lunchroom, rockthrowing, and reaching-out incidents—for example, about how each
incident was linked to and might have led to the next—before
introducing further landscape of identity questions.
These considerations about some of the other options for rich story
development underscore the fact that the options I chose were not the
correct options, but rather just the ones that seemed most available at
the time of this conversation. I did not prepare any of my questions in
advance; these questions were responses to Penny and Liam's
responses. Had I met with Liam and Penny on a different day, the
circumstances would not have been identical, and I have no doubt
that the route taken in our conversation would have been different.
Regardless of the route taken, the re-authoring conversations map
can be a very helpful guide in the journey of therapeutic
conversations, leading to destinations wherein subordinate storylines
are richly drawn. For Liam, this provided a foundation of
knowledge upon which he could proceed with his life. Liam was now
in a position to speculate about actions that he might take that would
be in harmony with new theme and identity conclusions and that
would be congruent with what he gives value to.
Although I have continued to employ the term subordinate storyline
in the context of this discussion, as our conversations continued over

[PAGE 042]

Re-Authoring Conversations 99


several meetings it was clearly apparent that a shift had occurred in
this subordinate status. What had previously been a subordinate
storyline began to overshadow the initially dominant account of Liam's
life.


The Benefits and Purpose of Landscape of Identity
Questions


As the subordinate storyline in my therapeutic conversation with Liam
and Penny was developed, the landscapes of action and identity
supporting it were more richly drawn. With regard to the landscape
of action, this was achieved by encouraging Liam and Penny to bring
together specific events of his life into a sequence that unfolded across
time according to a valued theme. With regard to the landscape of
identity, this was achieved by inviting Liam and Penny to be witness to
these events, to reflect on them, and to give voice to understandings
about Liam's life and identity that were derived from this reflection. In
this way, the landscape of identity questions I introduced sparked a
heightened state of mental activity in Liam and Penny. Among other
things, these landscape of identity questions encouraged:


* Reflections that were expressions of subjectivity (what Liam
and Penny thought of these events), of attitude (what Liam
and Penny felt about these events), of knowledge (what
Liam and Penny learned as an outcome of this reflection),
of appearance (what Liam and Penny thought these events
showed about each other's lives), and of supposition (what
Liam and Penny foresaw with regard to the future)*


* These terms describe specific transformations of actions in literary-text storylines. These
actions occur in the landscape of consciousness. These transformations, defined by
Todorov (1977), describe states of mental activity of protagonists, which, according to
Bruner (1986, p. 30), "thicken the connective web that holds a narrative together in its
depiction of both action and consciousness." In the context of therapeutic practice,
questions about what people think of particular events ("subjectivity"), about how they
feel about particular events ("attitude"), about what they are learning as they reflect on
these events ("knowledge"), about what these events show about each other's lives
("appearance"), and about what these events foretell ("supposition") encourage landscape
of identity development and a thickening of the subordinate storyline.

[PAGE 043]

100 Maps of Narrative Practice


¢ The derivation of intentional understandings (of a range of
purposes, goals, plans, aspirations, hopes, and so on) and
of understandings that were centred on considerations of
value (of belief, principle, conviction, faith, and so on)
+ An account of the manner of engagement with these
intentional understandings and with these considerations
of value (Penny, and, ata later stage, Liam as well,
expressed enthusiasm for some of the intentions reflected
in his actions, and they were passionate about the values
expressed in this)


Another characteristic of landscape of identity questions is the use
of the subjunctive stance (Todorov, 1977). This stance is characterized
by terms like as if, perhaps, maybe, might be, possibly, and so on. For

example: "What conclusions could be arrived at in relation to this?"
"What are some of the possible understandings of this event?" "What
might this say about what it important to you?" In my conversation with
Liam and Penny, this subjunctive stance displaced the mood of
certainty and inevitability that was a pervasive feature of the accounts
of life that were given by them at the outset of our conversation. I
believe that the subjunctive stance of this inquiry had the effect of
loosening the interpretive process in Liam and Penny's minds.
Of all the responses that are invoked by landscape of identity
questions, it is the intentional understandings and understandings that
are centred on considerations of value that are the most significant
with regard to rich story development. In the following section I refer
to these together as "intentional state understandings" (following
Bruner) and contrast them with the "internal state understandings"
about human action that are more routinely part of contemporary life.


Intentional State Understandings Versus Internal State
Understandings


In my conversation with Liam and Penny, my landscape of identity
questions initially gave rise to internal state understandings of his

[PAGE 044]

Re-Authoring Conversations 101


actions. These internal state understandings featured conclusions
about his "bravery," his "strengths," and his "needs." In these
understandings, Liam's actions were interpreted as surface
manifestations of specific elements or essences that were
considered to be the bedrock of his identity—to be emanating from
the center of a "self." However, further questions gave rise to
intentional state understandings. Liams actions were increasingly
understood to be shaped by a raft of purposes, values, beliefs,
aspirations, hopes, goals, and commitments. These understandings ot
his actions were not referenced to any concept of an essential self,
but instead provided an account of what he was actively and
willfully engaging with and embracing in his acts of living. Rather
than representing his actions as essences of his identity, these
intentional understandings relate to broader considerations of life.
The intentional understandings arrived at in these conversations were

in harmony with particular themes of life to which Liam and Penny
attributed overriding importance. It is these intentional
understandings, and understandings that are centred on what people

give value to, that are highly significant in rich storyline development.

Internal State Understandings


Internal state understandings portray human action as a surface
manifestation of specific elements or essences of a self that is to
be "found" at the center of identity. For example, in the context of
internal state understandings, human expression might be interpreted
as a manifestation of any number of unconscious motives,
instincts, needs, desires, drives, dispositions, personality traits,
personal properties (like strengths and resources), and so on.
According to this tradition of understanding, these elements or
essences are universally present to different degrees in the human
condition, and life is derived from either the direct expression of
these elements or essences or from distortions of these elements and
essences. Such distortions are often called "dysfunctions" or
"disorders."
These internal state understandings are often associated with ideas
about intrapsychic processes that construct an account of the
mechanisms by which the elements and essences of the self are
trans-

[PAGE 045]

102 Maps of Narrative Practice


formed into human expression. At the turn of the 20th century, these
conceptions of internal states and intrapsychic mechanisms gave rise
to a specific concept of the "unconscious mind." This achievement
represented the culmination of a number of "modern" and interlinked
developments of the preceding century or two, which included:


¢ The development of humanist notions of the presence of
a human "nature" that is considered to be the foundation
of personal existence and that is understood to provide the
source of human expression.
¢ The evolution of the concept of a "self" as an essence that
is understood to occupy the center of personal identity.
Although this idea of a self is a relatively novel idea in the
history of the world's cultures, it has been a hugely suc
cessful idea and is today quite taken for granted in the
West.

¢ The progressive development, from the 17th century on,
of a new system of social control in which "normalizing
judgment" steadily displaced moral judgment.*


Over the past century, these internal state understandings of
human expression have become pervasive in Western culture—so
much so that internal state understanding have achieved a taken-forgranted status in much of the professional and popular psychology of
this current era. It is now routinely believed that these elements and
essences of the self are ever-present in people's lives, to be discovered


* Michel Foucault, a historian of systems of thought, provided an account of the rise of
"modern power" over the past several centuries. He asserted that this has become a
principal system of social control in contemporary Western culture. This system of social
control incites people to enact "normalizing judgment" on themselves and on others in
an effort to reproduce specific norms about life and identity. In other words, people become
accomplices to a system of social control in which they exercise and act upon judgments
about life according to established norms about behavior and identity. According to
Foucault, these norms have been principally constructed by the professional disciplines
(law, medicine, psychology, and so on). This system of social control has significantly
displaced a system of social control that subjects people to moral judgment by
representatives of state institutions.

[PAGE 046]

Re-Authoring Conversations 103


and revealed in the context of personal development and in the

context of addressing the problems of living.

Intentional State Understandings


In contrast to internal state conceptions, intentional state conceptions
of identity are distinguished by the notion of "personal agency." This
notion casts people as active mediators and negotiators of life's
meanings and predicaments, both individually and in collaboration

with others. It also casts people as the originators of many of the
preferred developments of their own lives: People are living out their
lives according to intentions that they embrace in the pursuit of what
they give value to in life; they are going about the business of actively
shaping their existence in their effort to achieve sought-after goals.
According to Bruner (1990), the significance that is assigned to
notions of intention and purpose, the weight that is given to notions
of values, beliefs, and commitments, and the emphasis that is given to
personal agency constitute a theory of mind that is characteristic of a
centuries-old tradition of folk psychology:


All cultures have as one of their most powerful constitutive
instruments a folk psychology, a set of more or less
connected, more or less normative descriptions about
how human beings "tick," what our own and other minds
are like, what one can expect situated action to be like,
what are possible modes of life, how one commits
oneself to them, and so on. . . . Coined in derision by the
new cognitive scientists for its hospitality toward such
intentional states as beliefs, desires, and meanings, the
expression of "folk psychology" could not be more
appropriate, (pp. 35-36)


According to this definition, people routinely employ folk
psychology in making their way through everyday life. People put the
intentional state notions of folk psychology into service in their effort
to understand their own lives and make sense of the actions of
others. The intentional state notions of folk psychology equip people
with a

[PAGE 047]

104 Maps of Narrative Practice


range of notions about what makes people "tick" and provides a
foundation for their responses to the actions of others.
The intentional state notions of folk psychology also come to the
fore in people's efforts to make out just what it is that is going on in
the world more generally. Bruner (1990) illustrated the way that these
intentional state understandings shape people's endeavour to come to
terms with the unexpected in life, provide a basis for their effort to
address obstacles and crises, and make it possible for them to come
to terms with a range of predicaments and dilemmas that confront
them in everyday life.
Bruner traced the history of the displacement, in professional and
popular psychology, of these intentional state understandings about
life and identity through the end of the 18th century and the
beginning of the 19th century. In this development, the mind of folk
psychology significantly gave way to the "unconscious mind" of the
internal state psychologies.


In drawing this distinction between internal state understandings and

intentional state understandings, and in privileging the development
of intentional state understandings in re-authoring conversations, I
am not dismissing internal understandings of life and identity. There
are many cherished internal understandings of life that are quite
beautiful and that can be seen to have positive consequences. In the
context of therapeutic conversations, these understandings can be
honored.
However, these internal understandings are unlikely to yield the
sort of rich story development that is routinely an outcome of the
generation of intentional state understandings. This is because
internal understandings tend to:


¢ Diminish the sense of personal agency (according to
internal understandings, people's lives are lived by the
elements and essences of the self, not shaped by
actions taken under the influence of the intentions and
values that one is embracing)

[PAGE 048]

Re-Authoring Conversations 105


¢ Be isolating (according to internal understandings, human
expression is conceived as one of a singular self, not as an
expression of life that is the outcome of the story of one's

life being linked with stories of the lives of others around

shared and valued themes)
¢ Discourage diversity (internal understandings are shaped
by global norms about life that promote a modern ideal of
the "encapsulated self—one that valorizes notions of self-
possession, self-containment, self-reliance, and self-actu
alization)


Re-authoring conversations usually exhibit a drift toward the
generation of identity conclusions associated with intentional state
understandings, irregardless of the starting conditions. In my reauthoring conversation with Liam and his mother, this drift was
accentuated by the shape of my questions, which were biased toward
soliciting the more intentional understandings of Liam's actions:
"What did this suggest to you about what was important to Liam? Or
about what was precious to him?" "What's your guess about what this
reflects in terms of what Liam values?" "Thinking back on these
events when he was 6 years old, how did this act of rescuing other
children shape your picture of him as a person?" "Penny, what's your
guess about what this suggests to me about what Liam is aspiring to?"
"Penny, if you witnessed Liam taking this step to contact Daniel, what
would this suggest to you about his purposes in doing this?" "What do
you think this would reflect about your plans for your future?"
To reiterate, this bias toward intentional state conclusions should
not suggest that internal state conclusions are wrong or invariably
unhelpful. The internal state conclusions that were generated in the

earlier part of my conversations with Liam were positive and
validating of him. However, it was the intentional state

understandings that significantly contributed to a foundation for:


¢ The development of a sense of his life being joined with
the lives of others around shared themes, which was an
anathema to his prevailing sense of isolation

[PAGE 049]

106 Maps of Narrative Practice


° An experience of being knowledged about his own life,

which was an anathema to his sense of being totally lost
when it came to matters of living
° The expression of emotional responses to some of the neg
lected but significant events of his life, which was an
anathema to the flatness of affect that was characteristic
of his existence
e Speculation about how his life and his identity might
appear to others, which was an anathema to his sense of
invisibility

° Supposition that included speculation about actions that
might be available to him and that would be harmony with
what he gave value to, which was an anathema to his sense
of hopelessness and futility
° The expression of his manner of engagement with these
intentions and values, which was an anathema to his sense
of despondency


Apart from this, the intentional state understandings that were
generated in our conversation provided Liam with a sense of personal
agency, which was an anathema to his prevailing sense of paralysis.
They also provided a foundation for the expansion of a preferred sense
of identity that was continuous through his past, present, and future,
which was an anathema to his conclusions about being messed up

and damaged.


Landscape of Identity: Filing Cabinets of the Mind

Readers might find it helpful to conceive of the landscape of identity
as being composed of "filing cabinets of the mind," each one
representing a category of identity that is culturally relevant. In
Western culture, this would include internal state categories like
unconscious needs, instincts, desires, drives, dispositions, personality
traits, personal properties, and so on, as well as intentional state
categories like purposes, aspirations, quests, hopes, dreams, visions,
values, beliefs,

[PAGE 050]

Re-Authoring Conversations 107


and commitments. It is into these filing cabinets of the mind that
people file a range of conclusions about their own and each other's
identities. These identity conclusions determine what significance is
given to specific events of people's lives, and they are further
developed through reflection on these events and on the themes
that these events are part of. All of these conclusions, including
those of the internal state categories, significantly influence people's
actions; they are shaping of life. Put another way, it is not actually
"things" like motives and needs that shape life, but socially
constructed conclusions about these things.
Re-authoring conversations provide the context for the generation
of many identity conclusions that contradict those associated with the
dominant storylines of people's lives. As these conclusions are entered
into "the filing cabinets of the mind," they deprive the dominant
identity conclusions of the space that they previously occupied and of
the influence that they have had in shaping people's existence.


Further Illustrations


Following are two additional accounts of re-authoring conversations. I
have not, however, provided a narrative commentary on them. Rather,
their inclusion is meant to give readers an opportunity to undertake
their own narrative analysis of these therapeutic conversations, and

then to refer to my charting of them.

Vivienne


Vivienne, a woman in her early forties, had been referred to me by her

general practitioner. This was one of the few referrals that Vivienne
had followed through on in recent years, and it had been quite an
anxiety-provoking step for her to take. She had invited her partner,
Adel, to join her for moral support. At the outset of our first
meeting, Vivienne informed me that she was a "long-term sufferer of
agoraphobia" and that on account of this she had led a very restricted
life. She had also "endured a struggle with eating disorders for 18 years," chiefly with anorexia nervosa and bulimia. I learned that Vivienne
had been

[PAGE 051]

108 Maps of Narrative Practice


resigned to living a highly circumscribed life, but that recently, with her
partner's encouragement, had decided to embark on renewed efforts
"to get her life free" of the forces that "had for so long blighted it."
By the time of our third interview, Vivienne had developed some
familiarity with aspects of her life that had previously been invisible to
her. Among other things, she had begun to speak of purposes for her
life that contradicted those associated with a reclusive existence,
personal tastes that contradicted austerity, and desires that were
quite discordant with desires incited by anorexia nervosa. It was on
this basis that Vivienne had formulated a relatively bold plan. She
had decided to initiate contact with some relatives with whom she'd
had little to do through her adult life—two aunts, an uncle, and
a cousin—and to invite them to join her and her partner for a picnic.
Vivienne had chosen these relatives because she had fond memories
of her relationship with them in her childhood.
Vivienne had decided on a picnic for three reasons. First, she had
warm memories of picnics as a child. Second, this would be in an
open space and in defiance of the lifestyle that shed been restricted
to by her agoraphobia. Third, the idea of a picnic was linked to a plan
to publicly take sustenance—Vivienne had not consumed food
publicly for over 10 years. It was her hope that the nature of the event,
a picnic, and the presence of these relatives would contribute to new
impetus to recover her life from agoraphobia and anorexia nervosa.
However, she was highly apprehensive about this proposed action and
was not at all sure that she would be able to follow through with it.
At the fourth interview, 3 weeks later, I learned that Vivienne had
followed through on her plan. The picnic had gone ahead, minus the
presence of her cousin, who had been away on vacation. Vivienne
announced that she'd not fled the open environment and had
succeeded in consuming some food. Not only this, but at the end of
this event she had announced that this had been the first occasion in
which she had publicly taken sustenance in 10 years, that she had
carefully chosen the company that she wished to be in for this step, and
that she knew that this would be conducive to her success. Her aunts
and uncle had spoken of the sense of honor they experienced in
being selected for this and about the pleasure they had taken in being
present.

[PAGE 052]

Re-Authoring Conversations 109


Although this had clearly been an achievement in Vivienne's mind,
I was concerned that this might not be sustained against all of the
forces that had been so containing of her life. So I began to interview
her about this initiative with the hope that it might become even more
weighty and be taken into the further development of the subordinate
storyline of her life.


M: This was quite some picnic! Vivienne, I think I've got a
good understanding of the significance of this
achievement. Do you have a name for this step that would
give it the recognition it deserves?


Vivienne: I don't think so. I haven't really thought about
this. I don't know what name would work.

M: I guess it wouldn't be a name that fits with what s been
happening around all of that self-doubt? With what you

described as "losing your life"?

Vivienne: No, no. Not in any way. I would say that this
was more about self-belief.

M: Self-belief! Do you have any thoughts about what this
act of self-belief made possible for you?

Vivienne: What do you mean?

M: Do you have any sense of how this act of self-belief
affected your life? Maybe in terms of how you felt about
yourself? Maybe in terms of new realizations about your
life? In terms of your connection with your aunts and
uncle? Anything at all.

Vivienne: Well, I do know one thing, and that is that it
brought me closer to my aunts and my uncle. I definitely
feel reconnected to my two aunts and my uncle. They were
so lovely. Yeah. It brought me closer to them, and closer to
Adel too.

M: Part of the outcome of this act of self-belief is that it

[PAGE 053]

110 Maps of Narrative Practice


reconnected you to people who are important to you. How

do you feel about this sort of development?

Vivienne: The only thing I can say is that I'm happy about
it, of course.

M: Could you say a little about why you are happy about
this? Anything at all that would help me understand why
this is important to you?

Vivienne: This might sound a bit strange to you, especially

since I have been so disconnected for such a long time. But
I really believe that I am a people person, I really am.

M: A people person. Tell me, what sort of things are

important to a people person?

Vivienne: Well, let's, see...


My questions engaged Vivienne in loading with significance the
action she'd taken in organizing the picnic and following through on
her plan. However, I predicted that the status of these steps would be
tenuous if they were not taken into a storyline of her life. For
example, the step could be judged to be a "one-off" initiative, perhaps
fortuitous or born of chance, or the outcome of unusual
circumstances.
This tenuous status renders such steps vulnerable and unlikely to
provide the foundation of enduring change. Therefore, I began to ask
some questions to encourage Vivienne to take these steps into a
storyline of her life. Initially these were very straightforward landscape
of action questions that encouraged her to bring forth the recent
history of this act of self-belief: "Do you have any idea of what you
might have done to pave the way for this act of self-belief?" "Perhaps
you might be able to think of something that helped you to prepare
the ground for this?" "Would you reflect on events leading up to this
step and talk about any that might have been implicated in this?"
Suddenly we were in a conversation about the events and
circumstances leading up to the picnic, and this included the steps
that Vivienne had taken to keep her anxiety at bay before calling her
rela-

[PAGE 054]

Re-Authoring Conversations 111


tives about the picnic invitation. This review of the recent history of
these steps also contributed to a dramatic rendering of the events of
the picnic itself, including the moments of crisis that Vivienne went
through in the act of joining others in eating and the action that she
took to address these moments of crisis. As these steps were being
taken into a sequence of events unfolding through time, I asked
Vivienne what name she would give to this development in her life: "I
am getting a clearer picture of what led up to this act of self-belief.
What are your thoughts about what would be a good overall name for
this development? If these steps are part of a course in your life, what
would you call this course?" In response to these questions, Vivienne
concluded that this was about "reclaiming my life."
At the next meeting our conversations again turned to the events of
the picnic, and the time seemed ripe to extend our re-authoring
conversation:


M: Vivienne, I had some questions about what these
developments in reclaiming your life might say about who
you are as a person.


Vivienne: Well... I don't know. I really don't think
that I've got an answer to that.

M: Perhaps I could askAdel.

Vivienne: Okay, that's fine.


M: Adel, I would be interested to have your reflections on
the picnic event. You might have some thoughts about what
Vivienne was drawing upon in taking these steps. Or maybe
some thoughts about what sustained her in following
through on this. Or you might have some ideas about what
this could say about what is important to Vivienne.
Anything like this.

Adel: Yeah, actually, I've got quite a few ideas about this.
But what comes to me first is that this says a lot about
Vivienne's perseverance and willpower.

[PAGE 055]

112 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: Perseverance and willpower. Vivienne, can you relate to
Adel's thoughts on this?

Vivienne: Well, I guess so. But these wouldn't be my

words.

M: Do you have some other words?

Vivienne: I can't think of any. But I guess I can connect to
what Adel is saying.

M: Okay. Perseverance and willpower aren't your words,
but you can connect to them.

Vivienne: Yeah.

M: I'm curious about how it is that you can connect to
these words. Have you witnessed anything else happening
in your life in recent times that might also be a reflection
of perseverance and willpower?

Vivienne: Well... I'm trying to think of... maybe...

.No, that's not an example.

Adel: I can think of something. The weekend before last
we were talking about what we would do on Saturday
afternoon. Michael, we nearly always spend Saturday
afternoon together, just the two of us. It's our time.
Anyway, I was talking about some gardening that needed
to be done, and I remember Vivienne saying something
like: "Yes, that is a good idea, but I am a different person,
and I have some other ideas." (turning to Vivienne) And 1
don't recall you ever saying anything like that before.

Vivienne: No, I haven't. I'm sure I haven't. I mean I am

sure I haven't said anything like that before.

M: This fits with what Adel was saying about perseverance
and willpower?

Vivienne: I think it must.

[PAGE 056]

Re-Authoring Conversations 113


M: I wonder what else this "I'm a different person, and I

have other ideas" says about you, or about your relationship
with Adel. Do you have any thoughts about this? About
what this could reflect about what's important to you? Or
about your relationship with Adel?

Vivienne: I guess . . . yeah, I guess that it maybe says

that I am valuing myself a bit. Or beginning to at least.
Perhaps that I'm not just totally nowhere.

M: You gave your opinion, so...


Vivienne: So maybe I am valuing my opinions more, that

my opinion is worth something at least.

M: Like you havea...


Vivienne: Like I have a mind of my own, and I am valuing
this more.

M: Adel?

Adel: I agree with this. It has to be about Vivienne valuing

her opinions more, about valuing her own mind. I think it
is also about where we have got to in our relationship.

M: In what sense?


Adel: The trust, I mean. That Vivienne could trust that she

could say this to me.

M: So it's also a reflection of trust in your relationship. Of
a relationship of trust?

Vivienne: Yeah, that's true.


M: And trust has always been...

Vivienne: I honestly can't think of anything that is more
important to me.

M: Apart from Adel, can you think of anyone else who-has
recognized this perseverance and willpower in you? Or who

[PAGE 057]

114 Maps of Narrative Practice


has appreciated you valuing your opinions and your mind?
Or who would be aware of the importance of trust to you?

Vivienne: Helen would have. (Helen was Vivienne's older
sister by 4 years. She committed suicide when she was
16 years old. Until that time, she'd done what she could
to protect Vivienne from the abuses that she herself was
also being subjected to.)

Adel: Yeah, Helen for sure. From what I know about her at
least.

M: Would it be okay ifI asked some questions about
Helen, and maybe about your relationship with Helen? (I
had already learned a little about Helen in my second
meeting with Vivienne and Adel.)

Vivienne: This used to be hard for me to talk about, and
it might still be. But right now I think it would be okay. No,
right now I'd welcome it even if it is hard.

M: If Helen could be here and part of this conversation,
and if I asked her to tell me a story about you when you
were little, a story about your perseverance and willpower,
or about you valuing your opinions, or about the
importance of trust to you, what do you reckon we would
be hearing?

Vivienne: Helen really looked out for me, and she would
probably tell lots of stories.

M: Which one is most present in your mind right now?

Vivienne: She'd probably tell you about some of the
trouble I got into at school. I remember that everything was
just too much for me and I wasn't really coping with
anything. All it took to send me over the top was a mean
schoolteacher, and I had this really mean teacher in
seventh grade, and one day I just lost it. I went totally
wild, and I can't even remember much about what I did,
except that I

[PAGE 058]

Re-Authoring Conversations 115


just tore everything up and wrecked the classroom. But I
do remember that I got sent to the principal and had to
stand there for what seemed like hours to think about what
I'd said and done and about how I would fix it. But I

wouldn't agree that I was the one in the wrong. And then
suddenly Helen turned up. How she found out about this
I don't know, because the senior school was a whole block
away. Anyway, she started going for the principal. You know
what I mean. Telling the principal where to go and how to
manage his teachers, about what a disgrace his school was,
and so on. Then she went to hit him, and wow, before long
it was like a riot. I'd joined in too, and there were people
everywhere all of a sudden and all sorts of things

happening, and it seemed to go on forever. We sure got
into a lot of bother over this, from my father as well.

M: That's a very moving story.

Adel: Yeah. I haven't heard all of these details before.

Vivienne: It hasn't been in my mind. Maybe I haven't

wanted to think about it because things just went from bad
to worse after that.

M: What's your guess about what Helen appreciated about
you back then?

Vivienne: I don't have to guess. I know that she

appreciated how determined I was not to give in.

M: And about your mind?

Vivienne: Yeah. I'm sure she'd say that she appreciated the
fact that I had my own mind.

M: What do you think this event might have told Helen
about what is important to you, or about what you wanted
for your life?

Vivienne: About what I would have wanted? About what's

[PAGE 059]

116 Maps of Narrative Practice


important to me? Well, I'm thinking about the trust thing.
It was so strongly there between the two of us. And maybe
the fact that I wouldn't give in. Helen would say that this
meant that I was holding onto some fantasy about what life
could be.

M: Fantasy? Any other word?

Vivienne: Yeah. "Hope" would be better.

M: Could I ask some questions about that hope?

Vivienne: Sure.


The details about the events surrounding the crisis at school, and
about how they might have confirmed some of Helen's conclusions
about Vivienne's identity, marked the beginning of a deeply moving
remembering conversation. I will not provide the details of this here,
as the subject of re-membering conversations is covered in the next
chapter of this book.
At the end of this conversation, I asked Vivienne to speculate about
what might be possible for her if what Helen knew about her identity
was more available to her to draw on in taking further steps in the
reclaiming her life. I also consulted both Vivienne and Adel about


Figure 2.15 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (Vivienne)
8. Intentional understanding
holding onto a fantasy about life
-maintaining relationship with hope
Landscape of Identity 7. Accords value to: one’s own mind
—intentional understandings 6. Internal understanding: determination
—understanding about what is !
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges


Landscape of Action
—events

—CIrcumstances

— sequence 5. Account of:
—time the school riot
—plot
Remote History Distant History

[PAGE 060]

Re-Authoring Conversations 117


what circumstances might be arranged that would be favorable to
Vivienne's desire to stay in touch with this knowledge about her
identity. In response to these questions, Vivienne named three steps
that would be congruent with what Helen knew about her, and they
both had some thoughts about what would make it possible for
Vivienne to keep this knowledge about her identity close to her in
the coming weeks. At the next meeting I learned that Vivienne had
taken two of these steps.
Over a period of 18 months we had many more conversations that
contributed to the further development of the landscapes of action
and identity of the subordinate storyline characterized by the
"reclaiming my life" theme. This took in many of Vivienne's initiatives
in challenging the restrictions of agoraphobia and the dictates of
anorexia nervosa. At the 18-month follow-up I learned that Vivienne
had established a life for herself "out there in the world" from which
she was drawing pleasure, and although she still struggled at times
with insecurity in open spaces and with "discouraging thoughts' about
food and weight, they were no longer preoccupying concerns.
Figure 2.15 shows my charting of the re-authoring conversation
with Vivienne and Adel. The up arrows indicate landscape of
identity questions and the down arrows indicate landscape of action
questions.


Accords value to:
{nes own opinions
ones own mind 2.
1
Intentional understanding

=a relationship of trust perseverence and willpoweı

A .


3. Account of: |.
A
Account al 1, Account ol
weekend before lası the picnie episode proposal of three steps

Recent History Present Near Future

[PAGE 061]

118 Maps of Narrative Practice


David


David, age 11, and his parents, Pauline and Fred, were referred by a
social service agency that had had extensive involvement with this
family. In response to yet another crisis precipitated by David's
actions, Pauline and Fred were close to the conclusion that nothing
more could be done to resolve this situation, and they were seriously
considering "bailing out"—seeking alternative living arrangements for
David, away from the family home. Early in our first meeting there
was an opportunity to engage in an externalizing conversation about
trouble and its effects on the lives and relationships of these family
members. In this conversation Pauline and Fred, and then David as
well, spoke fully of their experience of this trouble.
Once this externalizing conversation was well established—when
"trouble" was not collapsed so solidly onto David's identity—
circumstances were right for the identification of some of the events
of his life that contradicted trouble's agenda. In response to my
questions about this, Fred told me a story about a recent family
visit to the beach. Fred had met an old friend there, and they'd been
locked in absorbing reminiscences for some time. Toward the end
of this exchange, Fred suddenly become aware of the circumstances
that had made this possible—he wasn't constantly being called upon to
address the trouble that David usually got into on these occasions.


M: Please say a bit more about why you are telling me
about this?

Fred: Well, I hadn't seen Geoff for nearly 20 years, and
he'd been my best friend when I was young. The only
reason we got to have such a good talk about old times
was that David wasn't so much into trouble. This didn't
really occur to me until the end.

M: David, do you remember this? This day at the beach?

David: Yep.

M: So, what was going on for you?

[PAGE 062]

Re-Authoring Conversations 119


David: Dunno.


M: What do you think, Fred? What's your guess about
what was going on for David?

Fred: Well, maybe it was just one of those things that

come along once in a while. For some reason David was
just getting along with everyone. It just seemed to come out
of the blue. But it sure was nice.

M: Pauline, what do you think about this?


Pauline: I don't know. I wasn't there at the time.

M: David, on this day at the beach, were you there for
trouble, or were you there for something else?

David shrugs.

M: (turning to Fred) Do you think that David was there for
trouble, or do you think that he was there for something
else?

Fred: Something else, I guess.


M: Pauline?

Pauline: Yeah. I'd say that. He was there for something

else.

M: (referring to understandings derived in the earlier
externalizing conversation) Let's go back to what we figured
out about trouble, about what trouble was out for. To wreck
friendships with other kids. To paint a negative picture of
David in everybody's eyes, and in his own eyes. To build a

bad reputation for him that puts everyone off. To create
hardship in David's connection with his mum and dad. To
demoralize David's father. To...

Fred: Well, obviously it didn't succeed this time, so that's
something. But then, it was only for one day, and then-not
even a whole day. Just an hour or two.

[PAGE 063]

120 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: However long it was, if David wasn't there for trouble,
what was he doing there?

Fred: Well, I guess what happened is that David just
resisted trouble for a while. He must have resisted the
trouble.

M: That's your guess. That this was about resistance?

Fred: On this occasion I would say so. Yes, I'd say it fits.
But I'd sure like to see more of this.

M: David, does this fit for you? Were you resisting trouble
on that day at the beach?

David nods yes.


M: Do you know what your father means by using the word
resistance}


David shakes his head no.


M: Would you define this for David? Would you spell it out
for him?

Fred: Well, its like this David...


Fred provided David with an account of what he meant by
resistance, which included some practical examples of actions that
typified this. It became quickly apparent that David was rather taken
with this description. I then asked him if he thought that "resisting

trouble" was a reasonable characterization of his actions at the beach,
and he didn't hesitate in confirming this. This response led us into a

conversation about the actual and potential consequences of this
expression of resistance in David's life and in his relationship with his
parents and others.
As the events of this recent visit to the beach had now been
rendered newly significant, I began to ask questions that I hoped
would assist David and his parents in taking these events into a
storyline:


M: I'm curious, David. How did you manage to resist
trouble at the beach in the way that you did?

[PAGE 064]

Re-Authoring Conversations 121


David shrugs.


M: Can you think of anything that happened before this

that could have prepared the way for you to resist trouble?
Can you think of anything that might have helped you get
ready to resist trouble?


David shakes his head no.

M: (turning to Pauline and Fred) Did you see anything
in David's life in the lead-up to this that might have paved

the way for him to resist trouble at the beach? Anything
that might have given him a foundation for this, that would
have helped him to get ready for this?

Pauline: Nothing that I can think of. We have had a hell
of a rough ride with David, and it has been even worse over
the last year or so. We haven't seen any real smooth
patches, if that's what you're looking for.

M: Fred?

Fred: I can't think of anything either. Like I said, it's just
one of those things, I guess.

M: So neither of you saw anything that could have

prepared you for what David did at the beach?


Pauline: No, not me.


Fred: Nope.


M: David, if no one saw anything, could it be that you
secretly got ready to resist trouble, and then just surprised
everyone with this?


David shrugs.

M: I am asking you about any secret preparations, because
it was a surprise to everyone, wasn't it?

David now grins and nods yes.

[PAGE 065]

122 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: What does that nod mean, David?

David: It was a secret.


M: Well who would have guessed that?!

Fred: We should have! (Pauline laughs.)

M: Okay, David, let us in on the secret. How did you get
ready for this? What did you get up to?

David: Well, I... um... I... Actually it was on the
Sunday before. I'd got into the worst trouble on Saturday,
and I'd got up late.

Pauline: Yeah, that's right. We'd had the police around and
everything. It was terrible!

M: Sure doesn't sound good. Back to you, David.

David: It was the Sunday, and I'd got up late, see. And I
looked in the mirror in the bathroom, and there I was
looking back, and I sure didn't look too good. So, I looked
down at the sink, and then up at the mirror again, and said
to myself: "Son, you've got to do something about this,
your life is going down the drain."

Pauline and Fred look at each other quizzically.

M: And that was the start of it!


David: Yep.


M: That's something! And how did this prepare you for
resisting trouble at the beach?

David: Don't know. But it must have.

M: (turning to Pauline and Fred) What do you think was the
link between what David did on that Sunday morning and
what he did in resisting trouble at the beach a week later?


In response to this question, Pauline and Fred began to speculate

[PAGE 066]

Re-Authoring Conversations 123


about the possible links between these two events. David subsequently
confirmed some of this speculation. It was in this speculation, and in
David's confirmation, that his actions in resisting trouble at the beach
were taken into a sequence of events unfolding across a week's time.

These actions at the beach were no longer singular, but had been
incorporated into an emergent storyline. With this development, the
time seemed ripe for me to ask David to name the associated theme or
plot.


M: All right, we're now all getting a little more clarity on
these events in David's life. David, I know that for you the
word resistance is a good word for what you did at the
beach. But is there another word that would be a good
word for all of this, from what you did on the Sunday
morning right up to resisting trouble at the beach? Maybe
there is another word for what you were doing for your own
life.


David shrugs.


M: This wasn't about going along with trouble. It wasn't
about going in trouble's direction, was it?

David: Nope.


M: Well, if it was a different direction, what would be a

good name for this direction? Just a guess?

David: Um...um... it's about, I think it's about making

a comeback. That's what I'd say.

M: Making a comeback from trouble. So that's what it is

all about!

David: Yeah.


M: (turning to Fred and Pauline) Did you know this?

Fred: Sure didn't.

Pauline: Neither did I. This is something that I thought
I'd never hear.

[PAGE 067]

124 Maps of Narrative Practice


M: So, it's a surprise, and because of this my next question
might be a bit difficult to answer.


Fred: Okay. Let's have it.

M: What does David's decision to make a comeback say to
you about him? Does it affect your picture of him in any
way? Or does it suggest something to you about what he
really wants for his life?

Pauline: It says something to me about his determination,
which I know he's always had. He's really a pretty gritty kid.
But the difference is that he had this working for him, not so
much against him. Yeah. And not so much against us, either.

M: What are your thoughts on this, Fred?

Fred: Well, I don't know . . . but I'll take a punt on it. It is
about David trying for something. I guess trying to make
something of his life so that he can get ahead, so that he
can have friends, so that he can make something different
happen in his life.

M: David, how's that? Do you think that your mum and dad
are getting this right about your determination working for
you, not against you and them? And what do you think of
what your father said about making something of your life?

David: Yep. That's it.

M: What's this like for you? I mean, what's it like for you

that your parents are getting things right about you?

David grins.

M: (turning to Pauline and Fred) What is it like for the two
of you to find that you are getting some things right about
David?

Pauline: This is a surprise too. It'd take us a long time to
get used to this. But it's good, really good. If only there
could be more of it.

[PAGE 068]

Re-Authoring Conversations 125


Fred: Yeah, I'd say that.

M: I was just wondering whether the developments we've
been talking about are totally new in David's life, or
whether they can be traced back to other events.

Fred: What are you thinking about?

M: Well, I was wondering whether you could tell me any
stories from David's younger life that might fit with this
determination and this wish to make something of his life.
Or perhaps other stories about secret preparations, or

perhaps about making an earlier comeback? Anything like
this.

Fred: Hearing you ask this makes me think of a time when
he was just a little kid, 5, maybe, or nearly 6 years old. You'd
remember, Pauline. I think it was on a Sunday, around
lunchtime. I was cooking lunch, and we heard David calling
out for us from the street. He was yelling. I thought, what
trouble is he in now? So we ran out there, and what did we
see? David was riding this enormous two-wheeler bike up
the street, swinging all over the place, looking as dangerous
as hell. And then what does he do? He lets go of the handle
bars and calls out, "Look, no hands!" We were petrified.

Pauline: And we were surprised, too, because we didn't
know he could ride a two-wheeler.

M: Secret training?

Pauline: Yeah, secret training again. And a whole lot of
determination for something.

David was grinning and clearly enjoying the recounting of
this story.

Fred: There was something else about that that we won't
go into right now.

M: What's that?

Fred: (endeavouring to be gracious) We won't talk about

[PAGE 069]

126 Maps of Narrative Practice


where the bike came from. It wasn't David's, and he didn't
have any friends with bikes like this.

David now looks sheepish but clearly is still delighted with
the recounting of this story.

M: David, was it your plan to surprise your parents?

David: I think so.

M: And do you agree with them that this shows how you

can get your determination working for you, and that you
can make something of your life?

David grins and nods.

M: Okay, let me ask you some more questions about what
this says about you, and about how you want your life to be.
And I'll ask your mum and dad to help out as we go along.


These questions prompted a conversation that gave rise to several
more identity conclusions that contradicted those shaped by all of the
trouble that had so closely pursued David's life. These conclusions
provided a foundation for questions about more stories of David's life
that were confirming of them. David also began to initiate some of this
storytelling. Before long I was engaging David and his parents in
specula-


Figure 2.16 Charting Re-Authoring Conversations (David)

9. Intentional understanding:
Landscape of Identity making something of life

dans understandings 8. Internal understanding: determination

— understanding about what is A
accorded value
—internal understandings
—realizations, learnings,
knowledges


Landscape of Action
—events

—<circumstances
—sequence 7. Account of:
—time bicycle adventure
—plot


Remote History Distant History

[PAGE 070]

Re-Authoring Conversations 127


tive conversations about the near future of these developments: "David,
if you were going to build on this comeback, if you were going to go
further with it after leaving here, what do you reckon your next step
could be? And if it is okay with you I will ask your mum and dad to
help us out with their ideas. But in the end, it will really be up to you."
With his parent's assistance, David came up with a number of ideas
about how to extend his comeback from trouble. He also said that he
had some other ideas, but that these were secret. I asked Pauline and
Fred for their thoughts about what they might do to provide a good
climate for David to get to work on these ideas for extending his
comeback from trouble, and then I checked this out with David. I
made it clear that I had no expectation whatsoever with regard to
David's acting on any of these ideas.
Over a series of meetings, David did extend on these initiatives and
succeeded in his comeback from trouble. Along the way, Fred and
Pauline took a turn in surprising him—they undertook some quite
unexpected and positive actions in ensuring that he had a supportive
climate that was favorable to the pursuit of this comeback. At the 6-
and 18-month follow-ups, I learned that, apart from a few hiccups,
things were working out well for David and his parents.
Figure 2.16 shows my charting of the re-authoring conversation
with David and his parents. The up arrows indicate landscape of
identity questions and the down and horizontal arrows indicate
landscape of action questions.


6. Intentional! understandings
making something of life
getting ahead
-making something different happen
5 Internal understanding determination



3. Account of
een:
|. Account of: trauble-
AR
10. Account of
secret preparations free beach incident proposal to extend on
2. Characterization of making a comeback
initiative: resisting from trouble
trouble
| J
4. Counterplot named: making a comeback from trouble

Recent History Present Near Future

[PAGE 071]

128 Maps of Narrative Practice


Conclusion

In this chapter I have presented a re-authoring conversations map of narrative practice. This map is
founded upon a text analogy that represents stories as composed of a "landscape of action" and a
"landscape of consciousness." This re-authoring conversations map provides therapists with a guide for
shaping therapeutic conversations that redevelop the subordinate storylines of people's lives. It is the
redevelopment of these subordinate storylines that provides people with a foundation to proceed to
address their predicaments and problems in ways that are in harmony with the precious themes of their
lives. These precious themes become more richly known in the course of re-authoring conversations.
The re-authoring conversations map has been a mainstay of my therapeutic practice for many years.
I have never been short on curiosity about the events of life, or on enthusiasm for rich conversations
about life. The narrative analysis of story-making has continued to fuel this curiosity and I find that I am
ever-more intrigued by life and enthusiastic about therapeutic practice.
In writing this chapter it was my hope to provide a relatively comprehensive account of "the
imaginative application of the narrative mode" in therapeutic practice. As I have drawn significantly
from the work of Jerome Bruner in developing this map, it seems fitting to close this chapter with the
following quote, which captures the sentiment associated with the narrative practices that I have been
describing here.
The imaginative application of the narrative mode leads . . . to good stories, gripping drama,
believable . . . historical accounts. It deals in human or human-like intention and action and
the vicissitudes and consequences that mark their course. It strives to put its timeless
miracles into the particularities of experience, and to locate the experience in time and place.
Joyce thought of the particularities of the story as epiphanies of the ordinary. (Bruner, 1986, p.
13)
