[PAGE 001]

YOU ARE THE ONE
YOU'VE BEEN WAITING FOR

BRINGING COURAGEOUS LOVE

TO INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS


. SCHWARTZ

[PAGE 002]

Lovingly dedicated to my parents

Gen and Ted Schwartz

my biggest mentors and tor-mentors


Copyright © 2008 by Richard C. Schwartz
Trailheads Publications”
Publishing Division of The Center for Self Leadership, P.C.


Without prejudice, all rights reserved.


No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without written
permission from the author. Published by Trailheads Publications, The Center
for Self Leadership, P.C., Post Office Box 3969, Oak Park, Illinois 60303.


ISBN: 978-0-615-24932-2

[PAGE 003]

The words in this book are well earned. I have had

relationships with many people that could be considered intimate,

and I have learned from all of them. Some of my best teachers

have been the clients who have allowed me to experiment with

their internal and external families and who have challenged my

parts. I’m grateful to them all.

Nancy Schwartz is the non-client who taught me the most

about intimate partnerships, and suffered the most while I was

learning. I’m also extremely grateful to the many other people who

have helped me grow personally in this area and who have been

patient with my delicate exiles and tiresome protectors.

In terms of the production of this book, I am very grateful

to Kira Freed for her wonderful and painstaking copyediting and

for her generosity with her time. William Harryman also donated

time and made valuable comments on the manuscript. Karon

Brashares provided expert supervision of the whole project.

Finally, many of the ideas in this book were the product

of discussions with IFS senior trainers as we explored how to

bring IFS to couples. There were many such contributors, but

in particular I want to thank Toni Herbine-Blank, who has an

amazing intuition for these issues, and Susan McConnell, who is

wise about all kinds of things.

[PAGE 004]

Other books authored or coat u ons gen E,



Internal Family Systems Therapy

Guilford Press


Introduction to the Internal Family Systems Model

Trailheads Publications


Family Therapy: Concepts and Methods

Allyn and Bacon


The Mosaic Mind: Empowering the Tormented Selves
of Child Abuse Survivors

Trailheads Publications


Metaframeworks: Transcending the Models
of Family Therapy

Jossey-Bass


Handbook of Family Therapy
Training and Supervision

Guilford Press

[PAGE 005]

Internal Family Systems Therapy

Internal Family Systems TherapyTM is one of the fastest
growing approaches to psychotherapy. It has developed
over the past twenty years into a way of understanding and
treating human problems that is empowering, effective, and
nonpathologizing. Internal Family SystemsTM (IFS) involves
helping people heal by listening inside themselves in a new
way to different “parts’—feelings or thoughts—and, in
the process, unburdening themselves of extreme beliefs,
emotions, sensations, and urges that constrain their lives. As
they unburden, people have more access to Self, our most
precious human resource, and are better able to lead their
lives from that centered, confident, compassionate place.

[PAGE 006]

Introduction

The Three Projects 11

Romantic Rescue: Debbie’s Story 13

Becoming the Primary Caretaker ofYour Parts 15

The Self 18

Self-to-Self Interaction 18

Speaking for Parts 19


Chapter One (only)
Cultural Constraints to Intimacy 21

Isolation 22

Cultural Pressure for the Romantic Rescue 23

Staying Out of the Dark Sea 25

The Empty Self 27

Another Kind of Happiness 31

The Cruel Joke 33

Gender Socialization 34

Multiplicity Versus the Myth

of the Monolithic Personality 45

[PAGE 007]

INTRODUCTION


The time will come

when, with elation,

you will greet yourself arriving

at your own door, in your own mirror,

and each will smile at the others welcome

and say, sit here. Eat.

You will love again the stranger who was your self.

Give wine. Give bread. Give back your heart

to itself, to the stranger who has loved you

all your life, whom you have ignored

for another...


—Derek Walcott, Collected Poems

[PAGE 008]

It’s my first session with Ken and Linda. Linda breaks the

early tension by stating that they are desperate and I may be their

last hope. They have been miserable for four years and have gone

through three other marital therapists, as well as several weekend

retreats for couples. Religiously they practice the communication

skills they have been taught and sometimes find them helpful

in the moment, but the structure falls apart once either of them

touches a sore spot in the other. In therapy, they have even found

livable compromises to several chronic issues, but their overall

dissatisfaction with each other hasn't really changed.

Ken concurs, adding that he feels helpless and despairing.

Hed had many relationships but waited to marry until he felt

totally sure that he'd found the right partner. He says, “We were so

in love, have so much in common, and are both intelligent. Why

isn't this working? Pve always succeeded in my life. When I find

something I want and work hard to get it, I succeed. When I face

a problem head-on, I can solve it. This marriage thing is my one

big failure.”

There are many couples like Ken and Linda. Earnestly

battling the demons that our culture and its relationship experts

implicate, such as poor communication and lack of empathy,

they feel bloodied and beaten by their inability to make it work.

They alternate between blaming each other and themselves for not

being able to bring harmony into their homes and satisfaction to

the most important relationship in their lives.

What if the premise itself is to blame? What if there were

[PAGE 009]

om x
ad ed o pu e > vun
ea Wen Ta pa, ad e ed a5) ll Pr reed zu Fee, oe = a ud


no way that Ken and Linda could succeed, no matter how perfect

their communication or how much they compromised and

empathized? Couples are told that if they could just accommodate

each other enough, they would be happy. Each partner is asked

what he or she needs from the other, and therapy is designed to

find ways that each can change to meet the other’s needs. What if

there is an essential flaw in this accommodation premise that sets

up couples to fail?

I believe that there is. Conditions exist within each

partner and in the context of their lives that, if left unchanged,

will preclude finding the intimate, mutually supportive, and

respectful connection they crave. This book will describe those

conditions and offer a clear path to changing them. It will help

couples replace the controlling, dependent, possessive, or distant

relating they have come to expect and dread with somethingI call

courageous love.

When each partner has courageous love for the other,

many of the chronic struggles most couples face melt away

because each partner is released from being primarily responsible

for making the other feel good. Instead, each knows how to care

for his or her own vulnerability, so neither has to force the other

into a preconceived mold or control the other’s journey.

Courageous love involves accepting all parts of the other

because there is no longer a need to keep the other in the confining

roles of parent/redeemer/ego booster/protector. The other senses

that acceptance and freedom, which feel wonderful and unusual

[PAGE 010]

to her. She comes to trust that she doesn’t have to protect herself

from you and can keep her heart open.

Thus, this ability to care for yourself emotionally permits

the intimacy you seek because you have the courage to allow your

partner to come close or get distant without overreacting. With

less fear of losing or being hurt by your partner, you can embrace

him fully and delight in his love for you.

Is this a far cry from your experience of relationship? Are

you thinking, “That sounds nice, but where am I going to find

someone who is evolved enough to treat me that way?” You may

not have to look as far as you think. If you and your partner can

take what I call a U-turn (you-turn) in your focus and begin

to relate differently inside yourselves, you will each find that

courageous love becomes a spontaneous way of life rather than

something you must strive to achieve. You will also find that your

partner doesnt have to take care of you because there is so much

support you can get from yourself,

In our second session, I proposed to Ken and Linda that

they take that U-turn, and they reacted the way most couples do

initially. Linda said, “Pm willing to look at my part in this, but

what about the way Ken digs at my self-esteem? It’s a rare day

when he doesn’t find something to criticize.” Ken was equally

resistant. “Am I supposed to work on myself so I just accept

Linda’s lack of interest in sex? Do you expect me to be okay with a

sexless marriage?”

What I propose in this book is a hard sell in our culture.

[PAGE 011]

We are primarily oriented toward getting from our partners what

we need to feel good and dont believe we can get much from

ourselves. We want to transform the source of pain in the outside

world rather than the source within us. That external focus—and

the therapies of accommodation that subscribe to it—will only

provide temporary relief at best from the inner and outer storms

that gradually erode the fertile topsoil of our relationships.

There is another way, and we will explore it in this book. Before

we do, however, let’s further examine the problems with this

accommodation premise.


The Three Projects

For reasons that will be discussed at length in the pages

to come, your partner cannot succeed in making you feel good in

a lasting way. For example, if you have had a hard life filled with

rejection and loneliness, his love can only temporarily lift the

cloud of worthlessness and self-loathing that will return whenever

he is away or in another mood. If you enter the relationship

expecting him to be that kind of redeemer, inevitably you will be

disappointed at some point.

Our culture, and many of the relationship experts in it,

have issued us faulty maps and improper tools. We've been told

that the love we need is a buried treasure hidden in the heart of a

special intimate partner. Once we find that partner, the love we

crave should flow elixir-like, filling our empty spaces and healing

our pain.

[PAGE 012]

When that love stops flowing, even momentarily, we

get scared and go to work on one of three projects. The first two

of these are designed to get our partner back into that loving

redeemer role. The third project is to give up on that endeavor and

find alternatives.

The first, and most common, project involves directly

trying to force our partner to change back. We get out the blunt

saws, scalpels, or dynamite in an attempt to break through the

crust surrounding her heart. We plead, criticize, demand,

negotiate, seduce, withhold, and shame—all in an effort to get

her to change. Most partners resist our crude attempts to perform

open-heart surgery on them. ‘They sense the implicit criticism

or manipulation behind these change attempts and become

defensive.

The second project is to use many of those same crude

tools on ourselves. First we strive to figure out what our partner

doesnt like about us and then try to sculpt ourselves into what we

think he wants, even if that is a far cry from our true nature. We

use self-criticism and shame to cut out parts of our personalities

or pounds off our bodies, hoping that if we please him, he will

love us. Because this self-transformation project isn’t authentic—

and instead is focused on manipulating our partner—it usually

backfires, too.

The final project kicks in once we give up on getting the

love we crave from our partner. At that point, we begin to close

our heart to him and: (1) search for a different partner, (2) numb

[PAGE 013]

or distract from the pain and emptiness enough to stay with the

original one, or (3) numb and distract enough to live alone.

All of these are exiling projects. In the first, we try to

get our partner to exile the parts of him that threaten us. In the

second, we work to exile the parts of us that we think he doesnt

like. In the third, we exile the parts of us that are attached to him.

As I will discuss later, whenever a relationship creates exiles, it will

pay a price.

Although couples enter therapy complaining of all kinds

of issues, usually it isn’t hard to discern some combination of these

three projects behind their dysfunctional patterns of interaction.

This is because virtually all of us carry inner vaults full of pain,

shame, and emptiness, and none of us know how to deal with

these emotions other than to numb or distract from them until we

finally get the love of that special other person.


Romantic Rescue: Debbie’s Story

Best-selling author Debbie Ford (2002) describes her own

struggle with her inner worthlessness in this way. “By the time I was

five years old, I was all too familiar with the voice in my head telling

me that I wasn’t good enough, that I wasn’t wanted, and that I didnt

belong. . .. Deep inside I believed there was something wrong with

me, and I went to great lengths to conceal my flaws.” This statement

could have been made by any number of my clients or by me. Each

of us then must find ways to manage all that inner angst until we find

the person whose love, we have been taught, will make it disappear.

[PAGE 014]

As a child, Debbie’s angst-managing strategy was to use

charm and good grades to keep a steady stream of approval flowing

into her to drown out the negative voice, until that no longer

worked. “When I couldn’t find someone to validate me or tell me

I was okay, I would sneak across the street to the nearby 7-Eleven

and buy a package of Sara Lee brownies and a bottle of Coca-Cola.

That dose of sugar really seemed to do the trick.” When she was

twelve, however, Debbie's parents decided to divorce, and the pain

and shame of that sudden event ignited all the burning emotions

she had been containing. Through her tears, she found herself

wondering: “Why doesn’t anyone love me? What's wrong with

me? Please, wont someone come and help me?”

A version of that plaintive question, “Won't that special

someone come and love me?” dwells in all of us and drives our

treasure hunts and crude attempts at open-heart surgery. In those

dark moments we feel so bereft, so despairing, so alone, that some

kind of romantic rescue seems like the only real solution. Every

message we get from friends, family, and the media reinforces our

attachment to that elusive solution.

Debbie continued to use achievement and perfect

appearance to keep her head out of the inner morass of self-

loathing but found that they weren't enough. “I began trying to

quiet the constant internal noise by drowning myself in drugs. I

was hypnotized by the continuous internal dialogue, by the story

I told myself over and over again about how I would never make

it, how I would never have the love, security, and inner peace I so

[PAGE 015]

desperately desired.”

Predictably, her frantic search for respite led her on

a series of treasure hunts. “In my twenties, I added men to my

prescription for pain relief. Unfortunately, my relationships with

men always seemed to backfire. They began with a high that held

the promise of salvation and ended with a low that left me deeper

in the hole than when I began.”

That last sentence summarizes the experience of most of

us. We feel intense elation when we find our designated redeemer

who will love us and prove that we aren't worthless after all—who

will provide the salvation we've been seeking.

The problem we will explore in this book is that our

partner can no more cleanse our sense of unworthiness than can

food, drugs, achievement, or perfect appearance. Consequently,

he will disappoint those desperate parts of us, leaving us deeper

in the hole of hopelessness and despair, at which point we will

initiate one of the three projects discussed earlier.


Becoming the Primary Caretaker ofYour Parts

Fortunately, there is a way to unload the pain and shame

that drive these patterns. The first step toward that goal is to shift

your focus. Like Debbie, most of us scramble to avoid our inner

lives and keep our attention fixed on external solutions that include

finding or changing a designated redeemer. Í try to get couples to

do a complete U-turn in their focus, moving them toward, rather

than away from, the inner worlds in which they fear to tread.

[PAGE 016]

When people listen deeply inside, they encounter a host

of different feelings, fantasies, thoughts, impulses, and sensations

that comprise the background noise of our everyday experience

of being in the world. When people remain focused on and ask

questions of one of those inner experiences, they find that it is

more than merely a transient thought or emotion. Within each

of us is a complex family of subpersonalities, which I call parts

(Schwartz, 1995; Schwartz, 2001). These parts are the reasons we

can simultaneously have so many contradictory and confusing

needs. American poet Walt Whitman got it right in “Song of

Myself”: “Do I contradict myself? Very well then I contradict

myself. (I am large, I contain multitudes).” So do we all contain

multitudes. Thus, the Oracle of Delphi’s admonition to “know

thyself” should really be to “know thyselves.”

I call these often-quarrelling subpersonalities parts because

when I first started doing this kind of work, that is how my

clients referred to them. “Part of me wants to stay married and

faithful, but another part wants to be free to get laid every night

of the week with a different woman,” a client might say. Another

would report, “I know I’m successful at my job, but there's a part

of me that says it’s only a matter of time until my wife finds out

how stupid and incompetent I really am.” The critical voice that

harangued Debbie Ford with so much self-loathing is an example

of one common type of part called a protector, which tried to keep

her from taking risks by running down her confidence. The more

vulnerable inner childlike part that believed her critic and, as a

[PAGE 017]

consequence, felt worthless and empty is an example of a type of

part I call an exile.

WhenI first started doing this kind of work, I was amazed

to find that if I could establish a safe, accepting atmosphere in our

sessions, clients could have inner discussions with their parts. In

a powerful state of internal focus, they could dialogue with their

parts about what motivated them to react in such irrational or self-

defeating ways. As they listened to their parts’ stories, what at first

seemed irrational suddenly began to make sense as many parts let

the clients know that they were stuck at points in the past when

the behaviors or beliefs were understandable and even necessary.

You can become your own healer—the special person

your vulnerable parts have been waiting for. When that happens,

your partner will be released from the redeemer trap and its

accompanying projects, and true intimacy will be possible.

In the past, this wasn't necessarily good news. It meant

logging countless hours in a therapist’s office, with the two of

you speculating together about how you were hurt during your

childhoods. Through those insights, you expected to feel less

vulnerable but often didn't make much progress toward that

goal. Fortunately, those days are over because it is now possible to

quickly discover the source of your pain and shame, and to pump

it out of the parts of you that carry it. In the process, those parts

come to trust and welcome you as their healer. Then they can love

being with your partner.

[PAGE 018]

The Self

As clients learn to separate from their extreme

emotions and thoughts (their parts) in this way, I find that they

spontaneously tap into a calm, centered state, which I call their

Self. | can sense when this happens in a session because it feels

as though the very molecules in the atmosphere have shifted

radically. My clients” faces and voices change, growing softer and

more tranquil, and they become more open and tender, able to

explore their parts without anger, defensiveness, or disdain. In

accessing this state of Self, clients are tapping into something

deeper and more foundational than all these conflicting inner

warriors—something that spiritual traditions often call soul

or essence. One aspect of this state is what many therapies call

mindfulness. In this state of Self, clients realize that they already

know how to take care of their inner exiles on their own and that

those parts don't need salvation because they were never bad to

begin with. I refer to this state of Self as Self-leadership.


Self-to-Self Interaction

I found that when I helped each partner access this state

of Self; a dramatic shift occurred in their interactions with each

other about problems in their relationship. Their dialogues would

be completely different from their usual ones, which were so

protective and parts-dominated. Even when discussing emotion-

laden content, partners could hold a respectful and compassionate

tone and were able to listen without defending themselves.

[PAGE 019]

Creative solutions, which were so elusive in previous attempts,

would emerge spontaneously and without intervention from me.


Speaking for Parts

It wasn't that the feelings of clients’ parts were absent

from the exchanges—oftentimes they were talking about very

strong emotions. It’s that, because they remained a little separated

from their parts, they could speak for those powerful feelings

rather than being flooded by them and speaking from them. For

example, in the past, Michael would have said to Marcia, “I hate

the way you interrupt me when I’m trying to make a point” in

a charged, judgmental voice. When I was able to help him hold

Self-leadership, he said, “When you interrupted me, it triggered

an angry part of me that thinks you dont care about my feelings.”

Michael’s tone remained compassionate, and he was able to stay

curious about what was happening to Marcia that made her

interrupt.

This book is designed to help you do two things that will

make a remarkable difference in all your relationships, particularly

your intimate ones. The first is that you—your Self—will become

the primary caretaker of your exiles so that your partner can be

their secondary caretaker. When that is the case, your protectors

can abandon all their projects and you can enjoy your partner for

who she is, not what you need her to be. Ironically, in turn, your

partner will be better able to drop her guard enough to give you

the open-hearted love you seek.

[PAGE 020]

The second thing you will gain from this book is that,

increasingly, you will be able to interact with your partner from

your Self, which will not only resolve, or make far less potent, the

longstanding issues between you, but will also foster the sense

of intimacy and deep connectedness that is sustaining to both

of you.

I don’t want to imply that achieving these goals will be

easy. Many beliefs and forces in our culture run counter to them,

and we each carry personal baggage that makes it harder. It will

take work, some of which may need to be done with a therapist.

This book is designed to reorient that work—to help you work

smarter instead of harder.

Let's begin by examining some of the cultural factors that

make intimate relationships so challenging.

[PAGE 021]

Chapter One


CULTURAL CONSTRAINTS
TO INTIMACY

[PAGE 022]

Cultural Constraints to Intimacy |


Sustaining intimacy wouldn't be such a big problem if you

had been encouraged by your family or culture to take care of your

exiles. Unfortunately, however, few people know about this secret

to relationship success. It is likely that your family taught you the

opposite—to lock away your parts when they felt hurt, needy,

ashamed, or otherwise in pain. Then our culture bombarded you

with messages about how great it would be when you finally found

your “soulmate.”


Isolation

That message about the romance, relief, and redemption

to be found in intimate relationships may be required to convince

us to enter the extraordinary institution that is American

marriage. As Margaret Mead said, “The American marriage . . . is

one of the most difficult marriage forms that the human race has

ever attempted.” Couples were once surrounded by communities

of relatives and friends, by people who shared their values and

helped them out. Today, couples are isolated, mobile units that are

expected to survive on their own. Not only is the couple isolated

from its community, but each partner is often cut off from the

other by the outrageous requirements of work or by the excessive

demands of raising children far from the help of kin networks.

Indeed, children are one of the biggest obstacles to intimacy that

couples face. Virtually every study of marital satisfaction has

shown that it drops precipitously with the birth of the first child

and doesn’t recover until the last one leaves.

[PAGE 023]

Finally, partners are cut off from their Selves by being

raised in a society that is so concerned with external appearances

that authentic inner desires are ignored and feared. Into this

nearly impossible arrangement is poured the expectation that your

partner should make you happy and that if she doesn't, something

is very wrong.


Cultural Pressure for the Romantic Rescue

These messages about your partner play into your exiles’

dreams, keeping the focus of their yearning on an external

relationship rather than on you. Thus, our culture’s view of

romantic love as the ultimate salvation exacerbates an already

difficult arrangement. Many writers have blamed the unrealistic

expectations our culture heaps on marriage as a significant reason

for its high rate of collapse. I agree with that indictment to the

extent that those expectations perpetuate the partner-as-healer/

redeemer syndrome.

In this society, we leave our parents and our children leave

us; the only person who is supposed to be with us forever is our

partner. As long as we remain such a highly mobile, appearance-

obsessed, work- and consumption-addicted culture, our isolated

couples do need to find a high degree of satisfaction with each

other, especially if we want to spare their children the pain of

divorce or a sense of responsibility for their parents’ well-being.

If we had been taught how to heal our own parts, I believe

we would be able to meet many of our needs in an intimate

[PAGE 024]

relationship because we wouldn't be as needy. Many expectations

of intimate relationships are not unrealistic per se. You can get

a great deal from your partner if you are willing to share the

responsibility of taking care of your parts rather than placing the

onus totally on him or her. When your partner is freed from the

extreme pressures to both caretake your parts and deal with your

rage or pouting when he or she doesnt, your partner can be the

lover, companion, and co-adventurer that you want. Once you

heal your own exiles, you can drop the drawbridge of your castle

and allow your partner enough access to you to create an enjoyable

relationship.

George complains that he never seems to be able to please

his wife, Ann, anymore. He works hard all day and spends most

weekday evenings watching their son’s soccer games or their

daughter’s field hockey games. Ann, an accountant, says she also

works hard and comes home to a second shift of cleaning the

house. She resents George’s long hours at work and feels that

their lives revolve around career and kids. On weekends they

occasionally socialize with another couple, but they have stopped

going out together because they have come to fear the awkward

silences when they run out of domestic details to discuss.

George and Ann are seeing a therapist who tries to help

them communicate differently. The therapist helps them stop

blaming each other and instead gets them to speak about their

more vulnerable feelings—George’s sense of being a failure as a

husband and Ann’s loneliness and belief that George prefers work

[PAGE 025]

to her. The therapist also has them listen carefully to each other

without interrupting and demonstrate that they heard each other

by repeating back what was said. They are also given assignments

to schedule dates together, to share the household chores more

equitably, and to find things to praise about one another. These

interventions seem to help. They both report that it makes a big

difference when their partner really listens and empathizes with

their predicament. In addition, George says that it helps to hear

something positive from Ann, and she says that seeing George

helping more around the house has lifted her chronic resentment.


Staying Out of the Dark Sea

George and Ann are typical of many middle-class

American couples, and the therapy they received is state of the art.

It is the kind of therapy I did with couples for years until I came to

realize that, in most cases, the improvements didnt last.

Without a constant stream of affirmation from an

intimate partner, most of us will experience these feelings to some

degree: worthless, empty, like a loser, lonely, rejected, desperate,

ugly, boring, insecure, and afraid. These are unbearable emotions

that we will do anything to avoid. What we call happiness is

often relief about not being in those states. Too often our partner

becomes a life preserver, keeping our head above water in the dark

sea of pain, shame, and fear in which we float. No wonder we feel

so threatened and jealous if it looks as though our partner might

leave us. And when, for one reason or another, he or she no longer

[PAGE 026]

keeps us out of that sea or even pushes us into it, it’s no wonder

that we begin to dream of finding a better partner and then go

looking for one.

This kind of head-above-water happiness is unstable

and easily disturbed. Our partner will buckle under the strain of

holding us up, and big waves (such as failures at work or criticism

from parents) will wash over us no matter how hard our partner

works to save us.

Our culture offers many other life preservers—television,

Internet, shopping, working, smoking, legal and illegal drugs,

alcohol, pornography, prostitution, plastic surgery, diets and

exercise, fatty and sweet foods—all the common addictions. As

John Updike said, “America is a vast conspiracy to make you

happy.” But these life preservers are flimsy—poor substitutes

for human connection. Although they don’t keep us afloat for

long, these addictive distractions can prevent us from jettisoning

intimate relationships by numbing the disappointment we feel

when the relationships lose their buoyancy. Or they can opiate our

pain when we're between periods of intimate contact. We become

convinced that happiness is as close as the next stock market

upswing, nose job, or European vacation.

These distractions themselves become part of a vicious

cycle that keeps us addicted to the search for head-above-water

happiness and away from a more sustaining happiness. The more

we pursue them, the more isolated we become from one another—

and ourselves—and the more afraid of the waves around us, so the

[PAGE 027]

| You Are the One You’ve Been Waiting For


more desperately we pursue them. To shift metaphors briefly, it’s as

though were stuck in a hole and the only tools our culture throws

us are an assortment of shovels. As Leonard Cohen sings, “You are

locked into your suffering, and your pleasures are the seal.”


Exercise

Take a few minutes to reflect on the following questions. Write
your answers in a journal that you can keep as you read this book.

1. Are you aware of feelings of emptiness or unlovability inside
you that you fear?

2. To what extent in your life have you expected your lover to
make those feelings disappear?

3. How much do you also rely on the distractions our culture
offers, and which of those do you use?

4. Do you have any faith that you might help those parts of you
yourself?


The Empty Self

Many reasons exist why most of us in this country contain

a secret dark sea of lonely emptiness and quiet desperation.

Later in the book we will discuss the psychological roots of this

condition, but it is also important to consider the sociological

development of what historian Phillip Cushman (1995) calls the

“empty self” that arose in this country after World War II. For

[PAGE 028]

Cushman, American individualism lost its soul at that point to the

huge pressures of industrial capitalism. Whereas before the war

our individualism was tempered by a strong ethic of community

service, afterward that changed. The American Dream of ever-

upward mobility, fueled by memories of the Great Depression and

by increasingly pervasive national advertising, infected that war

generation with a more selfish individualism. Their baby-boomer

children inherited that virus and, in addition, experienced little

of the extended family and community-focused upbringing

that their parents enjoyed. Instead, many of us boomers grew

up in anonymous suburbs and drew our values from television

commercials.

The result is the empty self, “a self that experiences a

significant absence of community, tradition, and shared meaning.

. . . a self that embodies the absences, loneliness, and disappointments

of life as a chronic, undifferentiated emotional hunger” (p. 79).

Our empty selves have been conditioned to sate that hunger with

material possessions, which has created a powerful economy that

gives us the illusion that we are doing well. But our inner lives are

not doing well.

It also hasn’t helped that political changes in recent

decades have made it harder for people in this country to survive

financially, while simultaneously we have been bombarded

with television images of happy, wealthy, consuming people.

The consequent striving for money and exhausting workweeks,

whether motivated by the need to stay alive financially or to join

[PAGE 029]

the wealthy, leave an ever larger emotional gulf between ourselves

and our families and friends. The fear of falling through the

widening holes in our social networks into that dark and lonely

sea makes us easy prey for the version of happiness found in the

ubiquitous advertisements, so we become more materialistic and

have to work even harder to support those materialistic habits.

The not-unrealistic fear of sudden financial impoverishment also

drives the anxiety and work pace of most people in the United

States since the social safety nets have been shredded by years of

conservative governing.

To all of us drowning in this empty, striving, isolated,

and anxious American lifestyle, the media throws the biggest

life preserver of all. From watching movies or TV, or listening to

songs on the radio, you'll be convinced that everyone, sooner or

later, will find their one, true, happily-ever-after relationship. The

person who will heal you, complete you, and keep you afloat is out

there. If the person you're with isn’t doing that, either he or she is

the wrong person altogether or you need to change him or her

into the right one.

This is an impossible load for intimate relationships to

handle. The striving for money and the isolation from a circle

of caring people are enough to do in many marriages—not only

because both partners are depleted by the pace of life and absence

of nurturing contact, but also because to work and compete so

hard, they each must become dominated by striving parts that

don’t lend themselves to intimate vulnerability. To deal with

[PAGE 030]

Cultural Constraints to Intimacy |


the stress of this lifestyle, we reach for the many distractions

that our culture offers, which are also obstacles to, and surrogates

for, intimacy.

Recently the United States overtook Japan as the developed

country with the workforce that puts in the longest hours. We're

spending all our time in cubicles, removed from nature and from

family, friends, and spiritual connectedness. We eat poorly and are

out of shape and sleep deprived. We're anxious about money and

about our appearance. Add to all that the burden of keeping each

other’s heads above polluted water, and it’s no wonder so many

marriages go under. Stress, depletion, and isolation make it harder

to control our inner demons, consequently increasing the pressure

on our one intimate relationship to keep the waves of self-loathing

and insecurity at bay. This is an impossible task, but we still expect

it to work, and we feel like abject failures when it doesn’t.


Exercise

1. How much does your lifestyle allow time and space for intimate
exchanges with your partner?

2. How isolated are you and your partner from a network of
nurturing relationships?

3. How much does fear of poverty or competition with others
drive your lifestyle?

[PAGE 031]

Another Kind of Happiness

Another kind of happiness exists that you can feel steadily

whether you are in a relationship or not. It comes from the sense

of connectedness that happens when all your parts love one

another and trust and feel accepted by your Self. When you have

that kind of love swirling around inside you, it spills out to people

around you, and those people become part of your circle of love

and support. You don’t need intimate others to keep you out of the

inner dark sea because that sea has been drained of its pain, shame,

and fear. In your inner world, your parts are on dry, solid land and

are well housed and nourished. They trust you to be their primary

caretaker, which allows your partner the freedom and delight that

come with being their secondary caretaker.

When you don’t fear drowning because there’s no longer

a dark body of water threatening to swallow you up, and when

your inner world is one of abiding love, you don’t grasp for the

life preservers our culture constantly throws at you. Your material

needs are simple, and you value relaxed human connection over

nonhuman escape. You have time and energy to nurture an

intimate network that extends well beyond your partner, so he

or she isn't the only target of your parts’ desires. As author John

Schumaker (2006) writes:

I never knew how measly my own happiness
was until one day when I found myself stranded in a
remote western Tanzanian village. 1 saw real happiness
for the first time—since then I have learned that it has
vastly more to do with cultural factors than genetics

[PAGE 032]

or the trendy notion of personal “choice.” So it didn’t
surprise me that an African nation, Nigeria, was found
recently to be the world’s happiest country. The study
of “happy societies” is awakening us to the importance
of social connectedness, spirituality, simplicity, modesty
of expectations, gratitude, patience, touch, music,
movement, play, and “down time.”


If you don't believe that caring social networks are

important, consider the decades of studies on schizophrenia by the

World Health Organization. This research has conclusively shown

that people with schizophrenia do far better in poorer countries

like India, Nigeria, and Columbia than in the United States and

England. For example, almost twice as many schizophrenics in

the poorer countries became symptom-free as compared to the

wealthy ones. ‘The only explanation researchers could find for this

shocking discovery is that stronger family ties in poorer nations

profoundly affected recovery rates.

In our American culture of empty, isolated, and depleted

selves, it’s extremely difficult for even the most psychologically

healthy couples to create truly intimate and nourishing

relationships. Those of us who carry additional baggage from

our personal histories and gender socialization might as well

not even try. Nonetheless try we do, over and over, oblivious to

the impossibility of the task and filled with self-blame each time

we fail.

[PAGE 033]

The Cruel Joke

So we've all been set up—victims of a cruel joke. First we

are loaded with emotional burdens by our family and peers, and

then taught to exile the parts carrying them. Then we are told to

go out into the world and find that special person who can make

us finally like ourselves. Together we and our partner enter the

striving, frenetic whirlpool American lifestyle that precludes time

together, isolates us from community, depletes and stresses us out,

and offers innumerable addictive distractions that further isolate

us. When we cant make this impossible situation work, we feel

like total failures—as though something is wrong with us. We

dont realize that we never had a prayer.

Most self-help books and couples therapy approaches

collude with this cruel joke. They try to help you fix something

that isn’t fixable, which makes you feel more like a failure when it

doesn't work. Shifting the deck chairs around wont avoid disaster

when youre on the Titanic. Instead, your relation-ship needs to

make a U-turn.

Using structured communication packages, your therapist

may convince you both to drop your defenses and open to each

other once again. This approach identifies the problem as you and

your partner not meeting each other’s needs well enough, and it

aims to help you negotiate better ways of taking care of each other.

Such therapists don’t understand that as long as you each contain

desperate, orphaned exiles looking to the other for redemption

and are caught up in the American whirlwind, that enterprise is

[PAGE 034]

Cultural Constraints to Intimacy |


futile. Both of you are too depleted, vulnerable, and needy, and

too focused on the other for any improvements to last.

After taking a brief history, I frequently tell couples not to

feel bad about their failures. Given the baggage with which they

entered the relationship and their frantic lifestyle, they never had

a chance to sustain real intimacy. Just learning about the cruel

joke of which they have been victims often helps couples begin to

reverse the vicious cycles it has caused.

The good news is that as you each become more Self-led

and experience more inner and outer intimacy, you have less need

for material distractions and become more interested in creating

community—connecting with the Selves of others around

you. During the course of our therapy together, many couples

spontaneously find creative ways to downshift their lives and

increase their time with each other and with friends and family.


Exercise

1. How much do you feel like a failure in your relationship?

2. Given all the constraints to intimacy discussed so far, do you
think your relationship ever had a real chance?


Gender Socialization

This kind of downshifting is particularly difficult for

men, which brings up another cultural influence that cannot be

[PAGE 035]

ignored: gender socialization. This is a huge and controversial

topic to which I can’t do justice in this space. Nor can I discuss it

without making gross generalizations that wont apply to many

readers. Yet from years of journeying inside with men and women

to the source of their protectiveness and pain, several patterns are

worth mentioning. In general, boys are taught to value and lead

with certain parts of them and to exile others. Girls are socialized

to do the same, but with different sets of parts. These differences

can create problems in and of themselves, and they challenge

the common assumption that women are better equipped to be

intimate than men.

A traditional, patriarchal form of childrearing, dominant

in our culture for many decades, was clear in its effects on the

inner lives of boys and girls. In that pattern, boys were nurtured by

their caretaker (usually their mother) until a certain young age—

perhaps four or five—when, out of fear of their being sissified, they

were wrenched away and often brutally shamed by their father or

by peers for expressions of weakness or any emotions other than

ageressiveness and anger—anything considered feminine.

This pattern left many of the men I’ve treated with

extremely needy and fearful exiles which were so thoroughly

locked away that most of the time the men had no access to those

vulnerable feelings. The term alexithymia has been used to describe

such men because they are so cut off from those emotions that

they don’t have words to describe them.

[PAGE 036]

Terrence Real (1997), author of a valuable book on the

wounding of men titled / Don't Want to Talk About It, describes his
life in a way that applies to my own experience and that of many

of the men I work with.


There is a blackness that has lain inside the center
of my being. When I have closed my eyes, it has been
there. When I have been left alone for more than a
few hours, I have returned to it. This jagged, empty,
frightening feeling has been a part of my internal
atmosphere for as long as I can remember. It has
been my baseline, my steady state—the me I spent
a good many years running from. I have come
to understand that dark, piercing unease at my
center as my experience of emotional abandonment
and fear of growing up in a dangerous household.
It’s a little boy’s loneliness, which I brought with
me out into the world for the next thirty years. (p. 328)


To keep their dark fear and loneliness at bay, men become

dominated by rational, aggressive, competitive, never-let-’em-

see-you-sweat protectors that serve them well in the business
world and are determined to never again allow them to be hurt or

humiliated. Men are also taught to bolster their fragile self-esteem

by objectifying and pursuing trophy women.

Before the sixties, when marriages were expected to be

more traditional, many men could get through relationships

without major challenges to this rigid and limiting inner structure.

They weren’t interested in being open and emotionally close to

[PAGE 037]

their wives, and their wives had been taught not to count on that

kind of intimacy from men.

Instead, traditionally raised girls were supposed to

be caretakers. They weren't as abruptly abandoned as men by

their early source of nurturance nor shamed for being soft,

so they remained more connected to their vulnerability and

to relationships with their children and female friends. On the

other hand, the focus on caretaking others left them little ability

to nurture their own vulnerable parts. Whereas men tried to

abandon those exiles, women learned to find comfort for them in

relationships.

The parts of girls, however, that were bright and assertive,

lively and competent, were exiled, and they became dominated

by self-critical protectors that kept them obsessed with the needs

of others and with appearing attractive to men. Because of being

raised in families where males were more highly valued, these girls

also had exiles that felt worthless and focused on the approval

of a father who was increasingly threatened by them and who

distanced from them as they developed physically.

Since the sixties, the traditional ways of being men and

women have been challenged, creating confusing contradictions

for both genders. Now men are still expected to be strong and

high achieving in the outside world, but within their relationship

they should be emotionally intelligent—in touch with and open

about their feelings and nurturing of their partner’s feelings. The

protectors they were raised to count on—rational, impatient,

[PAGE 038]

action-oriented problem solvers and entitled, macho objectifiers—

are no longer welcome at home.

In this way, men are expected to perform a total reversal

of their entrenched inner systems. Suddenly they are supposed to

access the very same vulnerable, sensitive, and caring parts that

they spent their lives trying to keep locked up. Simultaneously,

they are expected to exile some of their most trusted protectors. To

further confuse things, they need to remain close to the striving,

competitive protectors that help them succeed and make lots of

money, but not bring those parts into the relationship.

It’s no wonder that many of the men I treat have shut

down. They feel humiliated by their failures in the emotional

intelligence department, and humiliation is something they swore

early on would never happen to them again (which is why they

dont ask for directions). “I feel like I can never satisfy her” is a

common male utterance in my office. Since in their relationship

they cant rely on aggressiveness or rationality anymore, many

men just give up and hide behind stony walls of indifference and

passivity, which only further enrages their partners. These men’s

protectors opt for the third project of becoming resigned to a life

of non-intimacy and to finding distractions.

Women, on the other hand, faced their own quandaries

as gender expectations shifted. In the post-sixties world, they

were expected to shed their subservient and self-sacrificing selves

and find their power—the assertive and ambitious parts they had

exiled earlier. Within their marriages, this often meant letting

[PAGE 039]

their husbands know of their needs for emotional connection and

nourishment, and expecting more equity in decision making and

greater access to resources.


The problem is that, similar to men, women were trying

to achieve a reversal of entrenched inner systems without knowing

how. Consciously or not, their caretaker parts still had a powerful

influence, which led them to do more than their share at home

(in full collusion with their husbands’ entitled parts) while also

working outside the home. Those imbalances become combustible

when mixed with the chronic disappointment in their husbands’

emotional limitations. The inner battles between women’s

caretakers and their assertive parts often built over time until,

seemingly out of the blue, their assertive protectors would explode

with an intensity that left their husbands stunned.

The work of marriage researcher John Gottman (1994)

is relevant here. Gottman has done his homework, studying

over seven hundred couples of all kinds in a laboratory setting

and following them over time. Despite differences in how he

and I interpret his findings, I will frequently refer to his work in

this book because it represents the best data we have on the way

couples operate.

He found that men and women are very different in how

they handle conflict. For example, in terms of blood pressure and

heart-rate changes, men react much more strongly than women

when they begin to get into marital conflict and stay activated

much longer. They may seem rational and calm on the outside, but

[PAGE 040]

inside they are going crazy in reaction to their wives’ criticisms.

Men are also more likely to keep angry, vengeful thoughts

running through their heads even after the fight is over. Gottman

writes, “If you could read their minds, you might hear phrases

like, "I don’t have to take this crap,’ or “It's all her fault,’ or Tl get

her back for this” (p. 147).

In addition, he found that as the tension builds in couples’

fights, men are much more likely than women to shut down

emotionally and become what he calls stonewallers—people who

turn away from and completely ignore their partners in the face

of criticism. Indeed, the men were the stonewallers eighty-five

percent of the time during conflict in the relationship.

Women are more likely to bring up issues that lead to

arguments and to be critical of their husbands. When he then

begins to stonewall, she feels unheard and escalates the argument,

leading to a common vicious cycle in which he shuts down more

and she gets increasingly angry as she tries to blast through the

stone wall.

Let's review Gottman's findings on gender differences in

light of the earlier discussion of men’s and women’s parts. Given

that men have highly vulnerable exiles that they try to keep locked

up at all costs, it makes sense that criticism from their wives

would trigger the shame those exiles carry, which would account

for men’s extreme physiological reactions. In addition, men

would experience the activation of all their protectors, including

defensiveness and even anger or rage. On the playground, boys

[PAGE 041]

learned to view criticism as a challenge to their masculinity and to

lash out in response. As we've discussed, men’s angry parts aren't

welcome in many marriages and, also, many men fear what they

might do to their partner if they let rage take over. So they are left

with few alternatives. They are loathe to expose and don't have

words to describe the intense vulnerability they feel, and their

customary protectors are taboo. Shutting down externally seems

like the safest choice, while, as Gottman found, internally their

stifled angry protectors continue to roil beneath the surface and

keep them stirred up.

Far more than men, women are socialized to take care of

their exiles through relationships. Therefore, when their exiles

are upset, women want to change things in their marriages

so that their distressed exiles get from their husbands the love

and comfort those parts need to feel secure. Hence women are

more often the initiators of change-oriented discussions and are

frustrated and critical when those discussions are aborted by their

husbands’ stonewalling. In addition, because of the collusion

between women’s caretaker parts and men’s entitled ones, real

imbalances often exist in the lifestyles of each spouse—the wife

has more responsibility and fewer resources—that fuel her rage

and his reluctance to talk.

In terms of the three projects, mentioned earlier, that

protective parts take up in relationships once exiles have been

hurt, it seems that women are more likely to keep plugging away

with the first two, while men more quickly retreat to the third.

[PAGE 042]

That is, because women want a relational solution to their pain,

their inner critics take aim at their husband and, when that doesn’t

work, at themselves, in an effort to open his heart. Men, partly

in response to what feels like intolerable criticism, will give up

sooner on the intimacy-generating projects and will focus instead

on distractions that make them feel good, such as work, sports,

and drinking alcohol.

Many men’s exiles are so well insulated from them that

it often seems that they don’t need intimacy. The fallacy of that

myth is exposed when, for example, their partner decides she has

finally had enough and threatens seriously to abandon them. At

that point, many men’s protective fortresses crack open, and their

raw, needy exiles break through and take over. I’ve seen husbands

who a day earlier had seemed aloof, totally in control and

independent, transform into desperate, pleading little boys when

facing abandonment from their wives. Despite being extremely

isolated inside, these childlike parts of the husbands were addicted

to the little affection from their wives that was allowed to trickle

down to these exiles through the walls of protection. The exiles

knew that this trickle was all that kept them froma return to utter

love-starvation and worthlessness. This phenomenon also explains

why some men who seem so detached from their spouses are

simultaneously so possessive and jealous, to the point of stalking

and threatening them when they try to leave.

Pll end this section on gender differences by reiterating

a couple of points. The first challenges a prevalent belief in our

[PAGE 043]

| You Are the One You’ve Been Waiting For


culture and among couples therapists—the assumption that

because women are closer to their feelings and are more relational

than men, they are better equipped for intimacy. In contrast, I

believe that because women’s focus is so much on caretaking

others and on getting their exiles cared for by a relationship, they

are no better at nurturing their own parts than are men.

The second point is that these gender patterns are not

exclusively due to biological differences in vulnerability or

emotionality. While biological differences exist and should not

be minimized, both genders have been socialized to create exiles.

Many of the incompatibilities between men and women come

from differences in how they were trained to relate to those needy

parts inside and outside. When it comes to achieving intimacy,

both men and women are expected to reverse various rigid

internal systems without an instruction manual. Fortunately, once

they learn how to care for their own exiles and lead from their

Selves, many of the polarizations resulting from their confusing

socializations dissolve.


Exercise

1. (If you are a man) How much have you exiled the softer, more
vulnerable, or “feminine” parts of you? How much are you
dominated by highly rational, competitive, striving parts? Are
you the one who doesn’t bring up issues and shuts down when
they are brought up? What is conflict like for you?

How much do you expect your partner to be nurturing and
soft?

[PAGE 044]

Cultural Constraints to Intimacy |


2. (If you are a woman) Are you dominated by caretaking parts?
How much access do you have to your assertiveness—to your
ability to ask directly for what you need? How hard is it to feel
okay when distance exists in your relationship?

How much do you expect your partner to be strong and take
care of you?


Gays and lesbians are subjected to the same problematic

socialization process and, in addition, carry burdens of shame

about their sexuality and about being different. In more traditional

families, not only are they trained to exile the same parts as straight

boys and girls, but are also forced to exile their sexual desires. The

shame can produce parts full of self-hate, as well as other parts

carrying rage at how they have been treated. These extra burdens

can make relationships even more challenging than for those in

the straight world.

I have worked with many gay and lesbian clients in

individual therapy but not many in couples therapy. The

examples in this book are drawn from my clinical experience and,

consequently, are of heterosexual couples. I believe, however, that

much of the theory and all of the techniques can be applied to

same-sex couples as well.

[PAGE 045]

Multiplicity Versus the Myth of the Monolithic Personality

One other cultural influence has a pervasive and toxic

effect on intimate relationships. I call it the myth of the monolithic

personality—the belief that we have but one mind from

which emanate various thoughts and feelings. I believe it is no

exaggeration to say that the myth of the monolithic personality is

one of the greatest causes of distance in and dissolution of intimate

relationships, and that awareness of our natural multiplicity is the

greatest antidote. Why is it much easier to stay happily partnered

with someone with many personalities than a person you think

has just one? For one thing, when your partner says she no longer

loves you, things get pretty bleak if you think that’s her unitary

personality speaking. For another, it is much easier not to write off

your partner when you know you have an inner family with lots

of different perspectives and desires than when you take as gospel

all the crazy feelings about your partner that come up inside you

during the dance of intimacy.

While the notion of yourself as containing autonomous

multitudes may be disconcerting, the multiplicity perspective

offers a great deal of good news for couples. First, during the

inevitable dark periods in the relationship when you find your

love for him leaking out of your heart like air out of a balloon, and

your mind is reminding you of all his faults and wishing he would

move out or die so you could finally be free, it is terrifying to

believe that those are your most authentic feelings, thoughts, and

desires. If you don’t love him anymore, why are you still with him?

[PAGE 046]

How can you be so selfish as to want him to die? Whats wrong

with you that you cant make relationships work? These kinds of

panicked and caustic inner questions make sense if you believe

that you are a unitary personality. If your love has disappeared and

he now disgusts you, it makes sense that you should move on. If

you believe that your one mind wishes he were dead, it follows

that you must be a terrible person to harbor such a desire.

If, on the other hand, you recognize that your sudden

absence of love is caused by the activation of protective parts of

you that have blocked out your love in the way that the moon

obscures the sun during an eclipse, you can trust that there

is no need to panic or do something rash. Instead, you use that

numbing experience to signal the need to listen inside to discover

why you've become so protective and what needs to change, both

internally and externally, to help your protectors trust that it is safe

to open your heart again.

Similarly, you will react very differently to daydreams

about his death if you realize that you have young, childlike parts

that, when frustrated, have a variety of immature and selfish

fantasies. Rather than loathing yourself and trying to suppress

those thoughts, you can treat yourself with the kind of amused

patience and understanding that a mother might bring to her

angry two-year-old who just said, “I hate Daddy and I wish he

would die!”

Knowledge of our multiplicity also helps when your

partner says hurtful things or acts in extreme ways. When, in the

[PAGE 047]

in your communication to your partner, he will sense a tone of

respect and caring, even in messages whose content holds a

challenge or complaint. While it is a very rare person who can

hold total Self-leadership in the middle of a hot conflict with

an intimate partner, it is possible for you to avoid becoming so

thoroughly blended with your parts that you lose all perspective.

I find that if couples can maintain even a small degree of Self-to-

Self connection while they fight, the damage from the storm is

minimal and the repair comes quickly.

Even during the worst storms, when both of you are

totally flooded by extreme protectors, the knowledge that this isn’t

a permanent condition—that the clouds will part and the sun will

shine again; that the protectors on both sides will relax and your

two Selves will emerge eventually—is very comforting and can

keep panic from setting in. Once your Selves re-emerge, repair and

reconnection are possible. People can tolerate a great deal of scary

turbulence if they trust that smooth skies are just ahead. As we

will discuss later, it’s only when protectors come to permanently

dominate interactions that relationships are doomed.

Not only does the multiplicity perspective help you

through the inevitable storms of couplehood, it can also deepen

the intimacy you came together to achieve. One aspect of intimacy

is the ability to be highly vulnerable with your partner and, while

in that state, to receive love and acceptance from him. It is scary to

reveal to anyone, but especially to your intimate other, aspects of

your character that you view as weak, unsavory, or shameful. The

[PAGE 048]

fear is that once you expose those parts of you, you will be forever

seen by that other as having those character flaws. If you both

understand that those are just small parts of you—parts that carry

burdens of worthlessness, insecurity, distorted sexual impulses,

and so on; parts that simply need empathy and acceptance to

heal—it’s easier for you to reveal them and for your partner to

respond lovingly.

There is something magical about trusting that all of you

is welcomed in a relationship. It’s as if you are a single parent who

feels ashamed of how ugly, stupid, or frail some of your children

are and thinks they reflect badly on your genes and parenting.

Then you find someone who not only accepts them but who also

can see past their apparent deficits to their essential goodness and

lovability. You feel an incredible connection to that person, based

not only on relief at no longer having to hide your children from

the world, but also on seeing how he makes them shine and how

attached they are to him.

When this process of vulnerability and acceptance is mutual,

couples form such a secure connection that their protectors relax

and their young parts know it is safe to pop out at any time. You may

know a couple whose relationship seems full of lively spontaneity

and creative playfulness. They literally bring out the best in each

other because they each know that all their parts are welcome to step

into the warm, safe space between them. Their interactions have

the feel of an improv ensemble, with a wide variety of characters

jumping excitedly onto the stage and playing off each other.

[PAGE 049]

Actually, you may have had trouble thinking of a couple

you know like that. Unfortunately, such vibrant relationships

are rare because without the multiplicity perspective and the

knowledge of how to hold Self-leadership, it is very difficult not

to overreact to the extremes of some of your partners parts. You

resent her sloppiness because you think she wants you to do all

the housework. She blows up at your nagging about cleanliness,

assuming that you are a control freak. Your need to stay out of

debt makes her think that you don’t trust her judgment about

money. Her cavalier attitude about spending leaves you with the

impression that she doesn’t care how hard you have to work to earn

money. When your partner chronically acts in ways that bother

you, your tendency is to: (1) assume that behavior represents a

core personality trait that you're stuck with, and (2) attribute a

selfish or pathological motive to the behavior. Because of these

monolithic attributions, you will be critical or contemptuous of

your partner, and she will respond in kind.

The result of processes like these is that each partner

retreats behind walls of indifference or caution. The playful and

loving parts that initially brought them together are bruised and

now seem too vulnerable to reveal. The terrorism alert between

them shifts from green to amber and, sometimes, even to red.

Their interactions become stilted and predictable because only a

few members of their respective inner tribes do the interacting,

and those members don’t trust each other. Many parts of each

partner feel most unwelcome. Those parts will leave you with an

[PAGE 050]

| You Are the One You’ve Been Waiting For


underlying sense of emptiness and dissatisfaction and, at some

point, will give up hope and begin to sabotage.

The rest of this book is designed to help you avoid

becoming an amber or red couple or, if you are already on high

alert, help you get back to green. If you ever had a vibrant energy

between you, you can get it back. Having a general knowledge

about parts and Self can help a great deal, and in the coming

pages I will embellish the framework we have developed so far

and add exercises and techniques that can lighten the load your

relationship carries.


Exercise

1. Are you ashamed of the extreme thoughts and emotions you
experience in your relationship? Do you worry that they are
your true feelings?

2. Do you take the extreme things your partner says or does as
representative of a core personality trait? If so, how does that
affect the way you feel about the relationship?

3. What would change in your relationship if you trusted that all
of the above came from small, burdened parts of you and your
partner?

[PAGE 051]

Good Luck

Like aging, intimate relationships are not for sissies.

They require the courage to face what is ugly and scary in

yourself and your partner, love fully without possessing, and

risk losing that love. That is why intimate relationships are so

rare—why so many people settle for protector-dominated lives

together or choose to live alone. I have introduced a raft of

provocative concepts and suggestions in this book whose

unorthodox nature may make your head spin at first. All I can

tell you is that they have served my clients and me extremely

well. They vastly increase the odds that the risks you take for

intimacy will lead to growth and healing. Happy trailheads, and

may the Self be with you.

[PAGE 052]

References

Barbera, M. (2008). Bring Yourselfto Love. Boston: Dos Monos Press.

Chodron, P. (1994). Start Where You Are. Boston: Shambhala.

Cushman, P. (1995). Constructing the Self, Constructing America.
New York: Addison Wesley.

Davis, L. (1997). Almost No Memory: Stories. New York: Farrar, Straus
and Giroux.

Ford, D. (2002). The Secret ofthe Shadow. New York: HarperCollins.

Gilbert, E. (2006). Eat, Pray, Love. London: Penguin.

Gottman, J. M. (1994). Why Marriages Succeed or Fail. New York:
Simon and Schuster.

Gottman, J. M. (1999). The Seven Principlesfor Making Marriage Work.
New York: Three Rivers Press.

Kipnis, L. (2003). Against Love:
A Polemic. New York: Pantheon.

Levoy, G. (1997). Callings: Finding and Following an Authentic Life.
New York: Three Rivers Press.

Merton, T. (1965). Seasons of Celebration. New York: Farrar, Straus
and Giroux.

Real, T. (2002). How Can I Get Through to You? New York: Fireside.

Real, T. (1997). I Dont Want to Talk About It. New York: Fireside.

Ruiz, D. M. (1999). The Mastery of Love. San Rafael, CA: Amber-Allen.

Schumaker, J. F (2006). ln Search of Happiness. London: Penguin.

Schwartz, R. C. (1995). Internal Family Systems Therapy. New York:
Guilford.

[PAGE 053]

Schwartz, R. C. (1997). Don’t look back. Family Therapy Networker,
March/April, 40-45.

Schwartz, R. C. (2001). Introduction to the Internal Family Systems
Model. Oak Park, IL: Trailheads Publications, The Center for Self
Leadership, selfleadership.org.

Spring, J. A. (2004). How Can I Forgive You? New York: Perennial
Currents.

Walcott, D. (2007). Collected Poems, 1948-1984. New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux.

Welwood, J. (ed.) (1985). Challenge ofthe Heart. Boston: Shambhala.
Welwood, J. (1996). Love and Awakening. New York: HarperCollins.

[PAGE 054]

Richard C. Schwartz, PhD

Psychologist Richard Schwartz began his career as a systemic
family therapist and an academic. Author, with Michael Nichols,
' of Family Therapy: Concepts and Methods (the most widely used
| family therapy text in this country), Dr. Schwartz was Associate
. Professor in the Department of Psychiatry at the University of


| Illinois at Chicago's Institute for Juvenile Research and later at
The Family Institute at Northwestern University.


Grounded in systemic and psychodynamic theory, Dr. Schwartz developed Internal
Family SystemsTM in response to clients’ descriptions of experiencing various parts
within themselves, which, when feeling safe and their concerns were attended to,
acceded to qualities of confidence, openness, and compassion that Dr. Schwartz came
to call the Self. In IFS, he moved the idea of a system of parts with characteristic roles,
as in systemic family theory, into the inner world of the client, constellating the parts
around a coordinating Self.


This approach to psychotherapy suggested alternative ways of understanding psychic
functioning and healing, and lent itself to innovative techniques for relieving clients’
suffering and symptoms. Locating the source of healing within the client, with
the therapist’s skills applied to helping the client access that source and unburden
obstacles to it, IFS is a nonpathologizing, hopeful framework within which to
practice psychotherapy.


In 2000, Dr. Schwartz founded the Center for Self Leadership in Oak Park, Illinois.
CSL offers three levels of training in IFS, workshops for professionals and for the
general public, a yearly national conference, publications, and videotapes and DVDs
of Dr. Schwartz’s work through its website at www.selfleadership.org. IFS courses in
Germany have drawn psychotherapists and physicians from across Europe.


A featured speaker for national professional organizations, Dr. Schwartz is a fellow of
the American Association for Marriage and Family “Therapy and serves on editorial
boards of four professional journals. He has published three books and over fifty
articles about IFS; his books include Internal Family Systems Therapy, Introduction to
the Internal Family Systems Model, and The Mosaic Mind (with Regina Goulding), as
well as Metaframeworks (with Doug Breunlin and Betty Karrer), about transcending
current models of family therapy. Dr. Schwartz maintains a private practice in Oak
Park, Illinois.

[PAGE 055]

In this book, Richard Schwartz, the developer of Internal Family Systems°“, applies
the IFS Model to the topic of intimate relationships in an engaging, understandable,
and personal style. Therapists and lay people alike will find this book to be an
insightful exploration of how cultivating a relationship with the Self—the wise
center of clarity, calmness, and compassion in each of us—creates the foundation for
courageous love and resilient intimacy: the capacity to sustain and nourish a healthy
intimate relationship. Self-leadership also allows us to embrace our partner’s feedback
and use it to discover aspects of ourselves that seek healing. The book includes user-
friendly exercises to facilitate learning.


“This profound and readable book provides clear guidelines for therapists and clients alike.
In ways that complement my own work, clients learn how to unload the cultural and family
burdens that block intimacy by keeping them locked in rigid gender roles. Therapists learn an
empowering and practical process for treating couples. I enthusiastically recommend this book
to anyone serious about improving relationships in the world today!”

— Terrence Real, author of
I Dont Want to Talk About It, How Can Get Through to You? and The New Rules ofMarriage


“It has been said that before you can love another, you have to love yourself. You Are the One
Youve Been Waiting For teaches us how to do that by offering a clear, compelling, intelligent
model for loving our inner demons and freeing ourselves to embrace greater intimacy. Thank


— Janis Abrahms Spring, PhD, author of
How Can I Forgive You? and After the Affair


ritical new insights into obstacles to the dance of intimacy.
that carry burdens of shame and abandonment from our
for intimacy. Dick Schwartz shows us how to use the
d and heal the source—our original attachment injuries.
e in relationships.”

1 der Kolk, MD, Medical Director, The Trauma Center,
1 of Psychiatry, Boston University School of Medicine


ISBN 97: 8-0-b15-2
b15- (GERD

| | 52500


j
j

9"7806 15 932 |
24
