[PAGE 001]

Musical Traditions
Discovery, Inquiry, Interp
ret ation, and Application
XXVI European Semina
r in Ethnomusicology
Institute of Musicolog
y, Budapest, 2010


Edited by Pal Richter



HAS, Research Centre for
the Humanities
Budapest, 2012

[PAGE 002]

We thank the National Cultural Fund (Budapest) and ESEM for their support.



Edited by Pal Richter PhD

Editor’s reader: Katalin Kovalcsik PhD
English proofreading: Istvan G. Németh

Make-up: Gitta Demeter
Design, graphic layout: Gitta Demeter, Matyas Bolya


© MTA Bölcseszettudomänyi Kutatöközpont, Budapest, 2012

© Authors, 2012

All rights reserved.


Published in Hungary by HAS Research Centre for the Humanities

Responsible publisher: Dr. Pal Fodor (director of HAS RCH)
Made in the Institute of Muscicology, RCH, HAS

Printed in the Petitpress Nyomda


ISBN 978-615-5167-01-0

[PAGE 003]

— Contents

JOHN BLACKING MEMORIAL LECTURE

= LASZLO FELFOLDI 11
Dance Knowledge - Dancing Ability
Homage to John Blacking (1928-1990)


KEYNOTE PAPER

= VILMOS VOIGT
29
Four Faces of Musical Traditions


DISCOVERY - THEORY OF TRADITION AND RESEARCH

= COLIN QUIGLEY 45
Tradition as Generative Process
An Example from European/Euro-American Fiddling

= ILwoo PARK 55
Rule Following as a Social Practice and the Irish Music-Session

= ZUZANA JURKOVA 71
Ethnomusicological Paradigm as a Question of Life and Death
(of Tradition)

= SARAH ROSS AND BRITTA SWEERS 89
A Blank Field of Musical Traditions?
(Re-)Constructing Ethnomusicology in Contemporary Switzerland

= AUSTE NAKIENE 116
Creativity of Songwriters and the Continuation of Tradition
Me and Historical Others


DISCOVERY - ALTERING TRADITION

= AusRA ZICKIENE 135
Lithuanian Anthems
In Search of the Law of the Survival of Tradition

[PAGE 004]

= RUTA ZARSKIENE 152
The Origin, Development, and Disappearance of Tradition
Brass Bands in Lithuania

= JACEK JACKOWSKI 167
Musical Traditions of Mazovia Region (Central Poland)
Historical Relict or Alive Tradition?

= URSULA HEMETEK 179
Re-entering the Field after 30 Years
Changing Traditions?


DISCOVERY - SPECIAL ASPECTS OF MUSICAL TRADITION

= JANA AMBROZOVA 201
Gypsy String Ensembles in Central Slovakia
and Their Performance Practice

= Lujza TARI 217
Vocal- and/or Instrumental Music?
Some Remarks to the Performance Style of Village- and
Town Gypsy Musicians

= 'TERESA NOWAK 237
Women in the Polish Musical Tradition


INQUIRY - TRADITION AND ITS RESEARCH
INTERACTIONS, METHODS, OPTIONS

= JANOS SIPOS 253
Tradition and Revival
How Do Musical Styles of the Karachays Living in Turkey Change?

= BERND BRABEC DE MORI 266
Song Patterns and Sung Designs
The Invention of Tradition among Amazonian Indians as a
Response to Researchers’ Inquiries

= ALEXANDRA BALANDINA 281
Doing Embodied Research in Ethnomusicology
Reflections of Fieldwork in Iran

[PAGE 005]

APPLICATION - ‘APPLIED ETHNOMUSICOLOGY,
MEDIA, EDUCATION

= Ewa DAHLIG-TUREK 311
New Tradition

= RyYTIS AMBRAZEVICIUS 322

Vocal Training “In Tradition”
Applied Ethnomusicology at Work

= KATALIN LAZAR 339
Traditional Music at the Beginning of the 21* Century

= PAL RICHTER 351
New Channels for Renewal of Tradition
Folk Music in the University Education


INTERPRETATION - PROMOTED, CREATED, AND
‘INVENTED’ TRADITION, NATIONAL IDENTITY

= GERDA LECHLEITNER 365
Can Archives Contribute to Establishing Traditions?
On the Interaction Between Archives and Tradition

= SHAI BURSTYN 377
The Ethnomusicologist as Inventor of Musical Tradition
An Israeli Case Study

= SEAWOMIRA ZERANSKA-KOMINEK 393
The Changes in the Musical Culture of the Lithuanian
Minority in Poland in the Past Twenty-five Years

= ANA HOFMAN 404

Musical Borderlands between National and Transnational
Musical Spaces

= MIROSLAV STOJISAVLJEVIC 422
Gusle and the Serbian Immigrants to Melbourne, Australia

[PAGE 007]

Song Patterns and Sung Designs’
The Invention of Tradition among
Amazonian Indians as a Response
to Researchers’ Inquiries


Bernd Brabec de Mori

Bernd Brabec de Mori is an ethnomusicologist specialised in indigenous music from
the Ucayali Valley in Eastern Peru. Together with his wife Laida Mori Silvano de
Brabec, who excels in translation and interpretation of indigenous poetics, he spent
some years in the field and became integrated in the indigenous group ShipiboKonibo. He has been working at the Phonogrammarchiv of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences and as an assistant at the Centre for Systematic Musicology at the University
of Graz. His publications address the topics of Western Amazonian indigenous
music, arts, and history as well as the complex of music, ritual, and altered states.


Abstract: The Shipibo-Konibo are an Amazonian indigenous group in
Eastern Peru. During centuries they have had contact with missionaries,
settlers, exploiters, and researchers. Shipibo-Konibo are very popular
among researchers of various areas as well as among tourists. The cause for
this popularity may lie in the combination of easy geographic accessibility,
spectacular artwork, and the practice of “shamanism” including a
hallucinogenic drug (ayawaska). Especially “ayawaska shamanism” and
related topics have been studied extensively during the last three decades.
The ritual complex around ayawaska includes magical songs. Visions
induced by the drug often mirror the quality of the indigenous groups
“traditional” geometric designs. During the 1980s, a German anthropologist

1 This paper was published in a reworked version with a slightly different focus in the
Yearbook of the Phonogrammarchiv of the Austrian Academy of Sciences 2 (2011, ed. by
Gerda Lechleitner and Christian Liebl) with the title “The Magic of Song, the Invention of
Tradition and the Structuring of Time among the Shipibo (Peruvian Amazon)”.


266

[PAGE 008]

Song Patterns and Sung Designs


proposed that Shipibo “shamans” could sing the designs as if they were
coded music, not unlike a notation; and by singing “pattern songs’, they
could evoke corresponding designs in their visionary drug experience.
This hypothesis was not only accepted in the scientific community, but
even more enthusiastically in popular literature and in the end by ShipiboKonibo people themselves. Nowadays, many Indians present these ideas as
a core “tradition of their tribe” — and researchers can observe and record
many opportunities of its actual practice. However, according to newer
studies (see references), this concept was not a part of Shipibo-Konibo life
before it was introduced by anthropologists.
Presenting this example I will point out how research (fieldwork,
publications, teaching) itself can influence an entire indigenous group to reinvent their “tradition” (which thereafter “has always been there”) in order
to obtain and maintain their social position as a preferred target group
for researchers (and tourists following in their footsteps). This example
underlines how “target groups” for research may actively shape their history
and “traditions” as a response to researchers’ inquiries. They efficiently
construct themselves as “interesting” and therefore may obtain funding,
foster tourism, and be invited around the world as “singing artist shamans”.

Keywords: Lowland South America, Shipibo-Konibo, invention of
tradition, vocal music, pattern art.


= 1. Introduction

The Shipibo-Konibo (or Shipibo) are an indigenous group comprising
about 45.000 individuals, who dwell mainly on the shores of the Ucayali
River in Eastern Peru, in the western Amazonian rainforest lowlands.
They are the biggest and only fluvial group of the Pano linguistic family.
The Shipibo are well-known because of their fine artwork, manifesting
especially in elaborate geometric patterns (called kené or kewé) applied
to textiles, ceramics, and carved wooden items. Since around 1965, much
research was done among them, in different disciplines like archaeology,
anthropology, or linguistics; also ethnomedical research has been
conducted on the group, mainly regarding the medical or “shamanic” use


267

[PAGE 009]

Bernd Brabec de Mori


of plants, most prominently the hallucinogenic brew ayawaska (called
nishi or oni in Shipibo-Konibo language).’
Because of their easy accessibility (the regional capital city of Pucallpa
can easily be reached on the road or by airplane, and many Shipibo
settlements can be visited via one-day boat-trips from Pucallpa), in the
second half of the 20" century, the Shipibo suffered a relative oversaturation
with researchers doing fieldwork, at least compared to neighbouring groups
like the Kukama, Ashaninka, Yine, or Kakataibo, although both Kukama
and Ashaninka count larger populations. During the 1950s and 1960s, the
archaeologists Harry Tschopik and Donald Lathrap (1970) drew attention
to their artwork, and Peter Roe (1982) worked intensely on Shipibo artwork
and mythology during the 1970s. In the 1980s, Jacques Tournon (2002)
started to do ethnobotanical fieldwork, Bruno Illius (1987) conducted
research on Shipibo shamanism, and Angelika Gebhart-Sayer (1987)
undertook a synthesis of artwork, music and shamanism/healing which
had a wide response among other researchers. Since then, many studies
have been done especially on the complex around arts and shamanism.


= 2. The role of music

Among the Shipibo, as well as most neighbouring indigenous groups, music
is an important issue, especially when it comes to curing. There is some
evidence that already before the rubber boom between circa 1870 and 1920,
songs and theatrical performance was maybe the most important aspect of
curing rituals, which may have included many processes which are rare
these days. It appears, for example, that possession by or transformation
into animals played a much higher role then, and music, specifically songs,’
were the preferred mode of communication with these animals, and also
the only possibility for animals or spirits who took possession of the healer
to express their message among the human listeners.

2 Acrucial event for this interest was the publication of Burroughs and Ginsberg’s popular
book Yagé Letters in 1963. There the authors describe their experiences they lived when
taking ayawaska in Pucallpa, Eastern Peru. Of course, also famous books by Castaneda
(1968) and Harner (ed., 1973) drew many experience-seekers towards “indigenous drugs’,
into the Peruvian rainforests and thereafter to the Shipibo people.
3 Illius (1987: 126, 157) argues that also the nowadays almost unknown musical bow
jonoronati served for the communication between the healer and his spiritual allies or enemies.

268

[PAGE 010]

Song Patterns and Sung Designs


However, there is no clear distinction between magical and nonmagical songs in Shipibo terminology and understanding. Also songs
performed at drinking parties or for courtship maintain a certain degree
of magical energy, as people are viewed as animals in the songs’ lyrics
and the performance itself targets a certain manipulation of the current
lived world (in order to have your desired partner fall in love with you,
for example, or singing for the companionship of the legendary “hidden”
Shipibo whom they call chaikoni jonibo and who are known to appear at
drinking feasts where especially good singers are performing). There are
also many songs which are said to have certain effects on the person they
are sung to, like the songs for attracting fish or game animals, for “curing”
somebody to become a good hunter or a better artist, and so on. Finally,
and still apart from what we would understand as “magical” or “medical”
songs performed for healing purposes, there is certain historical evidence
of the mochai ritual, which is not performed anymore either. The mochai
is almost unknown to anthropological studies about Shipibo history, and
it seems to have comprised a collective adoration of the Sun, the “curing”
of sun or moon in cases of eclipse, and in certain cases, the summoning
of delicately powerful animal-human double beings called simpibo jonibo.
The core of this ritual were the mochai songs.*
In healing rituals, the importance of music is rather obvious, because
songs are performed in all cases where healing occurs. The most discrete
performance is the whistling (koxonti) of certain melodies in order to
“charge” a carrier substance (usually a cigar, a tobacco pipe, a perfume, or
any remedy to be administered to a patient) with the power of the song.
Therefore, the melody is whistled, the object held close to the mouth, and
the songs lyrics are thought by the healer during this performance. When
the “charged” object is used (smoked, applied, ingested), the power of the
magical song should unfold and cause the intended effects. This “charging”,

4 The author recorded eleven mochai songs by different singers. One can find three
categories or purposes of mochai singing: (i) adoration of the rising sun, summoning the
sun or “healing” the sun or the moon during eclipses; (ii) a religious ceremony of collective
prayer which is not necessarily directed to the sun, but rather to meet with the world of
more powerful beings like the inka and their counterparts, the simpibo jonibo; and (iii) the
application of mochai songs within curing rituals in order to perform especially difficult
tasks of curing on a patient who is seriously ill (See BRABEC DE MORI 201 1b: 447-465).


269

[PAGE 011]

Bernd Brabec de Mori


koxonti, can also be executed with singing and pronouncing the lyrics, but
this is rather seldom (cf. OLSEN 1996: 259-260 on the Warao hoa songs).


== 3. Ayawaska Shamanism'

Another option is the directed singing towards the patient (or victim). This
is most often performed during curing sessions, when ayawaska is ingested.
The healer will wait until the drug takes effect and then start his? songs.
In Shipibo contexts, usually three categories of songs are used, the bewá
(derived from artistic songs with a specific descending melodic model in
two sections), mashá (derived from the round-dance music sung at drinking
parties, with a strict repetition section and consequent four-beat phrasing),
and ikaro (imported from the north by Kichwa-, Kukama-, and Spanishspeaking settlers together with the use of ayawaska with different melodic
and rhythmic features. Ikaro forms are exclusively sung during ayawaska
sessions). These song categories can change with each song; which musical
form is chosen, depends on the individual. Some healers may sing more
ikaro-type songs, others may sing mainly bewá, for example.
A third possibility for the application of music in healing rituals is
the setting most common when westerners take part in the session: not
only the healer (and maybe his apprentices) ingests ayawaska, so do the
participants, or the patients as well. In these cases, usually the healer
leads the voice in the same way as described above, but sometimes the
participants may enter the music by humming, whistling or trying to
follow the healers song in unison, or even singing along with him, and
maybe performing their own songs simultaneously with the healer, in case
of “advanced students” (provided the healer allows them to do so).
In all three cases, the healer whistles or sings determined musical
sequences he chose in order to accomplish a certain process. However, it
is not obvious, which melodic, rhythmic or dynamic features are related
to which processes (like summoning allies, calling upon divine forces or
praying, scaring away negative influences, cleaning diseased parts of the

5 I use male forms when referring to the healers because, in my survey, 45 out of the 50
healers I have been working with were male. Females also embark on important duties in
Western Amazonian medical systems, but they are rarely involved as médicas who cure by
singing and contacting non-human beings.


270

[PAGE 012]

Song Patterns and Sung Designs


body, or fighting enemy healers or sorcerers). Every healer has learned
a certain repertoire of melodies which are sometimes taken from songs
outside the curing context, sometimes learned or adapted from teachers
(usually a family member: father, grandfather or uncle) and sometimes
made up by the healer himself. Therefore, every single healer uses a different
repertoire of melodies. Also the singing style differs from one individual
to the other. Some sing in very high-pitched registers, some prefer intense
nasalization, some sing in fairly fast tempi, and so on, while others do
not. Despite this individual stylistic freedom, some generalisations can be
undertaken. High-pitched falsetto singing, for example, usually indicates
that the singer is in contact with powerful divine beings, who perform in
very high pitches themselves. However, falsetto singing is not a necessary
prerequisite to make contact with such beings. Some healers also apply
voice masking (OLSEN 1996: 159-162), depending on the beings they are in
contact with, so that the respective being seems to lend his/her voice to the
singer. However, it is still the “translated song”, produced by the singer, we
ie. the audience can hear, because he still uses a human (Shipibo) melody
and rhythm and in most cases pronounce human (Shipibo) language in his
lyrics. The communication with these beings is evidenced by the masked
voice, with the singer imitating the singing style of the corresponding
non-human beings, whose singing only he can perceive (cf. BRABEC DE
Mort 2007). The song appears as a “bodily-exterior manifestation of [...]
knowledge and power” (Gow 2001: 144).


= 4. The Emergence of the ‘Aesthetic Therapy’

The song categories mentioned above, with their individual interpretations,
represent in fact a very precise art and a certain craftsmanship. The singers
have to learn melodies and common phrases from their teachers or other
singers in their community, and then they have to train in long retreats how
to contact non-human beings. When they conclude their year-long training
period, they should be able to contact these non-human beings at will and
sing together with them in order to cure (or to inflict). However, these songs
were seldom analysed in broad comparative studies, only their fragments
taken out of the initial context. Moreover they were translated without the

271

[PAGE 013]

Bernd Brabec de Mori


necessary profound understanding of the metaphors and codes included in
the Shipibos “worldview” (as if this would exist as a singular phenomenon).°
Emerging from the 19" century and during the 20" century, ethnologists
tried to interpret, compare, and understand the meaning of the elaborate
geometric designs Shipibo women have produced on ceramics, textiles,
or men have carved into wooden items. The heritage from the 19%
century was the Kulturkreislehre and a general diffusionist understanding.
Tessmann (1928) expresses the view, that the Shipibo would only imitate
an art invented by “higher civilisations” before them, and they would
not understand anything of their art’s meaning. In the 20" century, the
designs were constant objects of interpretations, and it was mentioned
very seldom that they could actually be “only” lart pour lart. Naturvólker
were not supposed to produce art without function. Gebhart-Sayer (1987)
also clung to the idea, that an assumed original meaning was lost, and
only a few “Schamanen” would still know how to interpret these ancient
codes. She tried to find a connection between these designs, the intake of
ayawaska, and the performance of medical or magical songs, and called
her hypothesis “una terápia estética” (GEBHART-SAYER 1986).
With this “aesthetic therapy’, Gebhart-Sayer assumes that specialist
“Schamanen” could sing certain songs to obtain certain visions of designs
within their ayawaska experience. Vice versa, they could intone certain
songs when looking at certain painted or embroidered designs, a way of
reproducing a hidden code, specifically a coded song from the design.
These “singable designs” or “song patterns” would now play an important
role in healing sessions: the healer would perceive the patients body
covered by (usually invisible) body patterns yora kené, and then alter these
body patterns by singing the appropriate song for the appropriate pattern
to appear on the patient’s body.
Surprisingly, this hypothesis which was found to be a speculative
European idea’ lacking any evidence in the history or recent practice among

6 For relatively comprehensive and complete sequences of translated texts from ayawaska
sessions see e.g. MEYER 1974: 56-66, ILLIUS 1987: 300-383 and 1999: 250-252, TOURNON
1991: 183-201. Especially the translations by Illius stand out positively. See also BRABEC DE
Mort 201 1b: 426-446.
7 Bruno Illius (personal communication, 2011), who accompanied Gebhart-Sayer in
the field in the early 1980s explained that the error was primarily conceptual: Gebhart-


272

[PAGE 014]

Song Patterns and Sung Designs


Shipibo people, was also reinterpreted by the Shipibo people themselves.
By implementing Gebhart-Sayer’s work (even by incorrect or erroneous
quotations, see BRABEC DE Mort 2011b: 69-79), many researchers got
mesmerized, and visiting the field, asked Shipibo people about those
phenomena. In most of the cases (as it happened in my own fieldwork)
Shipibo laypeople would say that they did not know about such songs, or
designs. However, a few people who were in close contact with GebhartSayer, among them the Shipibo artist Herlinda Agustin, started to take up
this idea and produce such songs or designs themselves. This happened
in the 1990s, and Agustin was fairly successful in reproducing GebhartSayer. She even held an explanation why common Shipibo people would
not know about these techniques: because they were ignorant to their
“true tradition” and have forgotten it all. Mainly through this mediation by
Agustin, Gebhart-Sayer's speculative hypothesis more recently entered into
ethnographic reports, for example by Martin (2005) or Rittner (2007). They
presented healers who actually did cover their patients with embroidered
textiles before singing corresponding pattern songs under the influence
of ayawaska — of course together with their (Western) patients. Thus
they employ a healing technique they readily explain, based on “healing
patterns’, “design songs’, and “visions” of sung designs during ayawaska
influence. This practice can be observed mainly in the native community
of San Francisco de Yarinacocha, where most tourists and inexperienced
researchers reach out to meet Shipibo people for the first time.


= 5. Origins, authenticity, and tradition

Around 1950, the Shipibo did not by any means try to represent anything
especially “indigenous” in their daily life. They usually tried to find a way
to live in the best possible position between their customs and the process
of assimilation and adaptation to the growingly dominant fluvial mestizo

Sayer mistook “metaphor” and “synaesthesia”. Shipibo singers who used metaphors of
design in their song lyrics did not (as Gebhart-Sayer believed) describe their actual sensual
experiences. It is important to note here that Illius, who is often quoted in concordance with
Gebhart-Sayer, does not agree that designs could be sung or songs put into designs (see
explicitly ILLrus 1987: 167, footnote). For further details in this case of misinterpretation
and reinterpretation of the misinterpreted, see also BRABEC DE MORI AND MORI SILVANO
DE BRABEC 2009a, 2009b, and BRABEC DE Mort 2011b: 59-81.

273

[PAGE 015]

Bernd Brabec de Mori


(or peruano) society. However, some tendencies appeared, which led to a
re-indigenisation of most Peruvian rainforest societies:

» the missionary-linguistic labours of the Summer Institute of Linguistics

(SIL, established 1947-2002 in Yarinacocha) among most indigenous
groups;


» the land reform of the Sistema Nacional de Movilización Social
(SINAMOS) under the government of General Velasco in the early
1970s which granted communal land titles for native villages, the
comunidades nativas;


» the growing interest of anthropologists especially in the Shipibo-
Konibo,* and therefore a confrontation with many questions regarding
“traditions’, “original culture’, “knowledge of the past elders’, and so on,
and finally


» since William Burroughs, but massively for about three decades now,
an invasion by “individual tourists’, “eco-tourists’, “spiritual tourists”
» « » «


(Jervis forthcoming) and “shaman’s-pupil-tourists”.

All these tendencies helped to manipulate the indigenous peoples social
position in favourable ways compared to the fluvial mestizo, who were almost
entirely ignored. This favourable position was, however, only available for
people and villages who declared themselves “indigenous” and showed this in
their use of language (for the SIL), in economic communal labour (for Velasco's
SINAMOS land titles), in being very knowledgeable (for anthropologists),
and in the practice of preferably mystical or spiritual, “primitive’, spectacular,
and impressing events for the tourists — the more “indigenous’, the better.
In a series of publications,’ my wife and I have shown which elements
of today’s “Shipibo culture” (in singular) may be traced back in the past and

8 The huge interest in this indigenous group can be explained by combining the parameters
mentioned above: (i) easy accessibility, (ii) “traditional” consumption ofa spectacular drug, (iii)
elaborate artwork which is considered aesthetically appealing also by uneducated westerners,
(iv) some spectacular myths like they would have possessed “indigenous books’, the “aesthetic
therapy’, the hundreds of “meanings” of their geometric arts, etc etc.
9 See BRABEC DE MORI AND MORI SILVANO DE BRABEC 2009a, 2009b, and BRABEC DE
Mort 2007, BRABEC DE MORI 201 1a, 2011b, 201 1c, and forthcoming).

274

[PAGE 016]

Song Patterns and Sung Designs


history of the fluvial Pano of Ucayali (in plural), and which elements can
be understood as individual creations (in plural), but are presented as “the
original tradition of Shipibo people” (in singular).
It appears that there are many items changing, being lost, and being
created, although meanwhile, the illusion of “the original tradition of
Shipibo people” is maintained (by missionaries, Indians, researchers, and
tourists) in a surprisingly consistent mutual agreement. Everybody wins,
if the “tradition” is as modern as possible, but still reaches into the past via
“grandparents who already sang like this’, “authentic or original traditions
» cc


of our people’, “elements of a millennial culture”, and renderings like these,
which are reported by the indigenous people themselves. Especially in
San Francisco de Yarinacocha, a sort of unofficial “school” has emerged,
where people train to make money with the visitors: they are “chamanes’,
“artesanas” “artistas” or, in the most promising cases, a combination of all.'°
These changes include, though not exclusively, the following:

a) Healing songs outside the ayawaska complex, like those including
theatrical performances and possession by animals, were altogether
dismissed among Shipibo.


b) The ayawaska complex was quickly adapted: what was once marginal
and scary received most interest from visitors (and therefore gifts and
money) and so it was placed in the centre of “Shipibo culture” Not
only the respected healer would drink the brew, but all people present,
including visitors. The collective hallucinatory experience (sometimes
including collective singing) was declared a millennial tradition.


10 The Shipibo ayawaska-using specialists were mostly male, until, in recent years, a
“gender mainstreaming” (probably triggered by the tourist's preferences) has taken place,
and female ayahusqueros have emerged. However, all ayahuasgeros would call themselves
médicos within an indigenous context. If they call themselves chamanes, this is a secure
indicator that they aim towards Western visitors. Further on, the distinction between
artesanas and artists is very interesting (cf. BRABEC DE MORI AND MORI SILVANO DE
BRABEC 2009a): female artesanas produce handicrafts, with a medium size embroidered
sheet sold at around 35 US dollars (2008 price), while male painters produce art paintings
sold at around 350 US dollars each, although labour, material, and the invested creativity
are comparably the same. This distinction between “high art” and “low-level handicraft” is
a recent western import (art painters were absent among Shipibo before around 2000) and
sheds a doubtful light on the assumed equity of gender in Western society.


275

[PAGE 017]

Bernd Brabec de Mori


c) The kené designs were adapted to market strategies and therefore
simplified and standardized (cf. LATHRAP 1976). The questions of
researchers about possible “meanings” of the designs were reflected
and many Shipibo-Konibo started to come up with answers to such
questions.


d) The songs performed in ayawaska sessions were connected to kené
designs answering Gebhart-Sayer’s questions. Herlinda Agustin! from
San Francisco de Yarinacocha had worked with Gebhart-Sayer and is
now the most prominent protagonist in “healing patterns” (cf. MARTIN
2005).

e) This combined multimedia package was then declared a millennial
tradition: the (new) ayawaska drinking session, the (aesthetically
renovated) kené art, and the (never existing) songs which would evoke
designs or designs which would encode songs were therefore not
invented recently (which is an interesting advance in my point of view),
but have always existed.


== 6. Tradition and the structure of time

In most indigenous societies, “tradition” (or “originality”, “authenticism’,
» «


“historical legacy’, etc., etc.) can not be expressed in the vernacular language.
There are many indications, that the structure of time in indigenous
societies does not necessarily follow the linear nor the circular idea of
advancing time. In Shipibo Society, for example, the so-called “mythical
past” can be viewed much better as a “distant present” (see e.g. ILLIUs 1999:
128, BRABEC DE MORI 201 la: 182-184). Synchronicity is a very important
aspect in Shipibo healing and witchcraft practice, and through the analysis
of curing songs, many “synchronicisms” can be observed.
The idea of a flexible past is perfectly suitable to such a “synchronic time
structure’, where actually people (and the world itself) grow older, but where
the past and future are actually present, albeit in distant regions, which can
be visited by trained specialists (with or without the ingestion of drugs).

11 Herlinda Agustin died in early 2012. Her legacy, the actual production of healing
patterns and desing songs, however, is being carried on by family members and others.


276

[PAGE 018]

Song Patterns and Sung Designs


A certain conflict emerges from the translation of e.g. moatian ipaokani
in Shipibo-Konibo into Spanish and other European languages. This term
would be interpreted as “as they lived/acted in mythical past” in orthodox
understanding, but it transports much more a meaning like “because this
happens in a remote place, it effects what we know or do here”. Moatian
ipaokani cannot be translated anyway.”
The historical inevitability of the Western interpretation of time (there
is an objective past which had actually happened, and an intersubjective,
historical interpretation of this past in the present) is not compatible with
this generative model of time, where any past can be constructed from
a manipulation of contents in the present. Gow (2001) showed how the
changes in so-called “myths” among the Piro (a neighbouring group to the
Shipibo) that happen during the actual performance of a specific situation,
altogether alter the past of the group, independently from the historical
(mainly missionary) archives of Western visitors.
The Shipibo-Konibo protagonists nowadays singing songs which can
be transformed into designs and vice versa, are, of course, inventing this
from scrap. However, through their practice and their way of pouring a
meaning into the dimension of moatian ipaokani by declaring that “this is
the original tradition of Shipibo people’, this idea is slowly transforming
into reality. Nowadays it can be observed even honestly by visitors
(although still exclusively in San Francisco — I suppose the practice will
quickly spread through the Shipibo territories).
The understanding of past in the Shipibo philosophy allows for a
complete freedom in maintaining, transmitting, creating, and changing of
“traditions”.


12 Moa-tian // i-pao-kan-ni. Root: “yet/already” - Temp: synchr. (“when”) // Root: “be/
do” - Mod: distance indicator (?) - Mod: pluralisation “we/they” - Temp: distance (?). I
marked with (?) those particles which are understood as “indicators for mythical past” but
which are not emically predetermined in a temporal sense.


277

[PAGE 019]

Bernd Brabec de Mori


References

Brabec de Mori, Bernd. 2007. “The Inkas Song Emanates from my Tongue:
Composition vs. Oral Tradition in Western Amazonian Curing Songs”. M.S.,
Paper presented at the 39" World Conference of the International Council for
Traditional Music ICTM, Vienna, July 5-11 (in process of publication).


Brabec de Mori, Bernd. 2011la. “The Magic of Song, the Invention of Tradition
and the Structuring of Time among the Shipibo (Peruvian Amazon)”. Jahrbuch
des Phonogrammarchivs der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 2:
169-192.


Brabec de Mori, Bernd. 2011b. Die Lieder der Richtigen Menschen. Musikalische
Kulturanthropologie der indigenen Bevölkerung im Ucayali-Tal, Westamazonien. 2
Vols. PhD Thesis in ethnomusicology, University of Vienna. Summary retrievable
from: http://www.uni-graz.at/Brabec_Diss_international.pdf.


Brabec de Mori, Bernd. 2011c. “Tracing Hallucinations. Contributing to a
Critical Ethnohistory of Ayahuasca Usage in the Peruvian Amazon”. In The
Internationalization of Ayahuasca, edited by Beatriz Caiuby Labate and Henrik
Jungaberle, 23-47. Zúrich: LIT Verlag.


Brabec de Mori, Bernd. forthcoming. “La transformación de la medicina shipibokonibo. Conceptos etnomedicos en la representación de un pueblo indígena”.
Estudios del Hombre 30. Guadalajara.


Brabec de Mori, Bernd and Laida Mori Silvano de Brabec. 2009a. “Shipibo-Konibo
Art and Healing Concepts. A Critical View on the ‘Aesthetic Therapy”. Viennese
Ethnomedicine Newsletter 11 (2-3): 18-26.

Brabec de Mori, Bernd and Laida Mori Silvano de Brabec. 2009b. “La corona de la
inspiración. Los diseños geométricos de los Shipibo-Konibo y sus relaciónes con
cosmovisión y música”. Indiana 26: 105-134.


Burroughs, William S. and Allen Ginsberg. 1963. The Yagé Letters. 2nd ed., San
Francisco CA 1975: City Lights Books.


Castaneda, Carlos. 1968. The Teachings of Don Juan: A Yaqui Way of Knowledge.
New York: Ballantine Books.


Gebhart-Sayer, Angelika. 1986. “Una terápia estética. Los diseños visionarios del
ayahuasca entre los Shipibo-Conibo”. América Indígena 46 (1): 189-218.


278

[PAGE 020]

Song Patterns and Sung Designs


Gebhart-Sayer, Angelika. 1987. Die Spitze des Bewußtseins. Untersuchungen zu
Weltbild und Kunst der Shipibo-Conibo (Miinchener Beitrage zur Amerikanistik).
Hohenscháftlarn: Klaus Renner Verlag.


Gow, Peter. 1994. “River people: Shamanism and History in Western Amazonia’.
In Shamanism, History and the State, edited by Nicholas Thomas and Caroline
Humphrey, 90-113. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.


Gow, Peter. 2001. An Amazonian Myth and its History. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Harner, Michael, ed. 1973. Hallucinogens and Shamanism. New York: Oxford
University Press.


Illius, Bruno. 1987. Ani Shinan. Schamanismus bei den Shipibo-Conibo (Ost-Peru).
(Ethnologische Studien Bd.12). 2nd ed., Münster 1991: LIT- Verlag.


Illius, Bruno. 1999. Das Shipibo. Texte, Kontexte, Kommentare. Ein Beitrag zur
diskursorientierten Untersuchung einer Montaña-Kultur. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer
Verlag.


Jervis, Francis. forthcoming. “How Do You Tell the Joshobo That Their Shinan Is
Coshima? Translation and Transculturality in Ethnomedical Tourism”. M.S., 20p.


Lathrap, Donald W. 1970. The Upper Amazon. (Ancient Peoples and Places 70).
New York: Thames and Hudson.


Lathrap, Donald W. 1976. “Shipibo Tourist Art”. In Ethnic and Tourist Arts.
Cultural Expressions from the Fourth World, edited by Nelson H. H. Graburn,
197-207. Berkeley: University of California Press.


Martin, Barrett H. 2005. “Woven Songs of the Amazon” (Icaros and Weavings
of the Shipibo Shamans). M.S., paper presented at the 50 Conference of the
Society for Ethnomusicology (SEM), Atlanta, November 2005. Online available
at: <http://www.museumtextiles.com/wovensongs.pdf>


Olsen, Dale A. 1996. Music of the Warao of Venezuela. Song People of the Rain
Forest. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.


Meyer, Bernhard Heinrich. 1974. Beitráge zur Ethnographie der Conibo und
Shipibo (Ostperu). PhD Thesis, Faculty of Philosophy II, University of Zurich.

Rittner, Sabine. 2007. “Sound - Trance - Healing - The Sound and Pattern
Medicine of the Shipibo in the Amazon Lowlands of Peru”. Music Therapy Today 8
(2): 196-235. Online available at: <http://musictherapyworld.net>


279

[PAGE 021]

Bernd Brabec de Mori


Roe, Peter G. 1982. The Cosmic Zygote. Cosmology in the Amazon Basin. New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.


Tessmann, Günter. 1928. Menschen ohne Gott: ein Besuch bei den Indianern des
Ucayali. Stuttgart: Strecker & Schröder.


Tournon, Jacques. 1991. “Medicina y visiones: canto de un curandero ShipiboConibo, texto y contexto”. Amerindia. Revue dethnolinguistique amerindienne 16:
179-209.


Tournon, Jacques. 2002. La merma mágica. Vida e historia de los Shipibo-Conibo
del Ucayali. Lima: CAAAP.


280
