[PAGE 001]

¿Preprints.org


‘Psychedelic’ as Mind-Revealing:
Psychological Processes in the
Subjective Experience That Drive
Positive Change


Runa E E. Walther * and Hein T. van Schie

Posted Date: 30 July 2024


doi: 10.20944/preprints202407.2400v1


Keywords: psychedelic; altered states of consciousness; therapeutic change; psychedelic-assisted therapy;
psychology; mental health


Preprints.org is a free multidiscipline platform providing preprint service that
is dedicated to making early versions of research outputs permanently
available and citable. Preprints posted at Preprints.org appear in Web of
Science, Crossref, Google Scholar, Scilit, Europe PMC.

Copyright: This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons
Attribution License which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[PAGE 002]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


Review


‘Psychedelic’ as Mind-Revealing: Psychological
Processes in the Subjective Experience That Drive
Positive Change

Runa F. E. Walther 1* and Hein T. van Schie 2

! Radboud University, School of Psychology, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; runa.walther@gmail.com
2 Radboud University, Behavioral Science Institute, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; hein.vanschie@ru.nl
* Correspondence: runa.walther@gmail.com


Abstract: This narrative review explores the utilization of psychedelic states in therapeutic contexts,
deliberately shifting the focus from psychedelic substances back to the experiential phenomena they
induce, in alignment with the original meaning of the term “mind-manifesting.” The review
provides an overview of various psychedelic substances used in modern therapeutic settings and
ritualistic indigenous contexts, as well as non-pharmacological methods that can arguably induce
psychedelic states, including breathwork, meditation, and sensory deprivation. While the
occurrence of mystical experiences in psychedelic states seems to be the strongest predictor of
positive outcomes, the literature of the field yields several other psychological processes, such as
awe, perspective shifts, insight, emotional breakthrough, acceptance, re-experiencing of memories,
and certain aspects of challenging experiences, that are significantly associated with positive
change. We additionally discuss in detail mystical experience related changes in metaphysical as
well as self-related beliefs and their respective contributions to observed outcomes. We conclude
that a purely medical and neurobiological perspective on psychological health is reductive and
should not overshadow the significance of phenomenological experiences in understanding and
treating psychological issues that manifest in subjective realities of human individuals.


Keywords: psychedelic; altered states of consciousness; therapeutic change; psychedelic-assisted
therapy; psychology; mental health


1. Introduction

Utilization of Altered States of Consciousness (ASCs) for therapeutic purposes can be traced
back to prehistoric civilizations. Substances like psilocybin and ayahuasca have historically been, and
still are, central to healing rituals and regarded as sacred in indigenous societies across the globe and
across time [1-3]. Recent years have seen a surge of interest into the therapeutic potential of
psychedelic and related substances as evidence of their effectiveness in treating various mental health
conditions has amounted [4,5]. For example, psilocybin shows promising therapeutic efficacy for
treatment of mood disorders [6-12], substance addiction [13], and end-of-life anxiety, among others
[3]. The dissociative ketamine is increasingly tested and was recently approved for treatmentresistant depression [14], and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has designated MDMAassisted psychotherapy as a “Breakthrough Therapy” in 2017. Additionally, research on indigenous
plant medicines, like ayahuasca and mescaline, and their effects are being researched within and
outside of their original cultural contexts [15-20] .
Psychedelic states can be utilized as a means to achieve therapeutic objectives [1,3] in a variety
of ways. Apart from neurobiological mechanisms, the literature on psychedelic-assisted
psychotherapy proposes several mechanisms and psychological processes within acute psychedelic
experiences that are associated with subsequent clinical improvement [2,14,21-26]. This review
intends to provide an overview of various psychedelic substances used in modern therapeutic
settings and ritualistic indigenous contexts, as well as non-pharmacological methods that induce

[PAGE 003]

psychedelic states, and particularly these states’ inherent subjectively experienced psychological
processes that are associated with positive change.
We thereby aim to contribute to the scientific understanding of the processes that drive
therapeutic change, which may assist in the development of specific frameworks for more
increasingly targeted and effective therapeutic interventions that are able to optimally harness
psychedelic states for clinical outcomes [22]. Insight into how change occurs aids in identifying the
clients or patients who are most likely to derive significant value from these kinds of therapy and
experiences, and, by considering contextual factors of, for example, particular therapeutic approaches
or ceremonial settings, the specific circumstances that are most conducive to these benefits. This
additionally enhances safety and accessibility of pharmacologically-assisted therapies employing
altered states of consciousness, and especially in a young and potentially still stigmatized field,
facilitate conversation in the scientific and clinical community through demystification [27]. For
psychotherapy in general, researchers have long noted the importance of studying change processes
in their specific context (i.e., the sessions themselves), and to extend our understanding of that change
beyond mere outcome measures with the ultimate goal of making therapy more effective [28].
Of all substances reviewed in this paper, classical psychedelics are currently the most extensively
studied. Other substances such as ketamine and cannabis, as well as the non-pharmacological
methods, have received researchers’ attention partly because of the similarity of their respective
phenomenology to the acute psychedelic state, while having distinct pharmacological and
neurological mechanisms of action [1,3]. The review will thus include classical psychedelics like
psilocybin, LSD, and DMT, as well as the substances 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA),
ketamine, and cannabis, the indigenous plant medicines ayahuasca, mescaline, and ibogaine, and
additionally present non-pharmacological methods such as breathwork, meditation, and sensory
deprivation before illustrating the psychological processes by which these modalities effect
therapeutic change through the subjective experience of the ‘psychedelic’ state.


2. Psychedelic- and Substance-Assisted Therapy

Therapies utilizing pharmacologically induced psychedelic states are pooled under the umbrella
terms “psychedelic-assisted therapy”, more inclusively “substance-assisted psychotherapy” [3], or
specifically as psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy, LSD-assisted psychotherapy, MDMA-assisted
psychotherapy, or ketamine-assisted psychotherapy. In sessions involving high doses of
hallucinogenic substances, it is common to use eyeshades to enable stronger focus on the internal
experience, but at least two therapists or session monitors are present throughout to provide support
if required. Ketamine-assisted therapy often involves minimal interactions, while for MDMA there
exist more specific protocols and manuals for interventions, and LSD, psilocybin, and ibogaine
studies vary along this spectrum [29].


2.1. Serotonergic Psychedelics: Psilocybin, LSD, and DMT

In 1938, the Swiss chemist Albert Hoffmann synthesized lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD),
which essentially marked the beginning of psychedelics’ entry to modern medicine [1]. Rapidly
growing research through the 1950s contributed to the early understanding of serotonin systems and
its role in cognition, and much research was conducted on clinical potential and safety of psychedelics
[30,31]. The Controlled Substances Act of 1980 in the US, as well as the United Nations Convention
on Psychotropic Substances in 1971 effectively illegalized psychedelic substances, and research was
severely impeded until recent years [1].
Psilocybin, LSD, and N,N-Dimethyltryptamine (DMT) are considered classical serotonergic
psychedelics while differing slightly in their chemical structures and subjective effects. They are
currently assumed to exert their effects by binding predominantly to the 5-HT2A serotonin receptor
subtype, which is presumed to lead to a cascade of effects, including downstream changes in
neurotransmitter release of particularly dopamine and glutamate, and altered neuronal and
functional connectivity [32]. Additionally, increased neuroplasticity is generated by cascades of
neurochemical effects including the release of brain-derived neurotrophic factors (BDNF) and

[PAGE 004]

subsequent expression of genes that are related to neuroplasticity and affect protein synthesis for
synaptic components [5,22,33,34]. Reduced levels of BDNF have been observed in people suffering
from anxiety, depression, and addiction [35], and boosting of BDNF levels is a biological mechanism
of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which implies a role of BDNF and enhanced
neuroplasticity in the therapeutic effects of psychedelics [33].
Users of serotonergic psychedelics report vivid visual hallucinations with perceptual alterations
in light, sound, and touch, accompanied by changes in mood, prevalently towards joy and euphoria
yet encompassing the whole emotional spectrum [36], and feelings of unity or ego dissolution which
can culminate in complete mystical and deeply spiritual experiences [1,37]. Cognition can feel
accelerated and hyper-associative [26], and users report abstract visions of colours and geometric
patterns, sometimes also visions of creatures or places. Spontaneous personal insight is common and
frequently imbued with a strong sense of meaning and significance [36,38,39]. Individual experiences
often reflect personal history and symbolism [26,36,40]. The intensity and nature of these
psychological effects vary widely based on factors like dosage, setting, and support [41].
Contemporary research has mainly investigated the therapeutic applications of psilocybin [68,42], while clinical investigations pertaining LSD and pure DMT are rarer [1]. Among outcomes of
these investigations are reductions in symptoms of depression [6,8,11,43,44], reduced anxiety around
death [45], reduced substance misuse [46] by mechanisms such as increased cognitive and
psychological flexibility [47,48], as well as improved mental well-being, happiness, trust, empathy,
positive mood, pro-sociality, (self-)acceptance, openness, mindfulness, and sense of meaning and
belonging [27,40,49-51].


2.2. Other Substances: MDMA, Ketamine, and Cannabis

The entactogen MDMA also acts to increase serotonin, as well as the other monoamines
norepinephrine and dopamine through reuptake inhibition and reversal of transporter proteins [52].
Through downstream serotonin effects, it additionally increases levels of cortisol, prolactin,
vasopressin, and oxytocin [3], all of which predominantly lead to increased feelings of empathy
(reflected by the alternative term “empathogen”), self-confidence, and sociability. Other self-reported
subjective effects are increased well-being, mood, introspection, and emotional openness [53,54], but
little hallucinogenic effects are reported. MDMA, like the classical serotonergic psychedelics, has
been found to increase neuroplasticity through BDNF release, the effects of which are said to reinforce
learning in the context of psychotherapy that accompanies the altered state experience [52].
Ketamine-assisted psychotherapy (KAP) is supported by numerous studies to be a promising
therapeutic intervention for the treatment of treatment-resistant depression and substance use
disorders [14]. Different frameworks for KAP exist that incorporate ketamine infusions into
psychotherapeutic treatment either in-between sessions or in-sessions with lower, sub-anaesthetic
doses [14]. However, ketamine is currently still primarily delivered as a standard pharmacological
intervention without specific psychological assistance or psychotherapy [21] which is somewhat
concerning considering its substantial psychoactive effects. It’s theorized that ketamine promotes
neuroplasticity through release of BDNF as well, while simultaneous cognitive-behavioural therapy
supports in stabilising new synaptic connections [55].-
Interestingly, the subjective experience after consuming a high dose of cannabis has been
suggested to overlap with reactions to psilocybin [56-58]. With high dosage, cannabis users report
experiences of oceanic boundlessness, ego dissolution, and emotional breakthrough much alike the
ones occasioned by classical psychedelics [56,57,59] and therefore might similarly act as a mediator
for therapeutic outcomes here. However, clinical research is limited to one case report of 10 cannabisassisted therapy sessions over 5 months, and reported hypothetical expectations of patients [57].

[PAGE 005]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


2.3. Contextual Factors in Substance-Assisted Therapy

2.3.1. Set and Setting

The terms “set” and “setting” have become well established as crucial factors influencing trip
experiences in clinical research [1,29,33] and refer to the internal disposition of the individual and the
external environment in which the therapeutic session occurs, respectively. Set includes the patient’s
beliefs, attitudes, expectations, mood, personality traits, and psychological state (e.g., arousal,
mindset) at the time of the session [22,49]. Physical surroundings (e.g., tent, nature, a hospital),
support from therapists, and sensory stimuli such as music or lighting are part of what is understood
as the setting [49,60]. Both set and setting have been found to be linked to therapeutic outcome as
well as to how the psychedelic state is manifested in the subjective experience, in particular regarding
the occurrence of mystical experiences [61]. For instance, prior to sessions, patients should ideally be
in a calm, accepting, and open mindset, without having specific goals or rigid expectations [60]. Good
settings are comfortable environments in which patients can relax, feel safe, supported and
undisturbed. Nature has also been found to provide a beneficial setting for psychedelic experiences
[49].
In psychedelic-assisted therapy, supervised sessions take place often in aptly decorated rooms
with for example a comfortable sofa to lie on, and are accompanied by evocative music that may
create a soothing auditory environment conducive to introspection and emotional processing [1].
Music has been found to enhance the overall therapeutic experience by evoking feelings of wonder,
transcendence, and mysticality [49,62]. It’s been suggested that set and setting manifest the
experiential outcomes (e.g., occurrence of a mystical experience) in a session much more than purely
the ingestion of a substance does, which then rather serves as a catalyst of such experiences [49,63].
This is historically mirrored in indigenous peoples’ use of psychedelic substances in structured
ceremonial rituals that have long acknowledged the importance of context and preparation [49,64,65].


2.3.2. Preparation and Integration

Both preparation and integration are recognized as relevant factors influencing therapeutic
outcomes [1]. Preparatory sessions are held prior to drug administration sessions with the same
therapists to create rapport and learn about the patient’s life, personal struggles, traumas,
relationships, and worldview. In subsequent drug-free integration sessions, patients are given the
opportunity to reflect on, process and integrate their psychedelic experiences with the help of the
therapists. The goal is to make sense of the potentially very profound insights and emotions that
emerged during the acute drug experience and translate them into the context of daily life behaviour,
personal values and goals, beliefs, and habits. Proper integration is thus crucially important to
maximise the therapeutic benefit that can be derived from the experience because accommodation of
the insights gained during the altered state into one’s everyday life and value systems is necessary
for lasting behavioural and psychological changes to occur [1,66].


2.3.3. The Therapeutic Relationship

Psychotherapy research has long recognized the therapeutic alliance —defined as the quality of
the bond and collaborative relationship between therapist and client—as a crucial contextual/nonspecific mechanism for positive treatment outcomes [1,67]. The therapeutic alliance has been found
to be similarly significant in forms of pharmacotherapy, e.g., findings indicating that treatment
response to SSRIs in depression is greatly influenced by the quality of the therapeutic relationship in
accompanying psychotherapy [68,69]. In psychedelic therapy, the therapeutic alliance assumes even
greater importance due to the profound, intimate, and intense experiences often elicited during highdose drug sessions.


3. Indigenous Ceremonial Use: Ayahuasca, Mescaline, and Ibogaine

The use of traditional psychedelic plant medicines such as ayahuasca, mescaline, and ibogaine,
has had a rich history rooted in indigenous spiritual practices long before the substances were

[PAGE 006]

researched in “western” clinical settings. Ayahuasca is a traditional Amazonian brew made from the
Banisteriopsis caapi vine and the Psychotria viridis leaf, which contain B-carboline alkaloids acting
as MAO-inhibitors and DMT, respectively. Ayahuasca is used in shamanic and spiritual rituals of
indigenous tribes and communities and is known for its intense introspective visionary experiences
and reported therapeutic benefits [17,70-72]. Among outcomes observed after consumption of
ayahuasca are lower hopelessness and improvement of depression [17,72-74], as well as beneficial
personality changes [75].
Mescaline is a naturally occurring psychedelic alkaloid found in several cactus species, most
notably Peyote and San Pedro cacti. It produces visual hallucinations and altered states of
consciousness similar to those of LSD and psilocybin, and has been used ceremonially in indigenous
contexts in Central America for millennia [76]. Both mescaline and ayahuasca are technically also
serotonergic psychedelics and have similar pharmacological and neurobiological mechanisms as the
ones described above for psilocybin, LSD, and DMT.
Ibogaine is an alkaloid derived from the root bark of the African plant Tabernanthe iboga and is
used in traditional African spiritual ceremonies. Ibogaine acts on various neurotransmitter systems,
likely including serotonin, dopamine, opioid, sigma, and NMDA receptors, but its precise
mechanism of action is not fully understood [77,78]. Ibogaine has been clinically researched mainly
in the context of substance use disorder treatment, and anecdotal findings suggest that Ibogaine may
help individuals struggling with various substance addictions [79], e.g., by reducing craving (through
dopamine transporter inhibition and NMDA antagonism) and withdrawal symptoms (via opioid
receptors) [77]. However, Ibogaine poses considerable risks because of its toxicity and potential
adverse physical reactions, particularly its potential to cause cardiac arrhythmias, which arguably
limits its therapeutic applicability [77-79]. The subjective experience is characterized by potentially
uncomfortable re-experience of repressed memories and imaginary scenes with personal
significance, accompanied by intense emotional release over a wide spectrum of emotions, and
insight [78].


3.1. Arising Issues with Indigenous Plant Medicines

For many indigenous peoples of the Amazon, ayahuasca is integral to ritual practices, myths,
cosmologies, art, music, and various aspects of cultural life [80]. Incorporating substances such as
ayahuasca, mescaline or ibogaine into modern therapeutic practices necessitates a careful
consideration of their traditional and shamanic contexts, as it raises issues of cultural appropriation
[80,81]. For example, ayahuasca is now used in various countries outside the Amazon, including parts
of South America, North America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and some parts of Asia. The
consumption in possibly different cultural and geographical contexts and thus “settings”, as well as
different “sets” in terms of a consumer’s cultural pre-convictions, affect how the altered state
manifests phenomenologically, and also the meaning individuals derive from the experience [81,82].


4, Pharmacology and the Subjective ‘Psychedelic’ Experience

There is, notably, an ongoing debate regarding the necessity of the subjective experience for
long-lasting clinical outcomes in particular for therapy assisted by psychedelic substances [5,83,84].
Some argue that acute subjective experience of a psychedelic state may not be essential for therapeutic
outcomes, positing that an increase in neural plasticity, independent of subjective phenomena, is the
primary, or at least a sufficient, mechanism driving therapeutic outcomes [83]. This perspective is
analogous with the psychoplastogen model of psychedelics, and with what is called the “Molecular
Neuroplasticity Theory of Psychedelic Therapy” [85].
These models suggest that isolating the non-hallucinogenic properties of psychedelics or other
substances could provide effective therapeutic interventions, for example through concurrent
administration of ketanserin to serotonergic psychedelics, which is a 5-HT2A receptor antagonist that
subdues the changes in perception generated by the hallucinogen alone [34]. Indeed, compounds
(such as tabernanthalog, a non-hallucinogenic analogue of DMT) have been engineered that promote
cortical neuron structural plasticity without inducing an acute altered state, and that have

[PAGE 007]

demonstrated preclinical anti-addictive and antidepressant effects similar to those of ketamine in
rodents [79]. Based on these findings, it has been suggested that the subjective alterations in
consciousness may not always be strictly necessary for producing at least some therapeutic responses
[83].
On the other hand, one of the most consistent findings in research about psychedelics is their
ability to elicit experiences that are considered extraordinarily meaningful and transformative by the
person going through them [39,51,86-88]. These profound psychological experiences have been
found to be significantly associated with positive treatment outcomes in various contexts and across
various substances [25,32,46,86]. The quality of the acute experience, and particularly the occurrence
and intensity of a mystical experience, is the strongest predictor of the efficacy of psychedelic therapy
for long-term mental health improvements [1,11,24,25,49,78,84,89]. These findings are more
consistent with the behavioural catalyst model of psychedelics, which acknowledges a synergy between
subjective experience and neurobiological mechanisms. It posits that the enduring therapeutic effects
of psychedelics are mediated by the facilitation of transformative or disruptive subjective experiences
during psychotherapy sessions and are implemented and reinforced neurobiologically during a
window of increased plasticity [2,53].
Importantly though, it is arguable that not only serotonergic substances can evoke psychedelic
states, but also other substances (e.g., ketamine) and even methods. Non-pharmacologically induced
ASCs, for example through breathwork, some kinds of meditation, and sensory deprivation
(presented in the following section), as well as near-death experiences and ancient dance and
drumming rituals, share common aspects of phenomenology and neural correlates with those
observed in drug-induced psychedelic states [90-94]. On the other end of the spectrum of theories,
this may correspond to the one that Letheby [85] calls the “Implementational Neuroplasticity
Theory”: The psychedelic experience itself could trigger neuroplastic changes, regardless of whether
it was induced by a substance or not. Molecular events like increased BDNF synthesis, in this view,
are really a result, and not a cause, of the nature of the subjective experience.
Consequently, we would like to interpret the term ‘psychedelic’ to not include only drugs acting
on a particular neurotransmitter receptor, but rather intentionally shift the focus away from
psychedelic substances back to psychedelic experiences. The term “psychedelic” has been spuriously
associated with experiences induced by substances that act as serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists,
yet this definition, in our view, places undue emphasis on specific substances and their
pharmacological actions rather than the experiential phenomena that the term was originally meant to
describe, such as an expanded or dissolved sense of self, heightened emotions, altered perception
and cognition, and visual mental imagery [41,95]. “Psychedelic” is simply a neologism derived from
the ancient Greek words psyche and delos, intended to convey the concept of “mind-manifesting”.
Over time, the original meaning of “psychedelic” has been obscured by cultural shifts, i.e., the
counterculture movement of the 1960s, the war on drugs, and a prevailing scientific reductionism
that focuses on the physical/materialistic rather than the experiential [94]. Especially when talking
about psychotherapy (as opposed to mere pharmacotherapy), however, the experiential aspect
becomes increasingly relevant, as the subjective experience of the individual is essential for the
therapeutic process. By broadening our understanding of “psychedelic” to encompass any experience
that manifests the mind in an ultimately transformative way, we can more fully appreciate and
understand the therapeutic potential of these experiences.


5. Non-Pharmacological ‘Psychedelic’ States

5.1. Breathwork

Nowadays, modern schools of breathwork, such as for example Holotropic Breathwork (which
was developed by Stanislav and Cristina Grof as a substitute method to bring about cathartic
psychedelic states of consciousness after LSD was effectively banned from psychiatric research and
practice), Rebirthing Breathwork or Sudarshan Kriya® breathing, aim to induce altered states of
consciousness to facilitate therapeutic change through active modulation of breathing rhythms [91].
Similar much older breathing practices such as yogic pranayama have been utilized for millennia in

[PAGE 008]

spiritual and healing practices [96]. Breathwork sessions are often guided by trained facilitators and
frequently accompanied by evocative music, although the specific context can vary depending on the
philosophy of each breathwork school [91]. The common technique of these modern forms of
breathwork is conscious connected breathwork (CCB), which induces respiratory alkalosis by increasing
CO2 elimination, leading to cerebral vasoconstriction and reduced oxygen delivery to the brain
[91,97]. Alkalosis disrupts GABAergic inhibition, increasing neuronal hyperexcitability and
neurometabolic demands that are not met by the reduced oxygen supply [98,99]. The hypoxic state
eventually results in heightened arousal, increased alertness, and stimulation of the sympathetic
nervous system, consequently contributing to intense emotional and somatic experiences that are
integral to the therapeutic processes taking place during the breathing session [91].
Participants report acute changes in the intensity and content of thoughts and emotions, sense
of self, as well as perceptual distortions, subjective visions, and somatic sensations such as for
example tingling, roaring in the ears, light-headedness, or sweating [100]. In a bulletin for the
Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS), 80% of psychiatric inpatients
described their Holotropic Breathwork experiences as ‘psychedelic’ [90], and in a day-long workshop
approximately 10% of participants met the criteria for a “complete” mystical experience [101], which
is comparable to the 11% rate observed in participants administered a 10 mg/70 kg dose of psilocybin
[87]. Similar to substance-induced psychedelic therapy, breathwork sessions aim to achieve
emotional breakthroughs or catharsis and gaining insights via the re-experiencing of significant
autobiographical events and through mystical-type experiences including ego dissolution or oceanic
boundlessness [101-103].
Despite being in early stages of scientific research concerning experiential states and outcomes,
breathwork represents a promising non-pharmacological alternative for inducing psychedelic-like
alterations in consciousness that may offer therapeutic benefits [91]. Indeed, in a recent study in this
special issue, Breathwork was used as a control group to assess changes in well-being, resilience, selfcompassion, and personality after an Ayahuasca experience. In follow-up, both groups showed
comparable changes and improvements in all measurements that did not differ significantly from
each other [104].


5.2. Meditation

Recent research indeed also suggests that there might be significant phenomenological and
neurophysiological overlaps between meditation-induced trance states and those induced by
psychedelic substances [105-107]. One example are their effects on brain regions involved in selfreferential awareness [108-110]. Both psychedelic and very deep meditative states of advanced
practice can be characterized by an experiential quality of oneness and an altered sense of self, such
as that of complete dissolution of ego boundaries, both of which have been proposed as a key
processes underlying therapeutic benefits [107,111,112] and will be elaborated on later in this review.
Indeed, it has been noted that most meditation practices, regardless of tradition or technique, have it
as their ultimate aim to transcend ego self-identification and achieve this unified state of “nondual”
awareness that is so characteristic of psychedelic-occasioned mystical experiences [113,114].


5.3. Sensory Deprivation

As a third example, sensory deprivation can induce altered states of consciousness that closely
resemble those induced by psychedelic substances. Sensory deprivation involves the intentional
reduction or elimination of sensory input, which can be achieved using methods such as darkened
chambers, soundproof spaces, or floatation tanks [115]. Floating induces a variety of
neurophenomenological effects similar to those caused by psychedelics, such as ego dissolution,
disembodiment, transcendence of space and time, and hallucinations [116,117]. Sensory deprivation
can also trigger visual and auditory hallucinations, as the brain generates its own sensory signals in
the absence of external stimuli [116,118,119]. These hallucinatory experiences and the resultant
cognitive flexibility may lead to novel insights and challenge existing cognitive structures, similar to
the effects of psychedelic substances [119-121]. Additionally, the disruption of default mode network

[PAGE 009]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


activity observed during floatation is comparable to the effects seen with psychedelics, suggesting
that both modalities can lead to ego dissolution and a heightened state of entropy in cognitive
processing [105,109,122].


6. Subjective Psychological Experiences and Processes Triggered by the Psychedelic State

6.1. Transcendent and Mystical Experiences

In the study of therapeutic change, the term “transcendence” is used to describe moving beyond
perceived limitations and problems caused by dysfunctional beliefs or entrenched thought and
behaviour patterns [28]. This process of “stepping outside” of the context where these limitations
exist, crucially, always requires individuals to alter or redefine their sense of self. This aligns with
self-transcendent experiences during psychedelic states — such as mystical states that by definition
involve profound shifts in the perception of self [112].
Psychedelic experiences have consistently demonstrated the capacity to include so-called
mystical states [32,49,123] that are experienced as deeply meaningful and transformative by the
individuals undergoing them [86]. “Mystical experiences”, per definition, are profound states
characterized by an experience of unity, interconnectedness, and transcendence beyond the
conventional sense of self and time. They are marked by intense positive emotions like joy and bliss,
deep peace, a sense of safety, and love; as well as the sense of having encountered some kind of
ultimate reality and insight [22,49,123]. They are associated with long-term positive change
[1,25,42,124,125] such as for example in personality traits, well-being and life satisfaction, greater
sense of meaning and appreciation for life, self-acceptance, and creativity, as well as decreased
existential anxiety in the terminal ill [1,45,49,126,127].
The most widely used tool to quantify mystical experiences is the Mystical Experience
Questionnaire (MEQ), a scale that is based on an identification of common core characteristics of
mystical experiences by Stace [128] that he argued to be universal; i.e., independent of culture and
not tied to any specific religion or philosophical system: experience unity and ego dissolution, noetic
quality, a sense of sacredness, positive mood, transcendence of space and time, paradoxicality, and
ineffability [129]. The most recent version of the questionnaire, the MEQ-30 [130], assesses the
subjective phenomenology of mystical experiences across four subdimensions: mysticality (which
includes the first three of Stace’s core characteristics), positive mood, transcendence of space and time,
and ineffability. For example, MDMA increases feelings of unity and positive mood that act
therapeutically but might not induce “complete” mystical experiences as frequently as psilocybin
[32,131].
Rather than being a mechanism as such, the quality and intensity of mystical experiences have
been shown to significantly mediate therapeutic outcomes [11,14,29,123] via experiences of unity, ego
dissolution, awe, insight, emotional breakthrough, and acceptance, as well as changes in beliefs about
the world and the self.


6.2. Unity and Ego Dissolution

One key feature of mystical experiences is a profound sense of connection with the universe or
self, referred to as “unity” [125]. This “extrovertive” unitive aspect is represented by high scores in
the “mysticality” factor of the MEQ as well as the “oceanic boundlessness” dimension of the Altered
States of Consciousness (ASC) scale, and it has been shown to predict long-term therapeutic outcomes
[18,25,49], for example for alleviating depression and reducing death anxiety in both terminally ill
patients and healthy participants [22,23,89]. During these experiences, individuals often report
feelings of empathy, (self-)compassion, and profound interconnectedness. Neuroimaging studies
have suggested that these unitive feelings are associated with increased global functional
connectivity in the brain, reflecting a more integrated mode of brain function during psychedelic
states [109,132].
The second, “introvertive” aspect of unitive experiences, known as “ego dissolution” or “ego
death,” involves a temporary loss of the sense of self and is considered a core therapeutic mechanism

[PAGE 010]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


of psychedelics [85,106]. Ego dissolution is characterized by “complete absence of self-reflective
thought, the experience of an ‘I’ as being distinct from the world, and of the sense of having a bodily
self or a narrative/reflective self” [22], which can be both pleasurable and initially frightening. These
“ego death” experiences can sometimes be preceded by extreme tension and distress, such as feeling
like or visions of dying, but ultimately lead to significant therapeutic benefits nonetheless [133-135].
Research indicates that individuals who undergo “complete” ego dissolution are more likely to report
positive clinical outcomes and long-term changes in worldview and personality traits, particularly
openness [25,41,44,50,105].
It’s been proposed that instances of ego dissolution, e.g., as occasioned by ketamine or DMT,
share certain similarities with near death experiences (NDEs) [136], which are equally renowned for
changing a person’s worldview and spiritual beliefs [14,137]. NDE’s are deeply transformative
experiences that may facilitate insights which help to make sense of death, instigate increased
meaning in life, and change embraced values [14], thereby making death seem less threatening [45].
The long-term self-transformational effects of NDE’s seem to be comparable with those of
psychedelics and present opportunities for foundational changes in self-identity, personality, values,
and purpose [138].


6.3. Awe

Findings support that awe is a core characteristic of mystical experiences and thus a factor for
long-term therapeutic outcomes [123], making it a significant process in the subjective psychedelic
state (MacLean et al., 2012). Awe is an emotion associated with profound pleasure, sometimes mixed
with fear, that arises when individuals process stimuli or ideas that are perceived as vast and
extending well beyond the sense of self [140]. In the context of psychedelic experiences, the profound
sense of awe can prompt individuals to adapt their existing mental frameworks to accommodate
these novel perspectives. Mirroring aspects of ego dissolution, experiences of awe often reduce selfreferential processing [141], fostering a sense of connection to a larger collective such as one’s
community or species [132,142-144]. The intense and awe-inducing nature of psychedelic experiences
is hypothesised to facilitate overcoming personal obstacles by prompting a revision of existing mental
schemes, also known as accommodation [139]. Encountering something awe-inspiring which
transcends current frames of reference can have beneficial effects on well-being and is associated with
increased life satisfaction [145,146], more positive emotions [147], and greater meaning in life [148].


6.4. Long-Term Changes in Beliefs — Cosmology, Meaning, and Self

Ultimately, all the psychological processes inherent to mystical experiences may lead to
fundamental changes in a person’s belief and value systems. Being inherently spiritual on account
of their transcendent nature, hallucinogenic and particularly mystical experiences have been found
to profoundly shift individuals’ beliefs about the world and about themselves, and even occasion sotermed “ontological shock”, a dramatic revision of prior beliefs [22,49,149]. Indeed, a recent study
revealed that a DMT experience can significantly impact individuals’ worldviews, with over half of
the participants no longer identifying as atheists after their experience with DMT as opposed to
before [150]. Additionally, another recent study found that participants in a psychedelic retreat
experienced shifts in their metaphysical beliefs, transitioning from physicalist or materialist
perspectives to more panpsychist ones [151].
It’s important to note that even though spirituality or religiousness are by no means
prerequisites for either mystical experiences to occur or for them to have therapeutic value, but that
these mystical experiences, on account of their transcendent nature, are fundamentally spiritual.
While purely secular interpretations of psychedelic experiences can certainly provide valuable
insights and improvements in psychological processes and well-being, they may limit the full
potential to be derived from these experiences. It seems thus advisable to achieve a balance between
acknowledging the diverse spiritual experiences and their metaphysical implications that may arise
during e.g., drug administration sessions and respecting the individual’s autonomy to interpret these
experiences and assign meaning to them within their own belief system [49]. This seems even more

[PAGE 011]

10


relevant when considering that psychedelic substances have been found to increase suggestibility
[38,152], i.e., a heightened responsiveness of individuals to suggestions, guidance, or external stimuli
during and after a psychedelic experience.
This effect is possibly evoked or strengthened by relaxed prior beliefs and convictions.
Integrating the entropic brain theory and free energy principle framework, the REBUS model
(reviewed elsewhere in more detail) attempts to explain how psychedelic-induced neural entropy
could temporarily induce a relaxation of precision weighting [152]. This leads to a state in which
established beliefs and reinforced patterns of attention are essentially more “plastic”, in a higher-level
sense concerning models of identity, ego, and sense of self [153], which makes experiences such as
ego dissolution possible. In states of increased neural entropy and uncertainty, the extra-ordinary
may be no longer “explained away” by the brain’s prior convictions and thus make it into conscious
reflection. Additionally, this state provides a chance to revise previously entrenched cognitive
patterns and self-models that may contribute to psychiatric complaints, as they are temporarily made
more amenable to alternative viewpoints and thus constructive change [2,152,154,155].
The so-called Metaphysical Belief Theory (MBT) of psychedelic therapy proposes that its
therapeutic efficacy stems indeed from inducing enduring non-naturalistic beliefs centred around a
“Joyous Cosmology” that is encountered during the mystical experience [85]. ‘Joyous Cosmology is
a term coined by Alan Watts [156] to describe the largely ineffable transcendent vision of nonnaturalistic metaphysical ideations. According to MBT, psychedelic states facilitate lasting benefits
by first triggering mystical experiences characterized by such a cosmology, which subsequently foster
strong beliefs in it. Thus, these belief changes, rather than the mystical experience itself, are seen as
primarily responsible for therapeutic outcomes [85]. This theory is not uncontroversial: the main
objecting concern is that these practices may promote or rely on beliefs that, while comforting or
psychologically beneficial for the individual, are not necessarily true or grounded in reality. This may
raise ethical questions about whether it is appropriate to essentially encourage beliefs in mental
health treatment that are not based on evidence, despite their pragmatic value for therapeutic
outcomes [82]. On the other hand, if the beliefs induced by psychedelic experiences lead to genuine
improvements in mental health and well-being, then the role they have in therapeutic practice might
arguably be justified. It may be argued that determining the “truth” or “falsehood” of beliefs based
on objective reality is beyond our capacity anyways, given our current understanding of the nature
of consciousness and the fundamental principles of the universe.
It has also been suggested that the therapeutic effects of psychedelics that correlate so
significantly with the occurrence of mystical experiences do not necessarily depend on the conscious
endorsement of changed metaphysical beliefs, but rather that they arise from non-reflective mental
representations of the encountered vision [85]. The idea would be that psychedelic therapy operates
akin to a kind of ‘inverse PTSD’ scenario [157], where a singular peak experience and the memory of
it yield enduring positive effects on well-being by functioning as an embodied beacon of hope.
Nevertheless, even when disregarding changes in metaphysical beliefs as the driving
therapeutic force, deeply meaningful experiences of self-transcendence do appear to frequently
prompt re-evaluations of personal narratives, life perspectives, and core beliefs. This brings about
positive therapeutic change by helping individuals make sense of their own identity and place in the
world, thereby alleviating symptoms of e.g., depression [22,126,158]. They may fundamentally
challenge the conventional or, in relation to psychopathology, dysfunctional ways of perceiving
meaning as well as one’s relation to the world, and thus offer individuals new ways to evaluate and
process their struggles and potentially adverse autobiographies. Like in ‘regular’ cognitivebehavioural therapy, one proposed mechanism of change in psychedelic-assisted therapy is indeed
the breaking of previously rigid maladaptive emotional and cognitive patterns, and “restructuring”
them in a more adaptive and functional way for the patient [3,55].
Psychedelic states, then, might operate therapeutically by challenging one’s core assumptions
about oneself, ine’s life, and one’s relationship with the world. The critical factor might not
necessarily involve a fundamental change towards non-naturalistic metaphysical beliefs, but rather
the disruption and re-evaluation of mental representations of the self, and the self in relation to the

[PAGE 012]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


11


world [85]. Ego dissolution, a phenomenological manifestation of self-disruption through relaxed
priors, might be seen as a more naturalistic hallmark of what we call mystical experiences. Positive
treatment outcomes associated with, for instance, psilocybin- and ketamine-assisted therapy have
indeed been attributed to enduring alterations in views on the self [3,14,153,159]. This relationship is
in alignment with neuroscientific findings describing psychedelic states that suggest alterations in
the default mode network and salience network, both of which plausibly influence changes in selfperception [109,160]. In a way, the experiential insight into alternative ways of perceiving the self
brings the earlier discussed original notion of ‘psychedelic’ back full circle: revealing one’s mind, and
its potential, to oneself.


6.5. Emotional Breakthrough

The occurrence of so-called “emotional breakthroughs” during psychedelic experiences has
been found to strongly predict improvements in psychological well-being and is generally correlated
with beneficial clinical outcomes [22,161-163]. These breakthroughs, whose conceptualisation is
similar to the psychoanalytic notion of catharsis [163,164], are facilitated by intensification of and
increased access to (conscious or unconscious) emotions and cognitions, which may be enabled by
the effects of a (psychedelic) drug or other mind-manifesting methods such as breathwork or
floatation-REST [41,116,165,166]. In a supportive therapeutic setting, this increased access and
amplification of emotions can facilitate emotional breakthroughs, leading to feelings of resolution,
relief, and insight [163]. The Emotional Breakthrough Inventory (EBI) was recently validated as a tool
to measure these aspects of psychedelic experiences and has been shown to predicts changes in wellbeing after psychedelic use [163].


6.6. Insight

“Insight” can be brought on by experiences of unity, ego dissolution, emotional breakthroughs,
reliving of autobiographical memories, or perspective shifts, but also occur independently. Insight is
generally considered a highly essential mechanism of core change in almost any psychotherapy
[3,28,167]. In the context of therapeutic psychedelic experiences, insight encompasses a profound
realization that may involve gaining a deeper understanding of one’s own (possibly dysfunctional)
thoughts, emotions, behaviours, personal histories or current life circumstances [168], like for
example the root causes or maintaining factors of a patient’s issues or disorders [3,169]. Additionally,
insights may extend beyond the personal realm to encompass deep metaphysical understandings of
fundamental truths about the nature of reality and the constructed sense of self [26].
In the context of psychedelic experiences, insight has been characterized by its intuitive (rather
than intellectual/rational) nature, with individuals experiencing sudden breakthroughs in
understanding accompanied by feelings of certainty and positive affect [170]. This understanding
aligns with Stace’s notion of “the noetic quality” (from the Greek word “noesis”, which means “inner
wisdom” or “intuitive understanding”) [171]. These insights are frequently cited as fundamentally
important to enduring positive outcomes in therapy, mediating improvements in e.g., well-being,
psychological flexibility, depression, anxiety, and substance use [84]. Insight in psychedelic-assisted
therapy is equated with a restructuring of existing patterns of cognitive schemas and beliefs into
novel understandings of past experiences or the self [26], for example renewed beliefs in one’s own
self-efficacy and worth, or one’s ability to stay abstinent, and a stronger sense of connection with
oneself and the world [36,84,172,173].
The Psychological Insights Questionnaire (PIQ) was developed to measure participants’
experiences of sudden understanding into their memories, emotions, relationships, behaviours, or
beliefs that may occur subsequent to the ingestion of psychedelics [174,175]. It has been observed that
insight effects predicted self-reported reductions in depression and anxiety, as well as changes in
well-being even when controlling for the occurrence of mystical experiences [47,63,84,176].

[PAGE 013]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


12


6.7. Perspective Shift

Psychopathology is, among other things, characterized by patients’ restricted ego-centric
perspective which is exemplified in the act of ruminating or common feelings of despair and
hopelessness in depression. A perspective change as enabled by consciousness-altering substances or
methods provides the patient not only with a temporarily altered view on their own “self”, but also
a new and different space to look for solutions and more functional ways of dealing with their
problems [3,21,22,86]. As mentioned previously, an embodied emotional recollection of a psychedelic
experience may stimulate people to “un-self”, i.e., to transcend biased or limiting perceptions of their
self in their daily life which may fuel gradual change and healing [177].
Notable with regards to mystical experiences is that particularly the shift to the experience of
unity/interconnectedness with the world and with others and away from ego-centric identification
have been hypothesized to account for the therapeutic effects of psychedelics across various disorders
[3,14]. Another example is ketamine, for which reduced self-referential awareness in the dissociative
experience is stressed as a factor enabling severely depressed patients to engage in therapy more
meaningfully as they are afforded a “break” from their ordinary ruminating mind, suicidal thoughts,
negativity, and hopelessness [14,21] . As Hanna et al. [28] suggest, gaining an overarching perspective
by simply stepping back and detaching from the context of a problem can itself facilitate more
effective coping.
Furthermore, the widening of a self-centred point of view is often paralleled by a sense of
connectedness and peace, and associated with increased empathy and better relationships [178]. The
shift in perspective fosters greater connectedness not only with oneself, but also a different way of
relating to people, the external world, and life [49,125,135,137,173], counteracting feelings of
disconnection and isolation commonly associated with depression (Breeksema et al., 2023).


6.8. Acceptance

The shift from avoidance to a state of acceptance, openness, and surrender is a process that is
seen as central in psychedelic treatments [179] and also for example in meditative practice [168,179182]. It has been linked to the occurrence of mystical experiences under psilocybin [159] and is also a
key aspect of mindfulness [49]. More generally, by adopting an accepting and compassionate
perspective towards the world and oneself, people might be better equipped to handle life’s
challenges without resorting to avoidance behaviours [183].
Patients undergoing psychedelic therapy for a variety of conditions have identified broadened
emotional spectrum and heightened emotional experiences as characteristic of the psychedelic state
and also found them therapeutically significant [%[36,135,184,185]. These intense emotional
experiences might initially involve confrontation with difficult or painful emotions, however the
acceptance of them can ultimately lead to a feelings of catharsis and release, even joy, bliss, or
profound forgiveness and love [85].
In addition, Thal et al. [3] highlight that substance-induced dissociation from conditioned roles
and habits may foster acceptance of oneself, which has also been reported by participants of e.g.,
ayahuasca [186] or breathwork [104] sessions. Acceptance can also target aspects of one’s life, such as
terminal illness [187] or aspects of one’s biography that were previously avoided [85]. Shifts from
experiential avoidance to acceptance may again be facilitated by the relaxation of higher-level beliefs
that would result in avoidance of e.g., certain emotions or memories [3], as described above for
metaphysical and self-related beliefs.
Moreover, avoidance sensitivity, meaning the tendency to avoid aversive aspects of psychedelic
experiences, can exacerbate potential adverse responses in the acute psychedelic state, while
embracing these experiences can lead to more positive outcomes: Participants have reported that
reducing resistance and embracing the experience during sessions with substances like esketamine
led to calmer, smoother, and more pleasant experiences, contributing to a positive affect post-session.
“Letting go” was not only necessary for the experience to unfold positively but was considered to be
a very meaningful and even key therapeutic aspect of their experience [60].

[PAGE 014]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


13


6.9. Re-Experiencing and Reconsolidation of Memories

Re-experiencing and reconsolidation of memories are hypothesised to play a crucial role in the
therapeutic efficacy of psychedelic-assisted therapy [2,3,188]. Psychedelic-induced states, as well as
experiences during breathwork and meditation, often involve emotional recollections and reflections
on significant life events and relationships, ranging from past transgressions and unresolved traumas
[189] to memories providing insights into one’s own ways of being and behaviour [1]. This process
thus often also involves mindfulness, where patients first become aware of unconscious thoughts and
emotions and are furthermore enabled to evaluate them open-mindedly. Due to their empathogenic
effects, substances such as for example MDMA allow patients to revisit and re-process traumatic
memories without experiencing overwhelming emotional discomfort, judgement, or retraumatisation [3,190], facilitating increased feelings of acceptance and resolution. For instance, a key
symptom of PTSD is the occurrence of involuntary memory intrusions associated with the traumatic
event. Through the process of memory reconsolidation, previously frightening stimuli lose their
threat association and become reintegrated in a less problematic way [3]. This process is akin to
exposure therapy for PTSD, where therapeutic change is a result of new emotional responses to
initially very distressing memories becoming integrated [191]. The metaphor of the “helioscope” has
been proposed to explain how psychedelics may help a patient choose and process traumatic
memories without being severely overwhelmed by their emotional charge [192].
It might be worth noting that the positive effects of these recollections are not necessarily
dependent on the factual accuracy of the memories themselves but rather on the release and reassessment of trauma-related emotions [190]. Additionally, the potentially ineffable nature of these
memories in the context of a mystical experience does not seem to diminish their therapeutic impact
or perceived meaningfulness [184].


6.10. Challenging Experiences

It is worth discussing that certain experiences occurring within psychedelic states may be
challenging and acutely unpleasant to the individual, such as ego dissolution or the re-experience of
traumatic memories. For instance, in one survey, about one-third of participants rated their mystical
experience among the top five most psychologically challenging experiences they had ever faced
[193]. The frequently used and validated Challenging Experience Questionnaire (CEQ) is a self-report
tool designed to measure the intensity and nature of challenging experiences encountered during
psychedelic sessions. It encompasses seven key domains: fear, grief, physical distress, insanity,
isolation/alienation, death, and paranoia [194]. The CEQ is particularly sensitive to difficult
psychedelic experiences, and it has been found to indicate that the intensity of such experiences is
indeed predictive of positive long-term outcomes (e.g., higher scores tended to be accompanied by
higher degrees of mystical experience and psychological insight), while prolonged struggle may
predict negative outcomes [25,194,195]. The subscales of the “Dread of Ego Dissolution” dimension
within the 11D-ASC questionnaire measure these negative aspects of altered states, namely anxiety
and impaired cognition and control [196].
In lay circles, instances of adverse experiences are frequently termed “bad trips”; it should
however be kept in mind that challenging experiences are usually transient and can be inherently
and exceedingly valuable to therapeutic progress. Intense emotions such as anxiety, confusion, grief,
anger, or distress can be unpleasant aspects of psychedelic experiences. However, it is not surprising
that a profound restructuring of the self, way of being, or way of perceiving and coping with the
world or life events (resembling perhaps the ultimate goals of psychedelic therapy) can involve
intense turmoil, stress, and internal conflicts before the significant change occurs (Hanna, 1995).
Such episodes of difficult self-experiences, whilst initially upsetting, are sometimes seen as
essential for emotional breakthroughs and insights [134], and do align with, for example,
psychoanalytic theories that emphasize the need to overcome psychological resistance for therapeutic
progress [164] and the humanistic notion that coming face to face with a problem is necessary to
transcend it [28]. Similarly, in modern exposure therapy, which shares parallels with confrontational
aspects of psychedelic experiences in its working mechanisms, braving discomfort plays a crucial role

[PAGE 015]

14


in emotional processing and subsequent symptom reduction [197]. Accordingly, challenging
experiences in psychedelic therapy can enable individuals to confront, process, and integrate
significant (and sometimes unconscious) memories and emotions, ultimately generating new helpful
perspectives, coping mechanisms, and self-awareness [1]. The deliberate/intentional and controlled
induction of discomfort or stress, as it happens also for example in breathwork sessions, can reduce
long-term anxiety through gradual adaptation [198,199].
Crucially, therapeutic support is vital in guiding individuals through these challenging
moments, ensuring that transient distress leads to meaningful insights and lasting benefits and not
further destabilisation [60], which is of importance especially in clinical populations. Proper
preparation, monitoring, and ongoing support with integration are critical, as they help contextualize
and ground these experiences, maximizing their therapeutic value [1,61,134,195].
Nonetheless, the unusually vulnerable state participants are placed in during psychedelic
experiences can lead to challenging experiences that have serious long-lasting negative effects, such
as for example prolonged existential struggle, social disconnection, depersonalization and
derealization, if not properly managed [200,201]. While cases in the literature might seem rare, there
is a realistic possibility that they are overlooked or under-reported due to flawed designs, small
sample sizes, imprecise follow-ups, or biased reporting [202]. Additionally, it is well possible that not
all contraindications are fully understood at this time, increasing the risk of adverse reactions and
experiences. Therefore, it is essential to take comprehensive precautions to ensure patient safety. This
highlights the importance of a nuanced view on challenging experiences, and on ongoing harm
reduction research to identify and mitigate risks associated with psychedelic treatments.


7. Discussion

The findings presented in this review speak to the relevance of the subjective experience to
therapeutic outcomes, rather than being a mere a ‘side effect’ of the non-experiential, low-level
molecular mechanisms that promote neural plasticity. While the occurrence of mystical experiences
seems to be the strongest predictor of positive outcomes, the literature of the field yields numerous
other psychological processes, such as insight, emotional breakthrough, acceptance, re-experiencing
of memories, and certain aspects of challenging experiences, that are significantly associated with
positive change.
We have additionally discussed in detail the changes in metaphysical as well as self-related
beliefs and their respective contributions to observed outcomes. Briefly, mystical experiences
facilitated by psychedelic substances as well as other mindful practices are thought to be able to
profoundly shift belief systems and thereby provide therapeutic benefits. However, these benefits
may not solely depend on changes in metaphysical beliefs but rather on the re-evaluation of selfperception and personal narratives as well. In essence, psychedelic experiences facilitate not only
plasticity on a pharmacological/neuronal level, but also in cognitive patterns and patterns of
meaning. Importantly, these kinds of plasticity do not necessitate a substance to ‘reveal their mind’
to a person, as they are not limited to pharmacologically induced altered states.
Earlier in this review, we discussed modern forms of breathwork [91,103,203], as well as
meditation [204], and sensory deprivation [116,117] as non-pharmacological modalities to induce
states that accurately might be described as ‘psychedelic’ in the original sense of its meaning.
Although investigations into their therapeutic efficacy and distinct neurophysiological correlates are
partly limited to date, existing findings offer sufficient insights to infer their change-driving
mechanisms. Importantly, some of them overlap considerably with the subjective states of
pharmacologically induced altered states that are more readily and commonly considered
‘psychedelic’. For example, among proposed therapeutic mechanisms of breathwork are reexperiencing of significant memories, emotional breakthrough, insight, change of beliefs, and
mystical experience [101-103,165,205]. Similarly, meditation has recently been investigated for its
potential to induce mystical experiences [204,206-208]. This additionally supports the notion that
therapeutic processes tied to subjective and ‘psychedelic’ experiences that exist across various
modalities (and beyond substances) and are fundamental in facilitating positive therapeutic change.

[PAGE 016]

15


A purely neurochemical/pharmacological approach thus seems reductionist when asked to account
for the therapeutic potential of these extra-ordinary states.


7.1. Implications for Research

Incidentally, the initial question of whether the acute subjective experience is essential for the
therapeutic effects of psychedelic therapy at all effectively invites a discussion of much broader
philosophical fundamental principles in psychology, specifically concerning our understanding of
psychopathology and what constitutes psychotherapy. This discourse hints at a potential paradigm
shift away from a traditional medical model towards a more humanistic and experience-focused
approach to understanding mental pathology and treatment, which is very relevant to our
understanding of how therapy in altered states of consciousness may work therapeutically.
Historically, the medical model has dominated the field of mental health, viewing mental disorders
primarily as biological diseases to be treated with medication or other medical interventions. This
approach somewhat mirrors the psychoplastogen model of psychedelics, as it solely emphasizes the
therapeutic neurobiological effects of these substances as a novel kind of pharmacotherapy.
However, our psychological and psychopathological realities as sentient humans are shaped most of
all by our subjective perspective and perception. In the field of medicine, a physician might identify
a patient’s condition based on symptoms and provides appropriate treatment aimed at curing the
illness. Similarly, proponents of the medical model in psychotherapy assert that therapists diagnose
patients using a similar symptom-based approach and consequently apply treatments aimed at
alleviating their psychological distress. This perspective arguably overlooks the fundamental nature
of psychotherapy as an inter- and intrapersonal process, distinct from medical practice and pure
technical intervention [209]. The emphasis instead lies on improvement on account of the therapeutic
relationship and psychological exploration that provides solutions and new perspectives, rather than
being a mere medical-pharmacological intervention [67]. Psychological problems are situated in the
context of life as it is experienced by a person, and most often in relation to others. From an existentialphenomenological perspective, disorders are not as much diseases as they are alterations of beingin-the-world that are experienced as distressing or impairing [209].
Psychotherapy should aim to acknowledge the complexity of human psychology and the
interconnectedness of biological, psychological, and social factors in shaping mental well-being.
Therefore, instead of trying to rigidly separate therapeutic efficacy of psychedelic therapy into
subjective versus neurobiological components or argue away either of them, it seems much more
reasonable to acknowledge their interdependence. There is no subjective experience without
neurological underpinnings, and likewise neurophysiological changes typically have mental
consequences. Taking a holistic view of individual patients as experiencing beings rather than
objectified “broken machinery” necessitates integrating psychological mechanisms of change, and
therefore subjective experiences, into our understanding of mental health treatment, and especially
into psychedelic therapy. As long as we label clinical interventions involving the administration of
psychedelic substances as “psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy” (and not just “substance-assisted
therapy”), the importance of the subjective experience (that is, in addition, so clearly contextdependent) in the meaning-making therapeutic process seems undisputable.
On this note, the accuracy of the term “psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy” has also been called
into question, since at least in case of therapy sessions involving the administration of high doses of
psychedelics, the experience itself is, in fact, the main constituent of the therapy. Therapists supervise
these drug sessions primarily for safety reasons rather than for therapeutic efficacy. For example,
with high doses of psilocybin or LSD, there is typically no “psychotherapy” that might be assisted by
the drug, because the acute psychedelic state makes interactions of conventional psychotherapy
largely impossible [210]. In contrast, MDMA-assisted therapy, for example, involves a therapeutic
relationship process that is augmented by a pharmacological agent that alters consciousness. The
medication serves as a catalyst within the treatment process rather than constituting the treatment
itself, making it, again, more than purely a medical-pharmacological treatment. We might therefore
need to make a more explicit and nuanced difference between “psychedelic therapy” and

[PAGE 017]

16


“psychedelic-assisted therapy”, depending on whether (a) the subjective transcendent experience of
a drastically altered state constitutes the therapy (by changing self-views, world-views, meaning,
increasing insight and acceptance etc.) or (b) a slightly altered state (such as with moderate doses of
a drug, or specific breathing patterns) supports a more regular psychotherapeutic intervention. In
both cases however, psychological mechanisms within the subjective experience of the patient play
an undeniably essential role for therapeutic success [22,84].
Consequently, while pharmacological agents such as psychedelics surely provide a neurological
foundation conducive to healing, the accompanying psychological processes remain crucial for
achieving lasting therapeutic outcomes. For example, disorders rooted in irrational core beliefs,
which are deeply embedded within the individual’s cognitive framework, certainly require more
than just pharmacological intervention for meaningful change. These beliefs, foundational to a
person’s worldview, are not easily altered by chemical agents alone and necessitate a comprehensive
psychological integration process. It must be noted that this transformation can be lengthy, requiring
shifts in viewpoints that eventually lead to changes in behaviour. We do no argue that psychological
experiences during psychedelic therapy or experiences are always singular solutions, but rather that
they can act as eye-openers that challenge limited beliefs and ordinary perspectives manifested by or
in psychopathology. At the same time, while psychedelic states may be able to facilitate significant
insights and breakthroughs, not all psychological/psychiatric disorders can be resolved solely
through these means either. Neurochemical imbalances and aberrant neural circuitry are frequently
implicated in various psychiatric conditions, and they do offer potential targets for pharmacological
interventions.
In essence, the debate around subjective experience in substance-assisted (psycho)therapy
highlights the necessity of a more nuanced, multi-level, interdisciplinary approach that bridges
pharmacological and psychological interventions to truly understand how therapeutic change is
sustainably achieved. As Garcia-Romeu and Richards [1] have stated: “we propose this paradigm
serves as an invitation for psychiatry overall to return to a more holistic, humanistic-existential, or
biopsychosocial framing of the person and his/her issues as a whole within a larger social matrix and
fabric of meaning, as opposed to approaches that reduce the person to mere neurochemistry,
symptoms, and disorders”.


8. Conclusion

This narrative review has emphasized the positive changes facilitated through psychedelic
altered states of consciousness rather than psychedelic substances alone. In addition to
pharmacological approaches, exploring non-pharmacological methods to harness the potential of
psychedelic-like effects for therapeutic and self-realization purposes seems worthwhile and could
expand the available repertoire of interventions.
The findings, moreover, suggest that a purely medical and neurobiological perspective on
psychological health is too limited and should not overshadow the significance of phenomenological
experiences in understanding and treating psychological issues that manifest in subjective realities
of human individuals. This is particularly relevant for therapies that utilize psychedelic states, as the
psychological processes inherent to the subjective experience of those states show clear associations
with subsequent positive change. An integrative model is needed to account for the interdependence
of psychological and pharmacological dimensions that shape psychopathology and mental health
treatment.


Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.W.; writing—original draft preparation, R.W.; writing—review
and editing, H.S.; supervision, H.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

[PAGE 018]

17


References
1. Garcia-Romeu, A.; Richards, W.A. Current Perspectives on Psychedelic Therapy: Use of Serotonergic
Hallucinogens in Clinical Interventions. Int. Rev. Psychiatry 2018, 30, 291-316,
doi:10.1080/09540261.2018.1486289.
Heifets, B.D.; Olson, D.E. Therapeutic Mechanisms of Psychedelics and Entactogens.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2024, 49, 104-118, doi:10.1038/s41386-023-01666-5.
Thal, S.B.; Bright, S.J.; Sharbanee, J.M.; Wenge, T.; Skeffington, P.M. Current Perspective on the Therapeutic
Preset for Substance-Assisted Psychotherapy. Front. Psychol. 2021, 12, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2021.617224.
Andersen, K.A.A.; Carhart-Harris, R.; Nutt, D.J.; Erritzoe, D. Therapeutic Effects of Classic Serotonergic
Psychedelics: A Systematic Review of Modern-era Clinical Studies. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 2021, 143, 101-
118, doi:10.1111/acps.13249.
Cameron, L.P.; Patel, S.D.; Vargas, M.V.; Barragan, E.V.; Saeger, H.N.; Warren, H.T.; Chow, W.L.; Gray,
J.A.; Olson, D.E. 5-HT2ARs Mediate Therapeutic Behavioral Effects of Psychedelic Tryptamines. ACS Chem.
Neurosci. 2023, 14, 351-358, doi:10.1021/acschemneuro.2c00718.
Carhart-Harris, R.; Giribaldi, B.; Watts, R.; Baker-Jones, M.; Murphy-Beiner, A.; Murphy, R.; Martell, J.;
Blemings, A.; Erritzoe, D.; Nutt, D.J. Trial of Psilocybin versus Escitalopram for Depression. N. Engl. J. Med.
2021, 384, 1402-1411, doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2032994.
Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Roseman, L.; Bolstridge, M.; Demetriou, L.; Pannekoek, J.N.; Wall, M.B.; Tanner, M.;
Kaelen, M.; McGonigle, J.; Murphy, K.; et al. Psilocybin for Treatment-Resistant Depression: fMRI-
Measured Brain Mechanisms. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, doi:10.1038/s41598-017-13282-7.
Davis, A.K.; Barrett, F.S.; May, D.G.; Cosimano, M.P.; Sepeda, N.D.; Johnson, M.W.; Finan, P.H.; Griffiths,
R.R. Effects of Psilocybin-Assisted Therapy on Major Depressive Disorder: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
JAMA Psychiatry 2021, 78, 481, doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2020.3285.
Galvao-Coelho, N.L.; Marx, W.; Gonzalez, M.; Sinclair, J.; De Manincor, M.; Perkins, D.; Sarris, J. Classic
Serotonergic Psychedelics for Mood and Depressive Symptoms: A Meta-Analysis of Mood Disorder
Patients and Healthy Participants. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 2021, 238, 341-354, doi:10.1007/s00213-020-
05719-1.
10. Ko, K.; Kopra, E.L; Cleare, A.J.; Rucker, J.J. Psychedelic Therapy for Depressive Symptoms: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. J. Affect. Disord. 2023, 322, 194-204, doi:10.1016/j.jad.2022.09.168.
11. Romeo, B.; Karila, L.; Martelli, C.; Benyamina, A. Efficacy of Psychedelic Treatments on Depressive
Symptoms: A Meta-Analysis. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2020, 34, 1079-1085, doi:10.1177/0269881120919957.
12. Von Rotz, R.; Schindowski, E.M.; Jungwirth, J.; Schuldt, A.; Rieser, N.M.; Zahoranszky, K.; Seifritz, E.;
Nowak, A.; Nowak, P.; Jancke, L.; et al. Single-Dose Psilocybin-Assisted Therapy in Major Depressive
Disorder: A Placebo-Controlled, Double-Blind, Randomised Clinical Trial. eClinicalMedicine 2023, 56,
doi:10.1016/j.eclinm.2022.101809.
13. Van Der Meer, P.B.; Fuentes, J.J.; Kaptein, A.A.; Schoones, J.W.; De Waal, M.M.; Goudriaan, A.E.; Kramers,
K.; Schellekens, A.; Somers, M.; Bossong, M.G.; et al. Therapeutic Effect of Psilocybin in Addiction: A
Systematic Review. Front. Psychiatry 2023, 14, doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1134454.
14. Joneborg, I.; Lee, Y.; Di, J.D.; Ceban, F.; Meshkat, S.; Lui, L.M.; Fancy, F.; Rosenblat, J.D.; Mcintyre, R.S.
Active Mechanisms of Ketamine-Assisted Psychotherapy: A Systematic Review. J. Affect. Disord. 2022, 315,
105-112, doi:10.1016/j.jad.2022.07.030.
15. Agin-Liebes, G.; Haas, T.F.; Lancelotta, R.; Uthaug, M.V.; Ramaekers, J.G.; Davis, A.K. Naturalistic Use of
Mescaline Is Associated with Self-Reported Psychiatric Improvements and Enduring Positive Life
Changes. ACS Pharmacol. Transl. Sci. 2021, 4, 543-552, doi:10.1021/acsptsci.1c00018.
16. Agin-Liebes, G.; Zeifman, R.; Luoma, J.B.; Garland, E.L.; Campbell, W.K.; Weiss, B. Prospective
Examination of the Therapeutic Role of Psychological Flexibility and Cognitive Reappraisal in the
Ceremonial Use of Ayahuasca. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2022, 36, 295-308, doi:10.1177/02698811221080165.
17. Palhano-Fontes, F.; Barreto, D.; Onias, H.; Andrade, K.C.; Novaes, M.M.; Pessoa, J.A.; Mota-Rolim, S.A.;
Osorio, F.L.; Sanches, R.; Dos Santos, R.G.; et al. Rapid Antidepressant Effects of the Psychedelic Ayahuasca
in Treatment-Resistant Depression: A Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial. Psychol. Med. 2019, 49, 655—
663, doi:10.1017/S0033291718001356.
18. Uthaug, M.V.; Van Oorsouw, K.; Kuypers, K.P.C.; Van Boxtel, M.; Broers, N.J.; Mason, N.L.; Toennes, S.W.;
Riba, J.; Ramaekers, J.G. Sub-Acute and Long-Term Effects of Ayahuasca on Affect and Cognitive Thinking
Style and Their Association with Ego Dissolution. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 2018, 235, 2979-2989,
doi:10.1007/s00213-018-4988-3.
19. Uthaug, M.V.; Davis, A.K.; Haas, T.F.; Davis, D.; Dolan, S.B.; Lancelotta, R.; Timmermann, C.; Ramaekers,
J.G. The Epidemiology of Mescaline Use: Pattern of Use, Motivations for Consumption, and Perceived
Consequences, Benefits, and Acute and Enduring Subjective Effects. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2022, 36, 309-
320, doi:10.1177/02698811211013583.

[PAGE 019]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


18


20. Van Oorsouw, K.; Toennes, S.W.; Ramaekers, J.G. Therapeutic Effect of an Ayahuasca Analogue in
Clinically Depressed Patients: A Longitudinal Observational Study. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 2022, 239,
1839-1852, doi:10.1007/s00213-021-06046-9.
21. Breeksema, J.J.; Niemeijer, A.; Kuin, B.; Veraart, J.; Vermetten, E.; Kamphuis, J.; Brink, W.V.D.; Schoevers,
R. Phenomenology and Therapeutic Potential of Patient Experiences during Oral Esketamine Treatment
for Treatment-Resistant Depression: An Interpretative Phenomenological Study. Psychopharmacology (Berl.)
2023, 240, 1547-1560, doi:10.1007/s00213-023-06388-6.
22. Van Elk, M.; Yaden, D.B. Pharmacological, Neural, and Psychological Mechanisms Underlying
Psychedelics: A Critical Review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2022, 140, doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104793.
23. Moreton, S.G.; Szalla, L.; Menzies, R.E.; Arena, A.F. Embedding Existential Psychology within Psychedelic
Science: Reduced Death Anxiety as a Mediator of the Therapeutic Effects of Psychedelics.
Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 2020, 237, 21-32, doi:10.1007/s00213-019-05391-0.
24. Nikolaidis, A.; Lancelotta, R.; Gukasyan, N.; Griffiths, R.R.; Barrett, F.S.; Davis, A.K. Subtypes of the
Psychedelic Experience Have Reproducible and Predictable Effects on Depression and Anxiety Symptoms.
J. Affect. Disord. 2022, 324, 239-249, doi:10.1016/j.jad.2022.12.042.
25. Roseman, L.; Nutt, D.J.; Carhart-Harris, R.L. Quality of Acute Psychedelic Experience Predicts Therapeutic
Efficacy of Psilocybin for Treatment-Resistant Depression. Front. Pharmacol. 2018, 8, 974,
doi:10.3389/fphar.2017.00974.
26. Tulver, K.; Kaup, K.K.; Laukkonen, R.; Aru, J. Restructuring Insight: An Integrative Review of Insight in
Problem-Solving, Meditation, Psychotherapy, Delusions and Psychedelics. Conscious. Cogn. 2023, 110,
doi:10.1016/j.concog.2023.103494.
27. MacLean, K.A.; Johnson, M.W.; Griffiths, R.R. Mystical Experiences Ooccasioned by the Hallucinogen
Psilocybin Lead to Increases in the Personality Domain of Openness. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2011, 25,
doi:10.1177/0269881111420188.
28. Hanna, F.J.; Giordano, F.; Dupuy, P.; Puhakka, K. Agency and Transcendence: The Experience of
Therapeutic Change. Humanist. Psychol. 1995, 23, 139-160, doi:10.1080/08873267.1995.9986822.
29. Schenberg, E.E. Psychedelic-Assisted Psychotherapy: A Paradigm Shift in Psychiatric Research and
Development. Front. Pharmacol. 2018, 9, doi:10.3389/fphar.2018.00733.
30. Brodie, B.B.; Shore, P.A. A Concept For a Role of Serotonin and Norepinephrine as Chemical Mediators in
the Brain. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1957, 66, 631-642, doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1957.tb40753.x.
31. Woolley, D.W.; Shaw, E. Some Neurophysiological Aspects of Serotonin. Br. Med. J. 1954, 2, 122-126,
doi:10.1136/bmj.2.4880.122.
32. Johnson, M.W.; Hendricks, P.S.; Barrett, F.S.; Griffiths, R.R. Classic Psychedelics: An Integrative Review of
Epidemiology, Therapeutics, Mystical Experience, and Brain Network Function. Pharmacol. Ther. 2019, 197,
83-102, doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera.2018.11.010.
33. De Vos, C.M.H.; Mason, N.L.; Kuypers, K.P.C. Psychedelics and Neuroplasticity: A Systematic Review
Unraveling the Biological Underpinnings of Psychedelics. Front. Psychiatry 2021, 12,
doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2021.724606.
34. Jaster, A.M.; González-Maeso, J. Mechanisms and Molecular Targets Surrounding the Potential
Therapeutic Effects of Psychedelics. Mol. Psychiatry 2023, 28, 3595-3612, doi:10.1038/s41380-023-02274-x.
35. Brunoni, A.R.; Lopes, M.; Fregni, F. A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Clinical Studies on Major
Depression and BDNF Levels: Implications for the Role of Neuroplasticity in Depression. Int. J.
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008, 11, 1169-1180, doi:10.1017/S1461145708009309.
36. Belser, A.B.; Agin-Liebes, G.; Swift, T.C.; Terrana, S.; Devenot, N.; Friedman, H.L.; Guss, J.; Bossis, A.; Ross,
S. Patient Experiences of Psilocybin-Assisted Psychotherapy: An Interpretative Phenomenological
Analysis. J. Humanist. Psychol. 2017, 57, 354-388, doi:10.1177/0022167817706884.
37. Barrett, F.S.; Griffiths, R.R. Classic Hallucinogens and Mystical Experiences: Phenomenology and Neural
Correlates. In Behavioral Neurobiology of Psychedelic Drugs; Halberstadt, A.L., Vollenweider, F.X., Nichols,
D.E., Eds.; Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences; Springer Berlin Heidelberg: Berlin, Heidelberg,
2017; Vol. 36, pp. 393-430 ISBN 978-3-662-55878-2.
38. Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Kaelen, M.; Whalley, M.G.; Bolstridge, M.; Feilding, A.; Nutt, D.J. LSD Enhances
Suggestibility in Healthy Volunteers. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 2015, 232, 785-794, doi:10.1007/s00213-014-
3714-z.
39. Preller, K.H.; Herdener, M.; Pokorny, T.; Planzer, A.; Kraehenmann, R.; Stämpfli, P.; Liechti, M.E.; Seifritz,
E.; Vollenweider, F.X. The Fabric of Meaning and Subjective Effects in LSD-Induced States Depend on
Serotonin 2A Receptor Activation. Curr. Biol. 2017, 27, 451-457, doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.12.030.
40. Winkelman, M.J. The Mechanisms of Psychedelic Visionary Experiences: Hypotheses from Evolutionary
Psychology. Front. Neurosci. 2017, 11, doi:10.3389/fnins.2017.00539.
41. Swanson, L.R. Unifying Theories of Psychedelic Drug Effects. Front. Pharmacol. 2018, 9,
doi:10.3389/fphar.2018.00172.

[PAGE 020]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


19


42. Raison, C.L.; Sanacora, G.; Woolley, J.; Heinzerling, K.; Dunlop, B.W.; Brown, R.T.; Kakar, R.; Hassman, M.;
Trivedi, R.P.; Robison, R.; et al. Single-Dose Psilocybin Treatment for Major Depressive Disorder: A
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2023, 330, 843-853, doi:10.1001/jama.2023.14530.
43. Davis, A.K.; So, S.; Lancelotta, R.; Barsuglia, J.P.; Griffiths, R.R. 5-Methoxy- N,N -Dimethyltryptamine (5-
MeO-DMT) Used in a Naturalistic Group Setting Is Associated with Unintended Improvements in
Depression and Anxiety. Am. J. Drug Alcohol Abuse 2019, 45, 161-169, doi:10.1080/00952990.2018.1545024.
44. Griffiths, R.R.; Johnson, M.W.; Carducci, M.A.; Umbricht, A.; Richards, W.A.; Richards, B.D.; Cosimano,
M.P.; Klinedinst, M.A. Psilocybin Produces Substantial and Sustained Decreases in Depression and Anxiety
in Patients with Life-Threatening Cancer: A Randomized Double-Blind Trial. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.)
2016, 30, 1181-1197, doi:10.1177/0269881116675513.
45. Moreton, S.G.; Arena, A.F.A.; Foy, Y.; Menzies, R.E. Reduced Death Anxiety as a Mediator of the
Relationship between Acute Subjective Effects of Psychedelics and Improved Subjective Well-Being. Death
Stud. 2023, 47, 1115-1126, doi:10.1080/07481187.2023.2169848.
46. Garcia-Romeu, A.; Davis, A.K.; Erowid, F.; Erowid, E.; Griffiths, R.R.; Johnson, M.W. Cessation and
Reduction in Alcohol Consumption and Misuse after Psychedelic Use. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2019, 33,
1088-1101, doi:10.1177/0269881119845793.
47. Davis, A.K.; Xin, Y.; Sepeda, N.D.; Garcia-Romeu, A.; Williams, M.T. Increases in Psychological Flexibility
Mediate Relationship Between Acute Psychedelic Effects and Decreases in Racial Trauma Symptoms
Among People of Color. Chronic Stress 2021, 5, doi:10.1177/24705470211035607.
48. Doss, M.K.; Povazan, M.; Rosenberg, M.D.; Sepeda, N.D.; Davis, A.K.; Finan, P.H.; Smith, G.S.; Pekar, J.J.;
Barker, P.B.; Griffiths, R.R.; et al. Psilocybin Therapy Increases Cognitive and Neural Flexibility in Patients
with Major Depressive Disorder. Transl. Psychiatry 2021, 11, doi:10.1038/s41398-021-01706-y.
49. Gandy, S. Predictors and Potentiators of Psychedelicoccasioned Mystical Experiences. J. Psychedelic Stud.
2022, 6, 31-47, doi:10.1556/2054.2022.00198.
50. Griffiths, R.; Richards, W.; Johnson, M.; McCann, U.; Jesse, R. Mystical-Type Experiences Occasioned by
Psilocybin Mediate the Attribution of Personal Meaning and Spiritual Significance 14 Months Later. J.
Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2008, 22, 621-632, doi:10.1177/0269881108094300.
51. Griffiths, R.R.; Johnson, M.W.; Richards, W.A.; Richards, B.D.; Jesse, R.; MacLean, K.A.; Barrett, F.S.;
Cosimano, M.P.; Klinedinst, M.A. Psilocybin-Occasioned Mystical-Type Experience in Combination with
Meditation and Other Spiritual Practices Produces Enduring Positive Changes in Psychological
Functioning and in Trait Measures of Prosocial Attitudes and Behaviors. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2018, 32,
49-69, doi:10.1177/0269881117731279.
52. Yazar-Klosinski, B.B.; Mithoefer, M.C. Potential Psychiatric Uses for MDMA. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2016,
101, doi:10.1002/cpt.565.
53. Barksdale, B.R.; Doss, M.K.; Fonzo, G.A.; Nemeroff, C.B. The Mechanistic Divide in Psychedelic
Neuroscience: An Unbridgeable Gap? Neurotherapeutics 2024, 21, doi:10.1016/j.neurot.2024.e00322.
54. Gorman, I.; Belser, A.B.; Jerome, L.; Hennigan, C.; Shechet, B.; Hamilton, S.; Yazar-Klosinski, B.; Emerson,
A.; Feduccia, A.A. Posttraumatic Growth After MDMA-Assisted Psychotherapy for Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder. J. Trauma. Stress 2020, 33, doi:10.1002/jts.22479.
55. Wilkinson, S.T.; Rhee, T.G.; Joormann, J.; Webler, R.; Ortiz Lopez, M.; Kitay, B.; Fasula, M.; Elder, C.; Fenton,
L.; Sanacora, G. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy to Sustain the Antidepressant Effects of Ketamine in
Treatment-Resistant Depression: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Psychother. Psychosom. 2021, 90, 318-327,
doi:10.1159/000517074.
56. Earleywine, M.; Ueno, L.F.; Mian, M.N.; Altman, B.R. Cannabis-Induced Oceanic Boundlessness. J.
Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2021, 35, 841-847, doi:10.1177/0269881121997099.
57. Earleywine, M.; Mian, M.N.; Altman, B.R.; Leo, J.A.D. Expectancies for Cannabis-Induced Emotional
Breakthrough, Mystical Experiences and Changes in Dysfunctional Attitudes: Perceptions of the Potential
for Cannabis-Assisted Psychotherapy for Depression. Cannabis 2022, 5, doi:10.26828/cannabis/2022.02.02.
58. Farmer, S.; Slavin, M.N.; Loflin, M.J.E.; Luba, R.; Earleywine, M. Aversiveness and Meaningfulness of
Uncomfortable Experiences with Edible Cannabis. J. Psychoactive Drugs 2019, 51, 413-420,
doi:10.1080/02791072.2019.1645371.
59. Ferrara, M.S. Peak-Experience and the Entheogenic Use of Cannabis in World Religions. J. Psychedelic Stud.
2020, 4, 179-191, doi:10.1556/2054.2020.00122.
60. Breeksema, J.J.; Niemeijer, A.; Kuin, B.; Veraart, J.; Kamphuis, J.; Schimmel, N.; Van Den Brink, W.;
Vermetten, E.; Schoevers, R. Holding on or Letting Go? Patient Experiences of Control, Context, and Care
in Oral Esketamine Treatment for Treatment-Resistant Depression: A Qualitative Study. Front. Psychiatry
2022, 13, doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2022.948115.
61. Aday, J.S.; Davis, A.K.; Mitzkovitz, C.M.; Bloesch, E.K.; Davoli, C.C. Predicting Reactions to Psychedelic
Drugs: A Systematic Review of States and Traits Related to Acute Drug Effects. ACS Pharmacol. Transl. Sci.
2021, 4, 424-435, doi:10.1021/acsptsci.1c00014.

[PAGE 021]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


20


62. Kaelen, M.; Giribaldi, B.; Raine, J.; Evans, L.; Timmerman, C.; Rodriguez, N.; Roseman, L.; Feilding, A.;
Nutt, D.; Carhart-Harris, R. The Hidden Therapist: Evidence for a Central Role of Music in Psychedelic
Therapy. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 2018, 235, 505-519, doi:10.1007/s00213-017-4820-5.
63. Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Roseman, L.; Haijen, E.; Erritzoe, D.; Watts, R.; Branchi, I.; Kaelen, M. Psychedelics
and the Essential Importance of Context. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2018, 32, 725-731,
doi:10.1177/0269881118754710.
64. Bohn, A.; Kiggen, M.H.H.; Uthaug, M.V.; Van Oorsouw, K.I.M.; Ramaekers, J.G.; Van Schie, H.T. Altered
States of Consciousness During Ceremonial San Pedro Use. Int. J. Psychol. Relig. 2023, 33, 309-331,
doi:10.1080/10508619.2022.2139502.
65. Winkelman, M. Psychedelics as Medicines for Substance Abuse Rehabilitation: Evaluating Treatments with
LSD, Peyote, Ibogaine and Ayahuasca. Curr. Drug Abuse Rev. 2015, 7, 101-116,
doi:10.2174/1874473708666150107120011.
66. Richards, W.A. Psychedelic Psychotherapy: Insights From 25 Years of Research. J. Humanist. Psychol. 2017,
57, 323-337, doi:10.1177/0022167816670996.
67. Elkins, D.N. Common Factors: What Are They and What Do They Mean for Humanistic Psychology? J.
Humanist. Psychol. 2022, 62, 21-30, doi:10.1177/0022167819858533.
68. Krupnick, J.L.; Sotsky, S.M.; Simmens, S.; Moyer, J.; Elkin, I.; Watkins, J.; Pilkonis, P.A. The Role of the
Therapeutic Alliance in Psychotherapy and Pharmacotherapy Outcome: Findings in the National Institute
of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 1996,
64, 532-539, doi:10.1037/0022-006X.64.3.532.
69. Weiss, M.; Gaston, L.; Propst, A.; Wisebord, S.; Zicherman, V. The Role of the Alliance in the Pharmacologic
Treatment of Depression. J. Clin. Psychiatry 1997, 58, 196-204, doi:10.4088/JCP.v58n0504.
70. Maia, L.O.; Daldegan-Bueno, D.; Wießner, I.; Araujo, D.B.; Tofoli, L.F. Ayahuasca’s Therapeutic Potential:
What We Know - and What Not. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 2023, 66, 45-61,
doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2022.10.008.
71. Palhano-Fontes, F.; Soares, B.L.; Galvao-Coelho, N.L.; Arcoverde, E.; Araujo, D.B. Ayahuasca for the
Treatment of Depression. In Disruptive Psychopharmacology; Barrett, F.S., Preller, K.H., Eds.; Current Topics
in Behavioral Neurosciences; Springer International Publishing: Cham, 2021; Vol. 56, pp. 113-124 ISBN 978-
3-031-12183-8.
72. Sanches, R.F.; De Lima Osório, F.; Dos Santos, R.G.; Macedo, L.R.H.; Maia-de-Oliveira, J.P.; Wichert-Ana,
L.; De Araujo, D.B.; Riba, J.; Crippa, J.A.S.; Hallak, J.E.C. Antidepressant Effects of a Single Dose of
Ayahuasca in Patients With Recurrent Depression: A SPECT Study. J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 2016, 36, 77-
81, doi:10.1097/JCP.0000000000000436.
73. Dos Santos, R.G.; Osório, F.L.; Crippa, J.A.S.; Riba, J.; Zuardi, A.W.; Hallak, J.E.C. Antidepressive,
Anxiolytic, and Antiaddictive Effects of Ayahuasca, Psilocybin and Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD): A
Systematic Review of Clinical Trials Published in the Last 25 Years. Ther. Adv. Psychopharmacol. 2016, 6, 193-
213, doi:10.1177/2045125316638008.
74. Santos, R.G.; Landeira-Fernandez, J.; Strassman, R.J.; Motta, V.; Cruz, A.P.M. Effects of Ayahuasca on
Psychometric Measures of Anxiety, Panic-like and Hopelessness in Santo Daime Members. J.
Ethnopharmacol. 2007, 112, 507-513, doi:10.1016/j.jep.2007.04.012.
75. Barbosa, P.C.R.; Strassman, R.J.; Da Silveira, D.X.; Areco, K.; Hoy, R.; Pommy, J.; Thoma, R.; Bogenschutz,
M. Psychological and Neuropsychological Assessment of Regular Hoasca Users. Compr. Psychiatry 2016,
71, 95-105, doi:10.1016/j.comppsych.2016.09.003.
76. Vamvakopoulou, I.A.; Narine, K.A.D.; Campbell, I.; Dyck, J.R.B.; Nutt, D.J. Mescaline: The Forgotten
Psychedelic. Neuropharmacology 2023, 222, doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2022.109294.
77. Kock, P.; Froelich, K.; Walter, M.; Lang, U.; Dürsteler, K.M. A Systematic Literature Review of Clinical
Trials and Therapeutic Applications of Ibogaine. J. Subst. Abuse Treat. 2021, 138,
doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2021.108717.
78. Schenberg, E.E.; Comis, M.A.D.C.; Felipe, J.; Alexandre, M.; Tófoli, L.F.; Daniel, B.; Chaves, R.; Silveira,
D.X.D.; Ekman, E.; Instituto, S.; et al. A Phenomenological Analysis of the Subjective Experience Elicited
by Ibogaine in the Context of a Drug Dependence Treatment. J. Psychedelic Stud. 2017, 1, 74-83,
doi:10.1556/2054.01.2017.007.
79. Cameron, L.P.; Tombari, R.J.; Lu, J.; Pell, A.J.; Hurley, Z.Q.; Ehinger, Y.; Vargas, M.V.; Mccarroll, M.N.;
Taylor, J.C.; Myers-Turnbull, D.; et al. A Non-Hallucinogenic Psychedelic Analog with Therapeutic
Potential. Nature 2021, 589, 474-479, doi:10.1038/s41586-020-3008-z.
80. Tupper, K.W. Ayahuasca Healing beyond the Amazon: The Globalization of a Traditional Indigenous
Entheogenic Practice. Glob. Netw. 2009, 9, 117-136, doi:10.1111/j.1471-0374.2009.00245.x.
81. Dobkin De Rios, M. Drug Tourism in the Amazon. Anthropol. Conscious. 1994, 5, 16-19,
doi:10.1525/ac.1994.5.1.16.

[PAGE 022]

21


82. Timmermann, C.; Watts, R.; Dupuis, D. Towards Psychedelic Apprenticeship: Developing a Gentle Touch
for the Mediation and Validation of Psychedelic-Induced Insights and Revelations. Transcult. Psychiatry
2022, 59, 691-704, doi:10.1177/13634615221082796.
83. Olson, D.E. The Subjective Effects of Psychedelics May Not Be Necessary for Their Enduring Therapeutic
Effects. ACS Pharmacol. Transl. Sci. 2021, 4, 563-567, doi:10.1021/acsptsci.0c00192.
84. Yaden, D.B.; Griffiths, R.R. The Subjective Effects of Psychedelics Are Necessary for Their Enduring
Therapeutic Effects. ACS Pharmacol. Transl. Sci. 2020, 4, 568-572, doi:10.1021/acsptsci.0c00194.
85. Letheby, C. Philosophy of Psychedelics; International perspectives in philosophy & psychology; Oxford
University Press: New York, 2021; ISBN 978-0-19-884312-2.
86. Griffiths, R.R.; Richards, W.A.; McCann, U.; Jesse, R. Psilocybin Can Occasion Mystical-Type Experiences
Having Substantial and Sustained Personal Meaning and Spiritual Significance. Psychopharmacology (Berl.)
2006, 187, 268-283, doi:10.1007/s00213-006-0457-5.
87. Griffiths, R.R.; Johnson, M.W.; Richards, W.A.; Richards, B.D.; McCann, U.; Jesse, R. Psilocybin Occasioned
Mystical-Type Experiences: Immediate and Persisting Dose-Related Effects. Psychopharmacology (Berl.)
2011, 218, 649-665, doi:10.1007/s00213-011-2358-5.
88. Schmid, Y.; Gasser, P.; Oehen, P.; Liechti, M.E. Acute Subjective Effects in LSD-and MDMA-Assisted
Psychotherapy. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 35, 362-374, doi:10.1177/0269881120959604.
89. Ross, S. Therapeutic Use of Classic Psychedelics to Treat Cancer-Related Psychiatric Distress. Int. Rev.
Psychiatry 2018, 30, 317-330, doi:10.1080/09540261.2018.1482261.
90. Eyerman, J. A Clinical Report of Holotropic Breathwork in 11,000 Psychiatric Inpatients in a Community
Hospital Setting. MAPS Bull. Spec. Ed. 2013, 23, 24-27.
91. Fincham, G.W.; Kartar, A.; Uthaug, M.V.; Anderson, B.; Hall, L.; Nagai, Y.; Critchley, H.; Colasanti, A. High
Ventilation Breathwork Practices: An Overview of Their Effects, Mechanisms, and Considerations for
Clinical Applications. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2023, 155, doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105453.
92. Fritz, P.; Lejeune, N.; Cardone, P.; Gosseries, O.; Martial, C. Bridging the Gap: (A)Typical Psychedelic and
near-Death Experience Insights. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 2024, 55, doi:10.1016/j.cobeha.2023.101349.
93. Holas, P.; Kaminska, J. Mindfulness Meditation and Psychedelics: Potential Synergies and Commonalities.
Pharmacol. Rep. 2023, 75, 1398-1409, doi:10.1007/s43440-023-00551-8.
94. Lyon, A. Psychedelic Experience: Revealing the Mind; 1st ed.; Oxford University Press: New York, 2023; ISBN
978-0-19-884375-7.
95. Osmond, H. A Review of the Clinical Effects of Psychotomimetic Agents. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1957, 66,
418-434, doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1957.tb40738.x.
96. Brown, R.P.; Gerbarg, P.L.; Muench, F. Breathing Practices for Treatment of Psychiatric and Stress-Related
Medical Conditions. Psychiatr. Clin. North Am. 2013, 36, 121-140, doi:10.1016/j.psc.2013.01.001.
97. Stenkamp, K.; Palva, J.M.; Uusisaari, M.; Schuchmann, S.; Schmitz, D.; Heinemann, U.; Kaila, K. Enhanced
Temporal Stability of Cholinergic Hippocampal Gamma Oscillations Following Respiratory Alkalosis In
Vitro. J. Neurophysiol. 2001, 85, 2063-2069, doi:10.1152/jn.2001.85.5.2063.
98. Li, S.; Rymer, W.Z. Voluntary Breathing Influences Corticospinal Excitability of Nonrespiratory Finger
Muscles. J. Neurophysiol. 2011, 105, 512-521, doi:10.1152/jn.00946.2010.
99. Sun, Y.-G.; Wu, C.-S.; Renger, J.J.; Uebele, V.N.; Lu, H.-C.; Beierlein, M.GABAergic Synaptic Transmission
Triggers Action Potentials in Thalamic Reticular Nucleus Neurons. J. Neurosci. 2012, 32, 7782-7790,
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0839-12.2012.
100. Agadzhanyan, N.A.; Panina, M.I.; Kozupitsa, G.S.; Sergeev, O.S. Subjective and Neurological
Manifestations of Hyperventilation States of Different Intensities. Hum. Physiol. 2003, 29, 448-452,
doi:10.1023/A:1024929523667.
101. Puente, I. Holotropic Breathwork Can Occasion Mystical Experiences in the Context of a Daylong
Workshop. J. Transpers. Res. 2014, 6, 40-50.
102. De Wit, P.A.J.M.; Moraes Cruz, R. Treating PTSD with Connected Breathing: A Clinical Case Study and
Theoretical Implications. Eur. J. Trauma Dissociation 2021, 5, doi:10.1016/j.ejtd.2020.100152.
103. Uthaug, M.V.; Mason, N.L.; Havenith, M.N.; Vancura, M.; Ramaekers, J.G. An Experience with Holotropic
Breathwork Is Associated with Improvement in Non-Judgement and Satisfaction with Life While Reducing
Symptoms of Stress in a Czech-Speaking Population. J. Psychedelic Stud. 2022, 5, 176-189,
doi:10.1556/2054.2021.00193.
104. Khubsing, R.S.I.; Leerdam, M.V.; Haijen, E.C.H.M.; Kuypers, K.P.C. Self-Rated Effectiveness of Ayahuasca
and Breathwork on Well-Being, Psychological Resilience, Self-Compassion, and Personality: An
Observational Comparison Study. Psychoactives 2024, 3, 167-183, doi:10.3390/psychoactives3020011.
105. Lebedev, A.V.; Lövden, M.; Rosenthal, G.; Feilding, A.; Nutt, D.J.; Carhart-Harris, R.L. Finding the Self by
Losing the Self: Neural Correlates of Ego-Dissolution under Psilocybin: Finding the Self by Losing the Self.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 2015, 36, 3137-3153, doi:10.1002/hbm.22833.
106. Milliere, R.; Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Roseman, L.; Trautwein, F.-M.; Berkovich-Ohana, A. Psychedelics,
Meditation, and Self-Consciousness. Front. Psychol. 2018, 9, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01475.

[PAGE 023]

22


107. Simonsson, O.; Goldberg, S.B. Linkages between Psychedelics and Meditation in a Population-Based
Sample in the United States. J. Psychoactive Drugs 2023, 55, 11-18, doi:10.1080/02791072.2021.2022816.
108. Brewer, J.A.; Worhunsky, P.D.; Gray, J.R.; Tang, Y.-Y.; Weber, J.; Kober, H. Meditation Experience Is
Associated with Differences in Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2011,
108, 20254-20259, doi:10.1073/pnas.1112029108.
109. Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Erritzoe, D.; Williams, T.; Stone, J.M.; Reed, L.J.; Colasanti, A.; Tyacke, R.J.; Leech, R.;
Malizia, A.L.; Murphy, K.; et al. Neural Correlates of the Psychedelic State as Determined by {MRI Studies
with Psilocybin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2012, 109, 2138-2143, doi:10.1073/pnas.1119598109.
110. Farb, N.A.S.; Segal, Z.V.; Mayberg, H.; Bean, J.; McKeon, D.; Fatima, Z.; Anderson, A.K. Attending to the
Present: Mindfulness Meditation Reveals Distinct Neural Modes of Self-Reference. Soc. Cogn. Affect.
Neurosci. 2007, 2, 313-322, doi:10.1093/scan/nsm030.
111. Dahl, C.J.; Lutz, A.; Davidson, R.J. Reconstructing and Deconstructing the Self: Cognitive Mechanisms in
Meditation Practice. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2015, 19, 515-523, doi:10.1016/j.tics.2015.07.001.
112. Van Lente, E.; Hogan, M.J. Understanding the Nature of Oneness Experience in Meditators Using
Collective Intelligence Methods. Front. Psychol. 2020, 11, 2092, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02092.
113. Berentsen, K.B.; Stodkilde-Jorgensen, H.; Sommerlund, B.; Hartmann, T.; Damsgaard-Madsen, J.; Fosnes,
M.; Green, A.C. An Investigation of Brain Processes Supporting Meditation. Cogn. Process. 2010, 11, 57-84,
doi:10.1007/s10339-009-0342-3.
114. Mills, P.J.; Peterson, C.T.; Pung, M.A.; Patel, S.; Weiss, L.; Wilson, K.L.; Doraiswamy, P.M.; Martin, J.A.;
Tanzi, R.E.; Chopra, D. Change in Sense of Nondual Awareness and Spiritual Awakening in Response to a
Multidimensional Well-Being Program. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 2018, 24, 343-351,
doi:10.1089/acm.2017.0160.
115. Lilly, J.C. The Deep Self: Consciousness Exploration in the Isolation Tank; Consciousness classics; Gateways
Books and Tapes: Nevada City, CA, 2007; ISBN 978-0-89556-116-9.
116. Kjellgren, A.; Lyden, F.; Norlander, T. Sensory Isolation in Flotation Tanks: Altered States of Consciousness
and Effects on Well-Being. Qual. Rep. 2008, 13, 636-656, doi:10.46743/2160-3715/2008.1577.
117. Norlander, T.; Kjellgren, A.; Archer, T. Effects of Flotation-Versus Chamber-Restricted Environmental
Stimulation Technique (Rest) on Creativity and Realism under Stress and Non-Stress Conditions. Imagin.
Cogn. Personal. 2003, 22, 343-359, doi:10.2190/0LAE-M7WP-R6UQ-CR3P.
118. Dotan, A.; Shriki, O. Tinnitus-like “Hallucinations” Elicited by Sensory Deprivation in an Entropy
Maximization Recurrent Neural Network. PLOS Comput. Biol. 2021, 17, doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008664.
119. Jonsson, K.; Kjellgren, A. Characterizing the Experiences of Flotation-REST (Restricted Environmental
Stimulation Technique) Treatment for Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD): A Phenomenological Study.
Eur. J. Integr. Med. 2017, 12, 53-59, doi:10.1016/j.eujim.2017.04.011.
120. Suedfeld, P.; Landon, P.B.; Ballard, E.J. Effects of Reduced Stimulation on Divergent and Convergent
Thinking. Environ. Behav. 1983, 15, 727-738, doi:10.1177/0013916583156003.
121. Suedfeld, P.; Metcalfe, J.; Bluck, S. Enhancement of Scientific Creativity by Flotation Rest (Restricted
Environmental Stimulation Technique). J. Environ. Psychol. 1987, 7, 219-231, doi:10.1016/S0272-
4944(87)80031-2.
122. Al Zoubi, O.; Misaki, M.; Bodurka, J.; Kuplicki, R.; Wohlrab, C.; Schoenhals, W.A.; Refai, H.H.; Khalsa, S.S.;
Stein, M.B.; Paulus, M.P.; et al. Taking the Body off the Mind: Decreased Functional Connectivity between
Somatomotor and Default-mode Networks Following Floatation-REST. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2021, 42, 3216-
3227, doi:10.1002/hbm.25429.
123. Ko, K.; Knight, G.; Rucker, J.J.; Cleare, A.J. Psychedelics, Mystical Experience, and Therapeutic Efficacy: A
Systematic Review. Front. Psychiatry 2022, 13, doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2022.917199.
124. Bogenschutz, M.P.; Forcehimes, A.A.; Pommy, J.A.; Wilcox, C.E.; Barbosa, P.; Strassman, R.J. Psilocybin-
Assisted Treatment for Alcohol Dependence: A Proof-of-Concept Study. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2015, 29,
289-299, doi:10.1177/0269881114565144.
125. Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Erritzoe, D.; Haijen, E.; Kaelen, M.; Watts, R. Psychedelics and Connectedness.
Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 2018, 235, 547-550, doi:10.1007/s00213-017-4701-y.
126. Hartogsohn, I. The Meaning-Enhancing Properties of Psychedelics and Their Mediator Role in Psychedelic
Therapy, Spirituality, and Creativity. Front. Neurosci. 2018, 12, doi:10.3389/fnins.2018.00129.
127. Van Den Hurk, P.A.M.; Wingens, T.; Giommi, F.; Barendregt, H.P.; Speckens, A.E.M.; Van Schie, H.T. On
the Relationship Between the Practice of Mindfulness Meditation and Personality—an Exploratory
Analysis of the Mediating Role of Mindfulness Skills. Mindfulness 2011, 2, 194-200, doi:10.1007/s12671-011-
0060-7.
128. Stace, W.T. Mysticism and Philosophy; St. Martin’s Press: New York, 1960; ISBN 0-87477-416-0.
129. Barrett, F.S.; Johnson, M.W.; Griffiths, R.R. Validation of the Revised Mystical Experience Questionnaire in
Experimental Sessions with Psilocybin. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2015, 29, 1182-1190,
doi:10.1177/0269881115609019.

[PAGE 024]

23


130. MacLean, K.A.; Leoutsakos, J.S.; Johnson, M.W.; Griffiths, R.R. Factor Analysis of the Mystical Experience
Questionnaire: A Study of Experiences Occasioned by the Hallucinogen Psilocybin. J. Sci. Study Relig. 2012,
51, 721-737, doi:10.1111/j.1468-5906.2012.01685.x.
131. Lyvers, M.; Meester, M. Illicit Use of LSD or Psilocybin, but Not MDMA or Nonpsychedelic Drugs, Is
Associated with Mystical Experiences in a Dose-Dependent Manner. J. Psychoactive Drugs 2012, 44, 410-
417, doi:10.1080/02791072.2012.736842.
132. Isham, A.; Elf, P.; Jackson, T. Self-Transcendent Experiences as Promoters of Ecological Wellbeing?
Exploration of the Evidence and Hypotheses to Be Tested. Front. Psychol. 2022, 13,
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1051478.
133. Dyck, E.; Elcock, C. Reframing Bummer Trips: Scientific and Cultural Explanations to Adverse Reactions
to Psychedelic Drug Use. Soc. Hist. Alcohol Drugs 2020, 34, 271-296, doi:10.1086/707512.
134. Gashi, L.; Sandberg, S.; Pedersen, W. Making “Bad Trips” Good: How Users of Psychedelics Narratively
Transform Challenging Trips into Valuable Experiences. Int. J. Drug Policy 2021, 87, 102997,
doi:10.1016/j.drugpo.2020.102997.
135. Gasser, P.; Kirchner, K.; Passie, T. LSD-Assisted Psychotherapy for Anxiety Associated with a Life-
Threatening Disease: A Qualitative Study of Acute and Sustained Subjective Effects. J. Psychopharmacol.
(Oxf.) 2015, 29, 57-68, doi:10.1177/0269881114555249.
136. Timmermann, C.; Roseman, L.; Williams, L.; Erritzoe, D.; Martial, C.; Cassol, H.; Laureys, S.; Nutt, D.;
Carhart-Harris, R. DMT Models the Near-Death Experience. Front. Psychol. 2018, 9,
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01424.
137. Krupitsky, E.; Burakov, A.; Romanova, T.; Dunaevsky, I; Strassman, R.; Grinenko, A. Ketamine
Psychotherapy for Heroin Addiction: Immediate Effects and Two-Year Follow-Up. J. Subst. Abuse Treat.
2002, 23, 273-283, doi:10.1016/50740-5472(02)00275-1.
138. Van Lommel, P.; Van Wees, R.; Meyers, V.; Elfferich, I. Near-Death Experience in Survivors of Cardiac
Arrest: A Prospective Study in the Netherlands. The Lancet 2001, 358, 2039-2045, doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(01)07100-8.
139. Hendricks, P.S. Awe: A Putative Mechanism Underlying the Effects of Classic Psychedelic-Assisted
Psychotherapy. Int. Rev. Psychiatry 2018, 30, 331-342, doi:10.1080/09540261.2018.1474185.
140. Keltner, D.; Haidt, J. Approaching Awe, a Moral, Spiritual, and Aesthetic Emotion. Cogn. Emot. 2003, 17,
297-314, doi:10.1080/02699930302297.
141. Van Elk, M.; Arciniegas Gomez, M.A.; Van Der Zwaag, W.; Van Schie, H.T.; Sauter, D. The Neural
Correlates of the Awe Experience: Reduced Default Mode Network Activity during Feelings of Awe. Hum.
Brain Mapp. 2019, 40, 3561-3574, doi:10.1002/hbm.24616.
142. Chen, S.K.; Mongrain, M. Awe and the Interconnected Self. J. Posit. Psychol. 2021, 16, 770-778,
doi:10.1080/17439760.2020.1818808.
143. Shiota, M.N.; Keltner, D.; Mossman, A. The Nature of Awe: Elicitors, Appraisals, and Effects on Self-
Concept. Cogn. Emot. 2007, 21, 944-963, doi:10.1080/02699930600923668.
144. Van Cappellen, P.; Saroglou, V. Awe Activates Religious and Spiritual Feelings and Behavioral Intentions.
Psychol. Relig. Spiritual. 2012, 4, 223-236, doi:10.1037/a0025986.
145. Lutkajtis, A. Entity Encounters and the Therapeutic Effect of the Psychedelic Mystical Experience. J.
Psychedelic Stud. 2021, 4, 171-178, doi:10.1556/2054.2020.00143.
146. Rudd, M.; Vohs, K.D.; Aaker, J. Awe Expands People’s Perception of Time, Alters Decision Making, and
Enhances Well-Being. Psychol. Sci. 2012, 23, 1130-1136, doi:10.1177/0956797612438731.
147. Anderson, C.L.; Monroy, M.; Keltner, D. Awe in Nature Heals: Evidence from Military Veterans, at-Risk
Youth, and College Students. Emotion 2018, 18, 1195-1202, doi:10.1037/em00000442.
148. Rivera, G.N.; Vess, M.; Hicks, J.A.; Routledge, C. Awe and Meaning: Elucidating Complex Effects of Awe
Experiences on Meaning in Life. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 2020, 50, 392-405, doi:10.1002/ejsp.2604.
149. Nour, M.M.; Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Bch, B.M. Psychedelics and the Science of Self Experience. Br. J. Psychiatry
2017, 210, 177-179, doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.116.194738.
150. Davis, A.K.; Clifton, J.M.; Weaver, E.G.; Hurwitz, E.S.; Johnson, M.W.; Griffiths, R.R. Survey of Entity
Encounter Experiences Occasioned by Inhaled N,N -Dimethyltryptamine: Phenomenology, Interpretation,
and Enduring Effects. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2020, 34, 1008-1020, doi:10.1177/0269881120916143.
151. Timmermann, C.; Kettner, H.; Letheby, C.; Roseman, L.; Rosas, F.E.; Carhart-Harris, R.L. Psychedelics Alter
Metaphysical Beliefs. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, doi:10.1038/s41598-021-01209-2.
152. Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Friston, K.J. REBUS and the Anarchic Brain: Toward a Unified Model of the Brain
Action of Psychedelics. Pharmacol. Rev. 2019, 71, 316-344, doi:10.1124/pr.118.017160.
153. Van Eyghen, H. Psychedelics and the Entropic Brain Beyond the Self. Int. J. Psychol. Relig. 2023, 33, 277-293,
doi:10.1080/10508619.2023.2192078.
154. Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Leech, R.; Hellyer, P.J.; Shanahan, M.; Feilding, A.; Tagliazucchi, E.; Chialvo, D.R.;
Nutt, D. The Entropic Brain: A Theory of Conscious States Informed by Neuroimaging Research with
Psychedelic Drugs. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2014, 8, doi:10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020.

[PAGE 025]

doi:10.20944/preprints202407.2400.v1


24


155. Girn, M.; Rosas, F.E.; Daws, R.E.; Gallen, C.L.; Gazzaley, A.; Carhart-Harris, R.L. A Complex Systems
Perspective on Psychedelic Brain Action. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2023, 27, 433-445, doi:10.1016/j.tics.2023.01.003.
156. Watts, A. The Joyous Cosmology: Adventures in the Chemistry of Consciousness; Vintage Books: New York, 1962;
ISBN 978-0-394-70299-5.
157. Garcia-Romeu, A.; Griffiths, R.; Johnson, M. Psilocybin-Occasioned Mystical Experiences in the Treatment
of Tobacco Addiction. Curr. Drug Abuse Rev. 2015, 7, 157-164, doi:10.2174/1874473708666150107121331.
158. Young, W.C.; Nadarajah, S.R.; Skeath, P.R.; Berger, A.M. Spirituality in the Context of Life-Threatening
IlIness and Life-Transforming Change. Palliat. Support. Care 2015, 13, 653-660,
doi:10.1017/S1478951514000340.
159. Smigielski, L.; Scheidegger, M.; Kometer, M.; Vollenweider, F.X. Psilocybin-Assisted Mindfulness Training
Modulates Self-Consciousness and Brain Default Mode Network Connectivity with Lasting Effects.
Neurolmage 2019, 196, 207-215, doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.04.009.
160. Asakage, S.; Nakano, T. The Salience Network Is Activated during Self-recognition from Both First-person
and Third-person Perspectives. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2023, 44, 559-570, doi:10.1002/hbm.26084.
161. Aday, J.S.; Mitzkovitz, C.M.; Bloesch, E.K.; Davoli, C.C.; Davis, A.K. Long-Term Effects of Psychedelic
Drugs: A Systematic Review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2020, 113, 179-189,
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.03.017.
162. Low, F.; Earleywine, M. Psychedelic Experiences After Bereavement Improve Symptoms of Grief: The
Influence of Emotional Breakthroughs and Challenging Experiences. J. Psychoactive Drugs 2024, 56, 316-
323, doi:10.1080/02791072.2023.2228303.
163. Roseman, L.; Haijen, E.; Idialu-Ikato, K.; Kaelen, M.; Watts, R.; Carhart-Harris, R. Emotional Breakthrough
and Psychedelics: Validation of the Emotional Breakthrough Inventory. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2019, 33,
1076-1087, doi:10.1177/0269881119855974.
164. Freud, S. A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis; Boni & Liveright: New York, 1920; ISBN 978-0-671-80032-
1.
165. Grof, S.; Grof, C. Holotropic Breathwork: A New Approach to Self-Exploration and Therapy; SUNY series in
transpersonal and humanistic psychology; State University of New York Press: Albany, 2010; ISBN 978-1-
4384-3393-6.
166. Lindegaard, T. Do Psychedelics Facilitate Emergence of Unconscious Psychological Processes? Psychodyn.
Psychiatry 2023, 51, 270-286, doi:10.1521/pdps.2023.51.3.270.
167. Jennissen, S.; Huber, J.; Ehrenthal, J.C.; Schauenburg, H.; Dinger, U. Association Between Insight and
Outcome of Psychotherapy: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am. J. Psychiatry 2018, 175, 961-969,
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2018.17080847.
168. Davis, A.K.; Barrett, F.S.; Griffiths, R.R. Psychological Flexibility Mediates the Relations between Acute
Psychedelic Effects and Subjective Decreases in Depression and Anxiety. J. Context. Behav. Sci. 2020, 15, 39-
45, doi:10.1016/j.jcbs.2019.11.004.
169. Noorani, T.; Garcia-Romeu, A.; Swift, T.C.; Griffiths, R.R.; Johnson, M.W. Psychedelic Therapy for Smoking
Cessation: Qualitative Analysis of Participant Accounts. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2018, 32, 756-769,
doi:10.1177/0269881118780612.
170. Danek, A.H.; Fraps, T.; Müller, A.V.; Grothe, B.; Ollinger, M. It’s a Kind of Magic-What Self-Reports Can
Reveal about the Phenomenology of Insight Problem Solving. Front. Psychol. 2014, 5,
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01408.
171. Waldron, J.L. The Life Impact of Transcendent Experiences with a Pronounced Quality of “Noesis.” J.
Transpers. Psychol. 1998, 30, 103-134.
172. Agin-Liebes, G.; Ekman, E.; Anderson, B.; Malloy, M.; Haas, A.; Woolley, J. Participant Reports of
Mindfulness, Posttraumatic Growth, and Social Connectedness in Psilocybin-Assisted Group Therapy: An
Interpretive Phenomenological Analysis. J. Humanist. Psychol. 2024, 64, 564-591,
doi:10.1177/00221678211022949.
173. Argento, E.; Capler, R.; Thomas, G.; Lucas, P.; Tupper, K.W. Exploring Ayahuasca-assisted Therapy for
Addiction: A Qualitative Analysis of Preliminary Findings among an Indigenous Community in Canada.
Drug Alcohol Rev. 2019, 38, 781-789, doi:10.1111/dar.12985.
174. Davis, A.K.; Barrett, F.S.; So, S.; Gukasyan, N.; Swift, T.C.; Griffiths, R.R. Development of the Psychological
Insight Questionnaire among a Sample of People Who Have Consumed Psilocybin or LSD. J.
Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2021, 35, 437-446, doi:10.1177/0269881120967878.
175. Peill, J.M.; Trinci, K.E.; Kettner, H.; Mertens, L.J.; Roseman, L.; Timmermann, C.; Rosas, F.E.; Lyons, T.;
Carhart-Harris, R.L. Validation of the Psychological Insight Scale: A New Scale to Assess Psychological
Insight Following a Psychedelic Experience. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2022, 36, 31-45,
doi:10.1177/02698811211066709.
176. Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Bolstridge, M.; Day, C.M.J.; Rucker, J.; Watts, R.; Erritzoe, D.E.; Kaelen, M.; Giribaldi,
B.; Bloomfield, M.; Pilling, S.; et al. Psilocybin with Psychological Support for Treatment-Resistant

[PAGE 026]

25


Depression: Six-Month Follow-Up. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 2018, 235, 399-408, doi:10.1007/s00213-017-
4771-x.
177. Kahonen, J. Psychedelic Unselfing: Self-Transcendence and Change of Values in Psychedelic Experiences.
Front. Psychol. 2023, 14, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1104627.
178. van der Tempel, J.; Moodley, R. Spontaneous Mystical Experience among Atheists: Meaning-Making,
Psychological Distress, and Wellbeing. Ment. Health Relig. Cult. 2020, 23, 789-805,
doi:10.1080/13674676.2020.1823349.
179. Watts, R.; Day, C.; Krzanowski, J.; Nutt, D.; Carhart-Harris, R. Patients’ Accounts of Increased
“Connectedness” and “Acceptance” After Psilocybin for Treatment-Resistant Depression. J. Humanist.
Psychol. 2017, 57, 520-564, doi:10.1177/0022167817709585.
180. Kornfield, J. Intensive Insight Meditation: A Phenomenological Study. J. Transpers. Psychol. 1979, 11, 41-58.
181. Wolff, M.; Evens, R.; Mertens, L.J.; Koslowski, M.; Betzler, F.; Gründer, G.; Jungaberle, H. Learning to Let
Go: A Cognitive-Behavioral Model of How Psychedelic Therapy Promotes Acceptance. Front. Psychiatry
2020, 11, 5, doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00005.
182. Wolff, M.; Mertens, L.J.; Walter, M.; Enge, S.; Evens, R. The Acceptance/Avoidance-Promoting Experiences
Questionnaire (APEQ): A Theory-Based Approach to Psychedelic Drugs’ Effects on Psychological
Flexibility. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2022, 36, 387-408, doi:10.1177/02698811211073758.
183. Cordova, J.V. Acceptance in Behavior Therapy: Understanding the Process of Change. Behav. Anal. 2001,
24, 213-226, doi:10.1007/BF03392032.
184. Malone, T.C.; Mennenga, S.E.; Guss, J.; Podrebarac, S.K.; Owens, L.T.; Bossis, A.P.; Belser, A.B.; Agin-
Liebes, G.; Bogenschutz, M.P.; Ross, S. Individual Experiences in Four Cancer Patients Following
Psilocybin-Assisted Psychotherapy. Front. Pharmacol. 2018, 9, doi:10.3389/fphar.2018.00256.
185. Nielson, E.M.; May, D.G.; Forcehimes, A.A.; Bogenschutz, M.P. The Psychedelic Debriefing in Alcohol
Dependence Treatment: Illustrating Key Change Phenomena through Qualitative Content Analysis of
Clinical Sessions. Front. Pharmacol. 2018, 9, doi:10.3389/fphar.2018.00132.
186. Soler, J.; Elices, M.; Dominguez-Clavé, E.; Pascual, J.C.; Feilding, A.; Navarro-Gil, M.; Garcia-Campayo, J.;
Riba, J. Four Weekly Ayahuasca Sessions Lead to Increases in “Acceptance” Capacities: A Comparison
Study With a Standard 8-Week Mindfulness Training Program. Front. Pharmacol. 2018, 9,
doi:10.3389/fphar.2018.00224.
187. Swift, T.C.; Belser, A.B.; Agin-Liebes, G.; Devenot, N.; Terrana, S.; Friedman, H.L.; Guss, J.; Bossis, A.P.;
Ross, S. Cancer at the Dinner Table: Experiences of Psilocybin-Assisted Psychotherapy for the Treatment
of Cancer-Related Distress. J. Humanist. Psychol. 2017, 57, 488-519, doi:10.1177/0022167817715966.
188. Healy, C.J. The Acute Effects of Classic Psychedelics on Memory in Humans. Psychopharmacology (Berl.)
2021, 238, 639-653, doi:10.1007/s00213-020-05756-w.
189. Weiss, B.; Wingert, A.; Erritzoe, D.; Campbell, W.K. Prevalence and Therapeutic Impact of Adverse Life
Event Reexperiencing under Ceremonial Ayahuasca. Sci. Rep. 2023, 13, doi:10.1038/s41598-023-36184-3.
190. Mithoefer, M.C. A Manual for MDMA-Assisted Psychotherapy in the Treatment of Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder. Available online: https://s3-us-west-1.amazonaws.com/mapscontent/research-
archive/mdma/TreatmentManual_MDMA AssistedPsychotherapyVersion+8.1_22+Aug2017.pdf (accessed
on 20 July 2024).
191. Ehlers, A.; Clark, D.M. A Cognitive Model of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Behav. Res. Ther. 2000, 38, 319-
345, doi:10.1016/50005-7967(99)00123-0.
192. Hasler, G. Toward the “Helioscope” Hypothesis of Psychedelic Therapy. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 2022,
57, 118-119, doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2022.02.006.
193. Griffiths, R.R.; Hurwitz, E.S.; Davis, A.K.; Johnson, M.W.; Jesse, R. Survey of Subjective “God Encounter
Experiences”: Comparisons among Naturally Occurring Experiences and Those Occasioned by the Classic
Psychedelics Psilocybin, LSD, Ayahuasca, or DMT. PLOS ONE 2019, 14, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0214377.
194. Barrett, F.S.; Bradstreet, M.P.; Leoutsakos, J.-M.S.; Johnson, M.W.; Griffiths, R.R. The Challenging
Experience Questionnaire: Characterization of Challenging Experiences with Psilocybin Mushrooms. J.
Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2016, 30, 1279-1295, doi:10.1177/0269881116678781.
195. Carbonaro, T.M.; Bradstreet, M.P.; Barrett, F.S.; MacLean, K.A.; Jesse, R.; Johnson, M.W.; Griffiths, R.R.
Survey Study of Challenging Experiences after Ingesting Psilocybin Mushrooms: Acute and Enduring
Positive and Negative Consequences. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2016, 30, 1268-1278,
doi:10.1177/0269881116662634.
196. Dittrich, A. The Standardized Psychometric Assessment of Altered States of Consciousness (ASCs) in
Humans. Pharmacopsychiatry 1998, 31, 80-84, doi:10.1055/s-2007-979351.
197. Rothbaum, B.O.; Schwartz, A.C. Exposure Therapy for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Am. J. Psychother.
2002, 56, 59-75, doi:10.1176/appi.psychotherapy.2002.56.1.59.
198. Balban, M.Y.; Neri, E.; Kogon, M.M.; Weed, L.; Nouriani, B.; Jo, B.; Holl, G.; Zeitzer, J.M.; Spiegel, D.;
Huberman, A.D. Brief Structured Respiration Practices Enhance Mood and Reduce Physiological Arousal.
Cell Rep. Med. 2023, 4, doi:10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100895.

[PAGE 027]

26


199. Meuret, A.E.; Ritz, T.; Wilhelm, F.H.; Roth, W.T. Voluntary Hyperventilation in the Treatment of Panic
Disorder—Functions of Hyperventilation, Their Implications for Breathing Training, and
Recommendations for Standardization. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 2005, 25, 285-306, doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2005.01.002.
200. Calder, A.; Hasler, G. Extrapharmacological Safety Topics in Psychedelic-Assisted Psychotherapy. JAMA
Psychiatry 2023, 80, 761-762, doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2023.1031.
201. Evans, J.; Robinson, O.C.; Argyri, E.K.; Suseelan, S.; Murphy-Beiner, A.; McAlpine, R.; Luke, D.; Michelle,
K.; Prideaux, E. Extended Difficulties Following the Use of Psychedelic Drugs: A Mixed Methods Study.
PLOS ONE 2023, 18, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0293349.
202. Marrocu, A.; Kettner, H.; Weiss, B.; Zeifman, R.J.; Erritzoe, D.; Carhart-Harris, R.L. Psychiatric Risks for
Worsened Mental Health after Psychedelic Use. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.) 2024, 38, 225-235,
doi:10.1177/02698811241232548.
203. Bahi, C.; Irrmischer, M.; Franken, K.; Fejer, G.; Schlenker, A.; Deijen, J.B.; Engelbregt, H. Effects of Conscious
Connected Breathing on Cortical Brain Activity, Mood and State of Consciousness in Healthy Adults. Curr.
Psychol. 2024, 43, 10578-10589, doi:10.1007/s12144-023-05119-6.
204. Gellings, T.; Ossebaard, J.; van Schie, H.T. Self-Transcendence in Daily Life and During Meditation in
Focused Attention and Open Monitoring Meditators. 2023, manuscript submitted for publication.
205. Lalande, L.; Bambling, M.; King, R.; Lowe, R. Breathwork: An Additional Treatment Option for Depression
and Anxiety? J. Contemp. Psychother. 2012, 42, 113-119, doi:10.1007/s10879-011-9180-6.
206. Josipovic, Z. Neural Correlates of Nondual Awareness in Meditation. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2014, 1307, 9-
18, doi:10.1111/nyas.12261.
207. Vieten, C.; Wahbeh, H.; Cahn, B.R.; MacLean, K.; Estrada, M.; Mills, P.; Murphy, M.; Shapiro, S.; Radin, D.;
Josipovic, Z.; et al. Future Directions in Meditation Research: Recommendations for Expanding the Field
of Contemplative Science. PLOS ONE 2018, 13, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0205740.
208. Travis, F. Transcendental Experiences during Meditation Practice. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2014, 1307, 1-8,
doi:10.1111/nyas.12316.
209. Pérez-Alvarez, M. Psychotherapy as a Human Science, More Than a Technological One. Papeles Psicólogo -
Psychol. Pap. 2018, 40, doi:10.23923/pap.psicol2019.2877.
210. Goodwin, G.M.; Malievskaia, E.; Fonzo, G.A.; Nemeroff, C.B. Must Psilocybin Always “Assist
Psychotherapy”? Am. J. Psychiatry 2023, 181, 20-25, doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.20221043.


Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those
of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s)
disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or
products referred to in the content.
