[PAGE 001]

Single-Dose Psilocybin Treatment for Major Depressive Disorder: A R.. https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2808950


Home | JAMA | Vol. 330, No. 9


View Correction


Original Investigation


Single-Dose Psilocybin Treatment for Major Depressive
Disorder
A Randomized Clinical Trial
Charles L. Raison, MD!; Gerard Sanacora, MD, PhD?; Joshua Woolley, MD, PhD?*; et al

> Author Affiliations | Article Information

« Cite C Permissions Y” Metrics


JAMA

Published Online: August 31, 2023

2023;330;(9):843-853.

doi:10.1001/jama.2023.14530


= RELATED ARTICLES [>] MEDIA FIGURES | SUPPLEMENTAL CONTENT


Key Points

Question What are the efficacy and safety of psilocybin in patients with major depressive disorder?


Findings In a randomized, placebo-controlled, 6-week trial in 104 adults, a 25-mg dose of psilocybin

administered with psychological support was associated with a rapid and sustained antidepressant

o
PDF ESS v=


vZ
o—

Sections PDF CME Share


1 of 22 07.07.26, 20:41

[PAGE 002]

Single-Dose Psilocybin Treatment for Major Depressive Disorder: A R. https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2808950


Meaning A 25-mg dose of psilocybin was well tolerated and may hold promise as a treatment for major

depressive disorder when combined with psychological support.


Abstract

Importance Psilocybin shows promise as a
ol y
treatment for major depressive disorder (MDD).

QUESTION What is the efficacy and safety of single-dose psilocybin in patients with major depressive disorder?

. = . . . CONCLUSION A 25-mg dose of psilocybin was associated with a clinically significant sustained reduction in depressive symptoms
O bj ective To eVa lu d te t h e m a g n | t u d e 1 tl m | n g 1 and functional disability, without serious adverse events.
nae . POPULATION INTERVENTION FINDINGS


and durability of antidepressant effects and e Mean cage nore om asin
. a . 5 . 52 Men &
52 Women 43
zB 104 Patients analyzed
104 Patients randomized
a Den a ”


safety of a single dose of psilocybin in patients Mn m e
with major AR disorder Psilocybin Niacin Niacin
. with current episode 260 days FE of synthetic 100-mg dose ein

W|th M D D= Mean age: 41 years with psychological support psychological support
LOCATIONS PRIMARY OUTCOME Psilocybin was associated with significantly
. o | o reduced MADRS scores vs niacin:


Design, Setting, and Pa rticipa nts In this phase inthe US (range, 0-60; higher scores indicate more severe depression) -12.3 (95% C1, -17.5 to -7.2); P<.001


2 trial conducted between December 2019 and

June 2022 at 11 research sites in the US,

participants were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to single-Dose Psilocybin Treatment for Major
Depressive Disorder
receive a single dose of psilocybin vs niacin Visual Abstract.

placebo administered with psychological

support. Participants were adults aged 21 to 65

years with a Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of

Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition diagnosis of MDD

of at least 60 days’ duration and moderate or greater symptom severity. Exclusion criteria included

history of psychosis or mania, active substance use disorder, and active suicidal ideation with intent.

Participants taking psychotropic agents who otherwise met inclusion/exclusion criteria were eligible

following medication taper. Primary and secondary outcomes and adverse events (AEs) were assessed

at baseline (conducted within 7 days before dosing) and at 2, 8, 15, 29, and 43 days after dosing.


Interventions Interventions were a 25-mg dose of synthetic psilocybin or a 100-mg dose of niacin in

identical-appearing capsules, each administered with psychological support.


Main Outcomes and Measures The primary outcome was change in central rater-assessed

Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) score (range, 0-60; higher scores indicate more

severe depression) from baseline to day 43. The key secondary outcome measure was change in MADRS

score from baseline to day 8. Other secondary outcomes were change in Sheehan Disability Scale score

from baseline to day 43 and MADRS-defined sustained response and remission. Participants, study site
narennnal ctidw ennnenr nııtcnma accacenre (ratare) and ctaticticiane were hlindad tn traatmant

9
a,
v=


o— v=


Sections PDF CME Share


2 of 22 07.07.26, 20:41

[PAGE 003]

Single-Dose Psilocybin Treatment for Major Depressive Disorder: A R. https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2808950


Results A total of 104 participants (mean [SD] age, 41.1 [11.3] years; 52 [50%] women) were

randomized (51 to the psilocybin group and 53 to the niacin group). Psilocybin treatment was

associated with significantly reduced MADRS scores compared with niacin from baseline to day 43

(mean difference,-12.3 [95% Cl, -17.5 to -7.2]; P <.001) and from baseline to day 8 (mean difference,

12.0 [95% Cl, -16.6 to -7.4]; P<.001). Psilocybin treatment was also associated with significantly

reduced Sheehan Disability Scale scores compared with niacin (mean difference, -2.31 [95% Cl, -3.50 to

-1.11]; P<.001) from baseline to day 43. More participants receiving psilocybin had sustained response

(but not remission) than those receiving niacin. There were no serious treatment-emergent AEs;

however, psilocybin treatment was associated with a higher rate of overall AEs and a higher rate of

severe AEs.


Conclusions and Relevance Psilocybin treatment was associated with a clinically significant sustained

reduction in depressive symptoms and functional disability, without serious adverse events. These

findings add to increasing evidence that psilocybin—when administered with psychological support—

may hold promise as a novel intervention for MDD.


Trial Registration ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCTO3866174


Introduction

Interest in the therapeutic potential of the psychedelic psilocybin has skyrocketed in recent years,

spurred in part by increasing awareness of the limitations of currently approved pharmacological

treatments for major depressive disorder (MDD)!=3 and in part by recent studies suggesting that
psilocybin engenders a rapid antidepressant response that far outlasts the presence of the drug in the

body.®-!5 However, recent critiques highlight notable limitations in many of these studies, 10-13
including small sample sizes, assessments by raters likely to be functionally unblinded, an open or

waitlist comparator design, and an inadequate assessment of adverse events (AEs). Larger recent

studies have addressed these issues to various degrees, but report primary end points of short

duration, '*:'> leaving open the question of the long-term clinical utility of psilocybin for an often
chronic condition such as MDD.


The current study seeks to address these issues using a randomized, multiblinded design that compared

a single dose of psilocybin with an active placebo comparator (niacin), with outcome assessments

conducted by blinded centralized raters to examine the timing of onset of action, durability of benefit,

and safety profile of psilocybin over a 6-week period.


9 Gia, v=


o— vZ


Sections PDF CME Share


3 of 22 07.07.26, 20:41

[PAGE 004]

Single-Dose Psilocybin Treatment for Major Depressive Disorder: A R. https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2808950


This randomized, 2-group, phase 2 clinical trial was designed to evaluate the efficacy of psilocybin vs

niacin (active placebo) administered with psychological support in patients with MDD. The trial was

conducted at 11 US sites from December 2019 to June 2022 (list of sites provided in eTable 1 in

Supplement 3). The study was conducted in accordance with the International Conference on

Harmonization Good Clinical Practice Guideline. Participants provided written informed consent before

engaging in study-specific procedures. The protocol was approved by a central institutional review

board (Western Institutional Review Board Copernicus Group) and/or site institutional review boards.

The trial protocol is available in Supplement
1 and the statistical analysis plan is available in Supplement

2.


Participants

Recruitment occurred through a study-specific website, clinical programs at participating institutions,

advertisements, and national clinician-focused and patient-advocate listservs. Eligible participants were

medically healthy adults aged 21 to 65 years who met Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental

Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) criteria for MDD with a current depressive episode of at least 60 days

assessed by the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders Clinical Version.2° Participants were
required to have a central rater-assessed Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) total

score greater than or equal to 28 at screening, with less than or equal to 30% improvement in MADRS

score during a 7- to 35-day period to allow for a psychiatric medication taper if indicated (including not

receiving antidepressants for >2 weeks or 5 half-lives, whichever was longer), to ensure randomized

participants met criteria for moderate to severe MDD at the baseline assessment. Additional exclusion

criteria included personal or first-degree family history of psychosis or mania, moderate/severe alcohol

or drug use disorder, being unable/unwilling to discontinue prohibited psychotropic medications, use of

a psychedelic drug in the past 5 years or more than 10 lifetime uses, active suicidal ideation with intent

or plan, or suicidal behavior in the past 12 months. There were no exclusions for number of prior

depressive episodes, length of current episode, maximum symptom severity, or number of previous

pharmacological or behavioral treatments, with the exception of history of deep brain or vagus nerve

stimulation, which were exclusionary as a proxy for severe treatment resistance. See the study protocol

in Supplement
1 for a full list of inclusion and exclusion criteria. Participants were queried regarding

demographic information by site personnel; race and ethnicity were collected in accordance with the US

Food and Drug Administration guidance document Collection of Race and Ethnicity Data in Clinical

Trials.2


Study Procedures

Following the 7- to 35-day screening period to allow for a medication taper if needed, participants who

9
a, D
v=


o— v=


Sections PDF CME Share


A of 22 07.07.26, 20:41

[PAGE 005]

Single-Dose Psilocybin Treatment for Major Depressive Disorder: A R. https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/
2808950


in a 1:1 ratio using permuted blocks with random block sizes of 2, 4, and 6, with randomization stratified

by site, to receive a single 25-mg oral dose of psilocybin or 100-mg dose of niacin. Randomization was

administered centrally by the study's clinical research organization via the Advantage eClinical data

system. Statistical programs generated for randomization by unblinded statistical staff at the clinical

research organization included a master medication list program that generated a random blinded

bottle number code and associated treatment for each bottle and a treatment assignment program that

assigned participants to a treatment. Bottles were labeled by the drug distributor with a blinded bottle

number prior to distribution to sites. On the day of dosing, after participants were confirmed to be

eligible, the data system identified the participant's treatment assignment based on the treatment

table. The data system then identified a bottle shown to be available on site containing the appropriate

treatment. Only the blinded bottle number was then displayed to site staff for treatment

administration.


Niacin was used as an active placebo that produces an acute physiological response (flushing) thought

to aid in blinding.®:22 Study drug administration occurred on the same day as randomization (day 1), no
later than 7 days following the baseline assessment. Postdosing assessments were conducted on days

2, 8, 15, 29, and 43. Participants, study sponsor, and study site personnel were blinded to treatment

group until unblinding following data lock.


Study drugs were administered within a “set and setting” protocol?? that was identical for participants
randomized to receive either psilocybin or niacin placebo and that included (1) 6 to 8 hours of

preparatory sessions with 2 facilitators between the baseline assessment and the day of dosing, (2) a 7-

to 10-hour dosing session conducted in a comfortable room under the supervision of the same

facilitators, and (3) 4 hours of postdose integration sessions during which participants were invited to

discuss their dosing experience with the facilitators. All set and setting sessions (eg, preparatory,

dosing, integration) were protocolized and communicated via instructions in a manual for clinical

facilitators. During the dosing session, participants were encouraged to wear eyeshades and listen to a

curated playlist on headphones. Lead facilitators were doctoral-level psychologists or physicians with

MDD treatment experience and co-facilitators held a minimum of a bachelor's degree in a mental

health-related field. All facilitators completed study-specific training prior to engaging with

participants.


Efficacy Assessments

The primary study outcome was between-group difference in mean change of central rater-assessed

MADRS score from baseline to day 43. MADRS is a 10-item scale with a scoring range of O to 60, with
E NN A AO Y OY E A A E OT A Y 7 UN WW
ond E Oe


9
POF MAS
v=


O v=


Sections PDF CME Share


5 of 22 07.07.26, 20:41

[PAGE 006]

Single-Dose Psilocybin Treatment for Major Depressive Disorder: A R. https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2808950


clinically meaningful and a change of 12 as clinically substantial.22:2© To reduce the risk of functional
unblinding of raters, all MADRS assessments, including those at screening and baseline, were

conducted via telephone2’:28 by trained, remote central raters who maintained interrater reliability and
were blinded to participant treatment assignment, study visit, and the specifics of the protocol and

study design.


The key secondary outcome was change in total MADRS score from baseline to day 8. Additional

secondary outcomes included change in Sheehan Disability Scale (SDS) score from baseline to day 43

and proportion of participants with a sustained depressive symptom response, defined a priori as at

least a 50% reduction from baseline MADRS score at days 8, 15, 29, and 43, and sustained depressive

symptom remission, defined a priori as MADRS score less than or equal to 10 at days 8, 15, 29, and 43.

The SDS comprises self-rated items that measure the extent to which psychiatric symptoms have

impaired functioning in patients’ work/school, social, and family/home responsibilities. Scores for each

section range from O to 10,29 and the total score was calculated as the mean score of all 3 sections. No
MCID is defined for active vs control interventions. If the work/school section was not applicable, the

mean score was calculated as the mean of social life and family/home responsibilities. Administration of

the SDS at baseline and postdosing assessments was overseen by trained and blinded site raters.


Exploratory outcomes included scores on the Clinical Global Impressions Scale, Hamilton Anxiety Rating

Scale, Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire, Symptoms of Major Depressive

Disorder Scale, and the Oxford Depression Questionnaire (to assess emotional blunting). These

exploratory assessments were completed by self-report overseen by blinded and trained site raters at

baseline and all postdosing assessments.


Safety Assessments

AEs were collected from enrollment through the end of study and were graded for severity,

seriousness, and relationship to study product by site principal investigators. Treatment-emergent AEs

(TEAEs) were considered any AE that occurred after drug administration. Among TEAEs, an AE was

classified as "related" if there was a reasonable possibility that the study drug caused the event as

judged by site principal investigators. Solicited adverse events included (1) active suicidal ideation

assessed with the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS) administered by site personnel or

MADRS item 10 and verified by clinical assessment, (2) elevated blood pressure or heart rate requiring

medication, (3) drug overdose with suicidal intent, (4) headache, (5) nausea, and (6) visual perceptual

effects. Serious AEs were classified as those resulting in any of a list of negative health outcomes (eg,

death, inpatient hospitalization, significant or persistent incapacity, congenital birth defect/
NNPA JN Y CI OP
A A A PC |


= = <
0 Ba, v=


Sections PDF CME Share


6 of 22 07.07.26, 20:41
