[PAGE 001]

LlA The University of University of Alabama at Birmingham
Alabama at Birmingham. o.
UAB Digital Commons
Libraries


All ETDs from UAB UAB Theses & Dissertations


2024


Use Of Psilocybin And Other Classic Psychedelics In
Fibromyalgia: A Survey Study

Kathleen Hodgin
University of Alabama at Birmingham


Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.library.uab.edu/etd-collection

O Part of the Arts and Humanities Commons

Recommended Citation
Hodgin, Kathleen, "Use Of Psilocybin And Other Classic Psychedelics In Fibromyalgia: A Survey Study"
(2024). All ETDs from UAB. 3845.
https://digitalcommons.library.uab.edu/etd-collection/3845


This content has been accepted for inclusion by an authorized administrator of the UAB Digital Commons, and is
provided as a free open access item. All inquiries regarding this item or the UAB Digital Commons should be
directed to the UAB Libraries Office of Scholarly Communication.

[PAGE 002]

USE OF PSILOCYBIN AND OTHER CLASSIC PSYCHEDELICS IN FIBROMYALGIA:
A SURVEY STUDY


by

KATHLEEN HODGIN


JARRED YOUNGER, CHAIR
KAREN CROPSEY
KEVIN FONTAINE
BUREL GOODIN
PETER HENDRICKS


A DISSERTATION


Submitted to the graduate faculty of The University of Alabama at Birmingham,
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy


BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA


2024

[PAGE 003]

Copyright by
Kathleen Hodgin
2024

[PAGE 004]

USE OF PSILOCYBIN AND OTHER CLASSIC PSYCHEDELICS IN
FIBROMYALGIA: A SURVEY STUDY


KATHLEEN HODGIN


MEDICAL/CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY


ABSTRACT


Psilocybin and other classic psychedelics may have potential for treatment of


fibromyalgia, a chronic condition characterized by widespread musculoskeletal pain and


other symptoms including fatigue, cognitive difficulties, and sleep problems. In this


exploratory, descriptive study, an online survey was distributed among individuals with


fibromyalgia to gather reports of any changes in pain related to past classic psychedelic


use. Sixty-four participants with fibromyalgia completed the study, with most having


used psilocybin mushrooms or LSD. In addition to recreational use and other reasons, use


of psychedelics for mental health or pain-related reasons was frequently endorsed. Of the


participants who reported experiencing any change in pain with past psychedelic use (n =


36), most (n = 32 or 88.9%) described an acute reduction in pain. Many participants (7 =


25 or 69.4%) reported lingering improvements in pain lasting one to two days, sometimes


up to several weeks or longer, and a subset of participants (n = 11 or 30.6%) noted a


decreased need for pain medications following use. Results add to a small but growing


body of work suggesting promise for classic psychedelics such as psilocybin for chronic


pain.


Keywords: fibromyalgia, chronic pain, psilocybin, classic psychedelic


ill

[PAGE 005]

DEDICATION


I dedicate this work to my godmother.


iV

[PAGE 006]

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


I would like to acknowledge the support and guidance of my research mentor and


committee members, as well as the support from my family, friends, and partner. I would


also like to thank each of the individuals who participated in this study, and all of those


who assisted with recruitment efforts.

[PAGE 007]

TABLE OF CONTENTS


Page


ABSTRACT ooo. cccccccccsssccsssecesensceecseecesssseeesesaeeceseecesesseecsesseecesseeeceeseeeseesaeseeeaeeseseseeeseesaes 111


DEDICATION .......cccccccccccssecessscceeesneeecessneccnseecesseeeceseeecseseeecssaeeeceaeeseseaeeeessaeeesnsaeeeenenees iv


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ......ccccccccccssscessseceesesceceseneecessneceesseeseseeesesseeeessaeesesetsesessneeeessaaes v


LIST OF TABLES2... ccccccccscccssseccssseceseneeeeeeeeceseseeeseseescesseeeeeesseessesseseeeaeesessseeesessaes ix


LIST OF FIGURES oocoooccccnooccnononcnonononononnnnononnnnncnnnnrononn
nro none rn nnnn rra nono n nr none rn nnnn ora rannnranannnnnnnsx


INTRODUCTION .......u...cucesesssessnnnensnnnnesnnnnennnnnnenennnnnnnnnnnennnnnnonennnneennenennnnnnanennsneennesannenn 1


Fibromyalgia............eeeeeesseeesssnnenenessnnnnennnsnnnnennnnsnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnennennsnnennnnnennnnennnennennennennnnn 2
Characteristics......eseessssensessnnnnneesnennnnennnnnnnnenneneennnenennennnnnennnensnnnneennnneneneensanen 2
Diagnosis......eeeeeeeesnnseesssennnennnssnennnenssnnnnnennnnnnnnnnnnnsnnennnnnsnnsnnennennennneennsnsennnneensnnn 3
Comorbidities and Overlapping Conditions ....ccooooccnonoccnononananonancnnnnnncccnnnnaconnnnos 5
Impact ......eeessssssssnseeneenennennensensssssnsnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnennennennensensensensnnnen 6
Coping Styles/BellefS..........ocooooooccononoooncnccononnnonccnnnononocnnonornnnnonnnonnnncnnnonnnnccnnnnnnnos 7
NAT8
Etiological Research .....ooooooococcnnooocccononononcnncononnnnnccononnonnonnnnnonnnncnnnnn
nn nc conan ncnrnnnannes 9
Psilocybin...............sseeeeeessseeesssnsneenesnnnnnennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnennnnnsnnsnnnenennsnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnennsnnenennenn 16
Natural and Synthetic Sources ............usnssesssssenssnnnnnssnnnennsnnnenennnnnnnnnenensnn
nennen 16
Pharmacodynamics ..ooooccccnoooncncnononnnnnnnnnnnnnonnnnnnnnnnconnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn
conan nnnnnconnnnnnnonos 18
Pharmacokinetics .0.......:cccccessccessseceesseeceesceeeessseeeesseeeessneeeeeseeeseseeeeenseeeesseeeensgs 19
History of Human USe ..occoooccconoccccnonoccnononcncnnnanononno
cocoa nnnconnn nn conan cn nonnncncnnnnnacinnss 21
Effects at Typical Dosages ....coooooocccncnooonconccononncnncnnnnnononnnnnnnnnnncnnnnnnnnrcnnannennnnnnns 22
Safety oo... cccecccccccesssccccessssseeccesssseeesesesssseeseeseseeeecssesseeeeessesseeeseesesueeeecseeesaeeseeseaas 24
Research with Other Conditions .....ccccooooccncnonooonnnonononanoncnnononnnnnnonanonnncnnnnannnnonos 25
Classic Psychedelics and Pain .....ooconnooconnnononocnnonnoononcnnnnonnncnncnnanncnncnnnnnnnnr
conan nrnrnnnnnnnss 26
Early Clinical Research........oooconoooocccnonoooncnocononnnonccnnnnonocnonnonnnnnconnnnnonccnnnnnnnannnns 26
Recent Clinical Research .......ooooooocccnnnonooccncnonanonnncnononononconononnncnnonanrnnncnonnannnnonos 27
Possible Mechanisms ...ocooooooccnncnnooncnnnnnonnncnononannonronnnnnnrnnnnnnnnnn
ron ronnnnrnrnnnannnnnnnnnns 30
Study Overview .o..ccccecccccessssecccesssseeeeesssaeeeeeeseeeeccesesseeeseeeessaeeseseeeseeeeeseessaeeeeenaas 34


IO 36


vi

[PAGE 008]

Design and Ethical Approval .............ccccscccccesssscccesssseeceesssseeeeeesssaeeeeeeseseeeessessaeeeeess 36
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria..........ccccccccccssssccesssssceeceseenneeeeeesesseeeeesssaeeeesseenaeeeeees 36
¡CASA 36
¡TIN37
Questionnaire DevelopMent....oooooocccnnnonoonnnnonooonnnnconannnnnnnonononnnnnnononnnnncnnannnnncnnnnannnnonns 38
Additional Survey DetallS.........ooooococnnnooococcncooononononononnnncononononccnnonnnnnocnonnnnonconannnnnnonns 39
Information Collected .....oooooocnnnocccnonoconononcnononocononnnnnconnnnonnnnorononnrnn
cono rn rnnn ora ronnnncrannnnos 40
ANALYSES 000... eeeeesecccesssseeceesesceeceesesaeeeeeseesaeeeeseesaeeeesseaeeeeeesesseeeeeeseseeeeeseesaeesessesaeeeenes 42


RESULTS A 46


Survey Responses ............uusussssssnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnennennennennensnnnensennnnnnnnennennnnnnnssss
ann46
Participant Characteristics .0........ccccccccccssscccceesssceecceeeseeecesessseeeeeessaeeeeeeseeeeeesseesaeeseees 47
Demographics .........cccccccccsessecceesesneeeeeesenseeeeesenaeeeecseseeeeeeseeseeeessesaeeeessesaeeeeees 47
FM Status occcoonoononccononccononanononcnnnonnro
nana one nnrn rn nn enn non nn nen rn n nro nannnnnrrnrnrannranannonencnnnnss 50
Other Conditions 2.0.0... ceccccesseccesseecesseeeesssseeeesseeeessneeeesseeesesseeeessneeeeseeeeseegs 51
Medication and Substance Use ...ooooccccnoooccncconaoonnncnononanoncononononnnnonanrnnncnonnannnnonos 52
Knowledge about Classic Psychedelics .......ooooococonoocccnooncnccooncncnnnrnccnoonononaoncnnnns 54
RQ 1: Classic Psychedelic Use Among Individuals with FM... 55
Type and Frequency of USe ..ocooooooccccnooooocnnonononononcnononanonconononnnnnnonnnrnnncnnnanannnnonos 55
Practical MOtives .........ccccccscsscccessseseeeeesssneeeeeesensaeeeessnneeeeesscseeeesssenseeeseneseneeseess 56
Change in Reasons for Psychedelic Use over Time cocooooooccncnnnoonnnncononancnoninnnoss 61
Expectations Related to Psychedelic Use ...................2uu2susssesesssenensennnnennn 62
RQ 2 and RQ 3: Changes in Pain with Classic Psychedelic Use .....ccoooococcccnoonccnnnnnns 62
Pain Changes with Use of Psilocybin Mushrooms ..............::cccsssccessseeeeeesteeeeens 64
Pain Changes with Use of LSD cooocoocccnnoncccnonannnonanncnononcncnnonnnnonnncoronnncncnnnnnaconnss 68
Pain Changes with Use of Other Classic Psychedelics......................... 69
Impact of Psychedelic Use on PalD....ooooooocccnonocccnccnoooccnocnonnnnnnnnononnnonccnnnncnncnnnos 71
Beliefs About Why Pain Changed ..oooooonoccccnonocccononccnononcncnnoncnconancnnonnncncnnnnnanonnss 78
RQ 4: Impact of Psychedelic Use on Other SyMptOMS ..ooooooccccnnoonccnccononacnnnnnnonononnnnns 80
Mental Health Symptoms ....occcconoconccnonnooncnnnononnnonccnnonnnnocnnnnonnnnncnnnnnnnccnnnnnncnnnns 81
Brain Fog ......cccccccccesssccecessesceceesesnseeeceseenseeecesseaeeeessesaeeecesesaeesessesaeeeessesaeeeeees 82
Fatigue/Energy ........uuesessnsseneessensnneensennnnnensnnnnnnennnnnnnnnnnnnennnennennnnnenensensensnnnenn 83
Gastrointestinal Problems.......ooooocnnnococnnonoccnonocaconnoncnononcncnnnonononnnnnnonnnnncnnnn
nennen 83
RQ 5: Factors Associated with Positive and Negative Impacts on Pain.................... 84
NANA 84
Preparation and Additional Characteristics of Psychedelic US8....................... 86
Additional Changes Following Psychedelic Use.......................... nenn 88
Practicality, Support, and ÁCCESS....coccooooccccnonoononcnnnnonncnnconannnnnnnonnnncnrcnnnnennnnnnns 89


DISCUSSION AA 91


Self-Medicating with Classic Psychedelics .....cocooooocnccnoooconcconononnnnnonnnonnnncononnonccnnnnnos 92
Reductions in Pain with Psychedelic US€....ooooooccccnooccccconanonononononancnncconanrnnncnnnonannnnonos 93
Microdosing vs. Macrodosing ..........:ccccsscccceeeesneceeeesscnseeeeescneeeecseeneeeesessstaeeseess 94


Vil

[PAGE 009]

LSD, Mescaline, and DMT uu... ccc cccccsssssssscceecssssssnseeececcessetertasececeeesenes 95
Reductions in Opioid Use ...oooooocccnoconocacoonnonnononannnnonnaron
crono roncrnnnnronnrnonarnn conoces 96
Impacts on Other Symptoms in FM iooocccccoccccoocnconnnnnonnncnonnnnoncnnnonaccnnaconnnanconccconanecaness 97
Potential Factors Involved in Pain-Related Changes.....ooooocnccnnoconoconiononocoronccnnnacnacns 98
Mind-Body Connection cooooococccooncoonononncnnnnnnnncnonnnnanononoroncrnnnnronnonnnnronnrnonarnananones 98
Cognitive and Behavioral Changes............cccccccccssccssscessecssecessecssecenseesssessesesseens 99
Possible Physiological Mechanisms .............cccccccccsccessscessscessscesssscesssecseeseneees 100
NANA 101
Limitations cocooocconccnonacancconnncnnnnonnncononnnnnnonnrnnnnnnn
cnc nro nn nnnn nn conc nrnnnnonnr rana conan rara r once cna ninos 102
Future Directions ..oooonconoccnononoccnononnncnncooncnnnonononanononon
o noo n cnn n corn rnr nora ron non rn onn rra nora ccinacns 103
Conclusion 0.0... eee eeecceeseeenceeeseeesceceneceseeceseceseecsssecsaccessccsaecsssecssecssesessessutseasesssseessensny 104


LIST OF REFERENCES1.00... cececcccesssesseeeseessesaceseceseeeseceseceseseeesssesesessssseesseesenessaseess 105


APPENDIX A: STUDY IRB APPROVAL FORM oooccccconnccnnncnonnconinnccnnnnononancnnncncanacinnnos 129


APPENDIX B: SURVEY cocccnnccnocccnocononnononoonnnonannonanononnonnncnonnnnnnonnnnrnnn
ron nn ron nr ano rana nanonanns 132


vill

[PAGE 010]

LIST OF TABLES


Table Page


1 Participant demographic characteristics .....ooooooccnnnocccononcnonnonanoonnnnnonnncononanancnnnrnoronnnoos 49


2 Age and pain characteristics .........cccceccccessecssseeeeeeeeeseeesseceessecseceecsseeeeseeeeseeeeseeeeseeeses 51


IN 52


4 Mental health conditions reported ...oooooonncccnnoccnononcnoncnconnnnonannnnnnnnonnnnonnnanonnnnonanaconannons 52


5S CIA 53


6 Non-psychedelic substance US€....ooonooccnnocccoooncnoncnonononnonnnnnannononnnonnn
nono nnconnnncnnnncnnnnnonnnos 54


7 Knowledge about psychedeliCS.......ooooonnocccnococoonccnoooncononccnnnnconnnnonannnonancononconn
nn nonannonanos 55


8 Reasons for use among participants With FM....oooconnnccccnonccccoonnnonnonanonnnnnnnnnnnanonnnnanonns 56


9 Any change in pain with past psychedelic USE .......ooooconococonocccooanconnnnnonnnononnnonanccnnnncnnos 63


10 Direction of pain changes by psychedelic SUDStance......ooonococonnncccnononcnonnananoonannnonnnnoss 64


11 Means of retrospective pain ratings by psychedelic substance..................n. 64


12 Impact of classic psychedelic USE on pain ..oooooonoccconoccconancnonanononaconnnconnnnononnnonnn
nono nncnnos 71


13 Other changes reported with psychedelic USE .....oooooconnocccnonacaconanancconancnnonananoonananoonnnoos 81


14 Negative effects reported with psychedelic USE ....oooooconncccionccconcccoonaccononononnononononnnnonono 85


1x

[PAGE 011]

LIST OF FIGURES


Figure Page


1 Inclusion and exclusion of participants...........cccccccccccssccssscesseesseceseeessscessesssseessesestensees 47


2 Retrospective pain ratings — Psilocybin MICrOdos€sS.....coooccnnnonccnoonnnononnnncnonanononnncconananos 65


3 Retrospective pain ratings — Psilocybin low/medium doOSeS............ccccsscccesseeesseeesseeenees 66


4 Retrospective pain ratings — Psilocybin high dOSeS.......oooononoccccnnocccconnancninannacinonaconnanos 67


5 Duration of pain reduction by psilocybin dosage type ...ocoooocccocncoocncoonoonnocanaconarcanaconanos 68


6 Retrospective pain ratings — LSD woo... eee cecceessccesseccessecesseccsseecessececssecesseeesssecessesenaes 69


7 Retrospective pain ratings — Mescaline ....ooocoooccconoccccononcnonnnnnnnonnnnnonanoncnnonaconnonccnanannacns 70

[PAGE 012]

INTRODUCTION


Fibromyalgia (FM) presents with a range of symptoms including chronic


widespread musculoskeletal pain, fatigue, cognitive difficulties, and sleep problems


(Wolfe et al., 2010). Affecting up to 6.6% of the general population (Marques et al.,

2017), the syndrome can carry substantial disability and socioeconomic burden (Lacasse

et al., 2016). Current standard pharmacologic treatments include serotonin and


norepinephrine inhibitors (duloxetine and milnacipran) and the gabapentinoid pregabalin,

although these medications are not effective for most individuals (Okifuji et al., 2016;


Schmidt-Wilcke & Diers, 2017). Identification of more effective treatments is strongly


needed. Classic psychedelics such as psilocybin have potential for treatment of chronic

pain conditions like FM (Castellanos et al., 2020; Elman et al., 2022; Whelan & Johnson,


2018). In this introduction, a review of FM characteristics, the current state of treatment,


and research on associated mechanisms will first be presented. A summary of psilocybin

and its psychopharmacology will follow, with a subsequent discussion of classic

psychedelics as potential treatments for pain and FM. An overview of the present study

will then be described.

[PAGE 013]

Fibromyalgia


Characteristics


FM is a multi-symptom pain condition affecting about 4 million people in the


United States (Walitt et al., 2015). FM often leads to significant impairments in physical


abilities and detrimental impacts on psychological and social well-being (Galvez-Sanchez


et al., 2019). Characterized primarily by chronic widespread pain, the condition is often


accompanied by persistent fatigue, unrefreshing sleep, and cognitive dysfunction (Wolfe


et al., 2016). FM pain can encompass both allodynia (pain in response to typically non-


painful stimuli, such as touch) and hyperalgesia (augmented pain sensitivity). Mood


problems, autonomic disturbances, headaches, abdominal pain, muscle stiffness, and


sensory hypersensitivity are also common. Prevalence of FM tends to increase with age


(Walitt et al., 2015) and is most commonly diagnosed in middle adulthood.


Women represent approximately 90% of those diagnosed clinically (Yunus,


2002); however, research has shown bias among clinicians towards diagnosing FM in


women (Srinivasan et al., 2019; Wolfe et al., 2019) and individuals with greater


psychological distress (Wolfe et al., 2019). Many individuals who meet self-report


criteria for FM do not have a formal diagnosis from a healthcare provider (Walitt et al.,


2015). Among unbiased samples using self-report criteria, women are estimated to


represent about 60% of those with FM (Wolfe et al., 2018). Although diagnoses are most


frequent among white women, a national survey study of 8446 people yielded no


difference in prevalence among non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic Black, and Hispanic


individuals, lower prevalence in Asian Americans, and greater prevalence in individuals


identifying as another or more than one race (Walitt et al., 2015).


2

[PAGE 014]

Diagnosis


There is no biomarker or gold standard for FM diagnosis, and the diagnostic


criteria have evolved over the past three decades. Patients often spend years after the


onset of symptoms before receiving a diagnosis, with the average time to diagnosis being


over six years (Gendelman et al., 2018). The American College of Rheumatology (ACR)


published diagnostic criteria in 1990 which required the presence of at least 11 out of a


possible 18 tender points, in addition to self-reported widespread chronic pain for at least


three months (Wolfe et al., 1990). The tender point exam is conducted by a physician and


determines the threshold at which individuals experience pain in response to pressure


applied at various sites on the body, using an algometer. The emphasis on a tender point


exam was dropped by the ACR in 2010, who then introduced the use of a widespread


pain index (WPI) and a symptom severity scale (SSS) (assessing severity of fatigue,


cognitive difficulties, and unrefreshing sleep, and the presence of headaches, abdominal


pain, and depression). The 2010 criteria also required the absence of another disease or


condition that would explain the musculoskeletal pain (Wolfe et al., 2010). Intended


primarily for use in research, additional revisions were introduced in 2011 which enabled


FM case criteria to be met entirely via self-report (Wolfe et al., 2011).


In 2016, a further revised set of criteria were published, designed for both clinical


and research use (Wolfe et al., 2016). The 2016 revisions kept the symptom scores from


2010/2011 but abandoned the exclusionary criterion of having other conditions that may


contribute to pain. With that change, a FM diagnosis could be “valid irrespective of other


diagnoses” and “does not exclude the presence of other clinically important illnesses”


(Wolfe et al., 2016).

[PAGE 015]

There is increasing recognition that FM symptoms exist on a continuum, with the


higher end of polysymptomatic distress associated with worsened outcomes. A


polysymptomatic distress scale for “fibromyalgianess” can be calculated by summing the


WPI and SSS scores of the ACR criteria. This method provides a continuous FM severity


scale ranging from 0-31 that can aid with both assessment of symptoms and severity


change over time (Wolfe & Rasker, 2021).


Misdiagnosis of FM occurs for a variety of reasons, including but not limited to


the lack of an objective diagnostic test. In a 2016 study of national survey data, the


majority of those reporting a clinical (physician-based) diagnosis of FM (73%) did not


actually meet the study’s surrogate criteria for diagnosis (Walitt et al., 2015). Further,


many individuals who meet self-report-based diagnostic criteria are not clinically


diagnosed. For example, in a 2019 study of over 3000 primary care patients, only one


third who met ACR criteria had a clinical diagnosis (Srinivasan et al., 2019). Problems


with misdiagnosis were also observed in a 2019 study of approximately 500


rheumatology clinic patients that compared rates of clinician and ACR criteria (Wolfe et


al., 2019). Given biases toward diagnosing FM in women and individuals with increased


psychological distress, these discrepancies may reflect misinterpretation of patient


symptom reports by providers. It is also possible that at the time a clinical diagnosis was


made, an individual met ACR criteria, but after receiving treatment their symptoms


improved such that the criteria were no longer met (Wolfe & Rasker, 2021).


Misdiagnosis may also occur in the early stages of rheumatic diseases (e.g., preclinical


rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory spondylarthritis), prior to the emergence of abnormal


laboratory or physical exam findings. Neurological disease, metabolic and endocrine


4

[PAGE 016]

disorders, gastrointestinal disease, infectious illnesses (e.g., Lyme disease, hepatitis C),


and early stages of cancers can also mimic FM (Hauser et al., 2019).


Comorbidities and Overlapping Conditions


Among individuals with FM, rates of comorbid medical and mental health


conditions are generally higher than in individuals without fibromyalgia (Walitt et al.,


2015). For example, hypertension, myocardial infarction, diabetes, asthma, liver disease,


and other medical illnesses occur more than twice as commonly in FM compared to


individuals without FM (Walitt et al., 2015). Many chronic pain and fatigue illnesses


have overlapping symptoms with FM and are commonly comorbid (e.g., chronic fatigue


syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis [CFS/ME] (Rusu et al., 2015), irritable bowel


syndrome [IBS] (Kleykamp et al., 2021), temporomandibular disorder [TMD] (Kleykamp


et al., 2021), chronic migraines and tension-type headaches (Kleykamp et al., 2021),


interstitial cystitis (Reed et al., 2012), and vulvodynia (Reed et al., 2012)). About one in


five people with FM reported also having CFS/ME in a nationally representative


Canadian health survey (Rusu et al., 2015). In a systematic review of comorbid chronic


pain conditions in FM, weighted lifetime prevalence rates were estimated at 39% for low


back pain, 44% for IBS, 48% for migraine, 56% for chronic tension-type headache, and


57% for TMD among FM patients (Kleykamp et al., 2021).


Psychiatric conditions such as mood and panic disorders also present frequently in


FM (Hudson et al., 1992; Kleykamp et al., 2021; Walitt et al., 2015). A systematic review


of studies that used structured clinical interviews suggested a point prevalence of 25%,


and a life-time prevalence of 65%, of comorbid major depressive disorder (MDD) in FM


5

[PAGE 017]

(Loge-Hagen et al., 2019). Similar rates were confirmed in a later review (Kleykamp et


al., 2021). These rates are higher than those found in the general US adult population (in


which 12-month and lifetime prevalence of MDD have been estimated as 10.4% and


20.6%, respectively (Hasin et al., 2018)). Prevalence of depressive symptoms and


disorders in FM are comparable, however, to those observed in other chronic pain


conditions such as TMD, chronic back pain, neck pain, and abdominal pain (Hooten,


2016). In addition to depression, elevated rates of current comorbid anxiety (30%) and


posttraumatic stress disorder (39.1%) have been observed in FM (Kleykamp et al., 2021).


Bipolar disorder also may occur more frequently in those with FM. A review including 4


case-control studies reported a pooled odds ratio of 7.55 [95% confidence interval (CI)


=3.9-14.62] for bipolar disorder in patients with FM compared to non-FM patients


(Kudlow et al., 2015).


Impact


A number of quality-of-life domains are impacted by FM. In a survey study with


800 patients (Choy et al., 2010), individuals reported moderate to strong impact of FM


symptoms on most aspects of their quality of life (including mood, sex life, ability to care


for family and children, personal relationships, etc.). Approximately a fifth of patients


were unable to work, and a quarter of patients missed substantial time at work due to


their symptoms. Individuals with FM often experience feelings of isolation in attempting


to manage their symptoms on a day-to-day basis in the context of family, work, and


social roles (Galvez-Sanchez et al., 2019). The impact of FM is also compounded by the

[PAGE 018]

uncertainty and stigma of dealing with what many consider an “invisible”, “mysterious”,
399 66


and “unexplained” illness.


Coping Styles/Beliefs


As in other chronic pain and health conditions, coping styles/beliefs influence the


symptom severity, functioning, and quality of life among patients with FM. Increased


scores on pain catastrophizing measures have been associated with higher symptom


severity, worse functional outcomes, depressive symptoms, greater attention directed


towards pain, and disability in FM (Edwards et al., 2006). Exactly what pain


catastrophizing represents has been debated, and individuals with chronic pain often


describe the term as stigmatizing, given implications of pain being exaggerated, not real,


or all in one’s head (Amtmann et al., 2018). Multiple definitions of pain catastrophizing


have been proposed, including, most traditionally, patterns of negative thoughts or


appraisals related to pain and its current and future impact, accompanied by


magnification of and rumination on pain, and a sense of helplessness. Catastrophizing has


also been suggested as an emotional regulation strategy that interacts with personality


traits and is related to activation of the behavioral inhibition system, leading to increased


avoidant behaviors (Petrini & Arendt-Nielsen, 2020). Avoidant coping, including


avoidance of activity, is associated with worse function (Galvez-Sanchez et al., 2019).


Conversely, increased acceptance of pain (Tangen et al., 2020) and higher perceived self-


efficacy (Van Liew et al., 2013) have been correlated with improved mental health,


reduced symptom severity, and less FM adverse impact.

[PAGE 019]

Treatment


There is no cure or highly effective treatment for FM. At present, treatment


recommendations focus on multidisciplinary approaches combining both pharmacologic


and nonpharmacologic methods from a biopsychosocial perspective.


Three medications are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration


(FDA) for FM treatment, including duloxetine, milnacipran, and pregabalin. Both


duloxetine and milnacipran are serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine (NE) reuptake


inhibitors (SNRIs). Pregabalin is an anticonvulsant that binds to the alpha2-delta (a2-0)


subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels, modulating release of excitatory


neurotransmitters such as glutamate and substance P. These treatments have modest


treatment efficacy, with a minority of patients benefiting significantly (Derry et al., 2016;


Welsch et al., 2018).


Though only three drugs are approved by the FDA for use in FM, many other


medications are prescribed off-label, including the SNRI amitriptyline and other


antidepressants, gabapentin (an anticonvulsant drug similar to pregabalin), non-steroidal


anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), muscle relaxants, and opioid analgesics. Low dose


naltrexone (LDN) has shown promise in small pilot studies for FM pain (Younger &


Mackey, 2009; Younger et al., 2013) and has also been prescribed off-label for treatment


in FM. As a toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4) antagonist, LDN is suspected to ameliorate


symptoms via microglial modulation and reduction of proinflammatory cytokines


(Parkitny & Younger, 2017; Patten et al., 2018). Though LDN may be helpful for some


in reducing symptoms of FM, larger clinical trials are still needed. NSAIDs are generally


not considered useful for FM symptoms (Derry et al., 2017). Given the significant risks


8

[PAGE 020]

associated with long-term use and the lack of evidence for benefit in FM, opioids are also


not typically recommended (Goldenberg et al., 2016).


In addition to pharmacologic treatment, aerobic exercise, cognitive behavioral


therapy (CBT), and multicomponent therapy (combined exercise and psychological


therapy) are recommended by multiple guidelines (Ablin et al., 2013). Despite numerous


treatments available for FM, their efficacy remains limited, underscoring the need for


new and more effective treatments.


Etiological Research


FM’s etiology remains unknown. Investigations into pathophysiological causes


initially focused on peripheral muscle mechanisms. Etiological research later shifted its


focus largely to the central nervous system (CNS). Despite the absence of evidence


pointing towards a clear causal mechanism, central sensitization has been hypothesized to


drive the persistence of FM pain (Meeus & Nijs, 2007). Psychological factors have also


long been considered to play a role in the development, course, and impact of FM.


Several hypothesized causes and psychophysiological correlates are presented in this


section. Rather than a single causal mechanism, FM likely develops due to numerous,


interconnected factors.


Fibromyalgia as a Mental Illness


The extent to which psychological factors are involved has been, and continues to


be, controversial. Early reports conceptualized FM (or “fibrositis”) as a form of


psychoneurosis, a psychosomatic manifestation, or “psychogenic rheumatism” (Boland,


9

[PAGE 021]

1947; Reynolds, 1978). Others have hypothesized FM as a variant of depression (Alfici et


al., 1989), a masked or muted depression, or a somatoform pain disorder. Such


explanations have since been rejected (Ahles et al., 1987; Hauser & Fitzcharles, 2018;


Hauser & Henningsen, 2014). Though depression and other psychiatric illnesses overlap


with FM and are common comorbid conditions, most individuals with FM do not


experience simultaneous depression. In sum, despite a great deal of investigation directed


towards the topic, there remains no compelling evidence of FM to be a psychiatric


disorder.


Hudson and Pope (2004) posited FM as part of a family of affective spectrum


disorders, emphasizing the overlap, common comorbidity, and frequent familial


aggregation with other disorders involving chronic pain (IBS, headaches, facial pain,


etc.), chronic fatigue (CFS/ME), and psychiatric conditions (e.g., major depressive


disorder, panic disorder). They suggested that the disorders are all driven at least partially


by a shared underlying pathophysiology, given similar beneficial treatment responses


from antidepressants. Yunus (2007) suggested central sensitivity (or sensitization) as a


uniting factor for FM, CFS/ME, IBS, and other overlapping syndromes, but did not


include mood and other psychiatric disorders within this umbrella.


Central Sensitization


Central sensitization is posited as an amplification of nociceptive signaling in the


brain and spinal cord, promoting decreased thresholds for pain and heightened response


to painful stimuli (Meeus & Nijs, 2007). Quantitative sensory testing (QST) has been


used to explore differences in sensory function among FM patients compared to healthy


10

[PAGE 022]

controls and other clinical populations. Temporal summation and conditioned pain


modulation are two methods thought to provide evidence of central sensitization.


Temporal summation is a QST paradigm in which noxious stimuli are repeatedly applied,


provoking an enhanced perception of pain, a response similar to the wind-up


phenomenon observed in animals. Wind-up is an augmented excitatory response that


occurs due to abnormal activity of C-fibers in the spinal dorsal horn. Enhanced temporal


summation has generally been reported more in individuals with FM than in healthy


controls (O'Brien et al., 2018).


Other researchers have posited dysfunction in central pain processing occurring at


the supraspinal level. Conditioned pain modulation is measured using a QST paradigm in


whicha test stimulus (e.g., heat) and a conditioning stimulus (e.g., cold-water immersion)


are applied concurrently, which typically lowers perception of pain. This phenomenon is


thought to result from inhibitory pain mechanisms. Inhibitor pain mechanisms are


monoaminergic pathways that descend from the midbrain to block nociceptive messages


in the spinal cord. Conditioned pain modulation is lower among individuals with FM,


when compared to healthy controls, suggesting diminished inhibitory processes (Julien et


al., 2005; O'Brien et al., 2018).


Neurotransmitter Dysfunction


Abnormalities in neurotransmission underlying endogenous pain facilitative and


inhibitory processes have also been observed in FM. Alterations in serotonergic,


noradrenergic, and dopaminergic systems likely play a role not only in FM pain but also


other symptoms, such as sleep and mood difficulties. Decreased serotonergic and


11

[PAGE 023]

noradrenergic activity has been suggested, given the reduced levels of norepinephrine and


serotonin metabolites found in the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) of FM patients compared to


controls (Russell et al., 1992). The use of SNRIs in FM supports this premise, as they


increase levels of both serotonin and norepinephrine (Welsch et al., 2018). Decreased


dopaminergic function has also been posited. When compared to healthy controls, FM


patients have shown reduced D2/D3 receptor availability in some brain regions (Albrecht


et al., 2016; Wood et al., 2007) and have demonstrated abnormal dopaminergic responses


to painful stimuli (Wood et al., 2007) .


Abnormalities in endogenous opioid activity and differences in levels of


excitatory neurotransmitters have also been reported in FM when compared to non-FM


patients. High levels of enkephalins have been found in the CSF of individuals with FM


(and of individuals with low back pain) compared to controls (Barantuk et al., 2004).


Decreased opioid receptor binding in the brain has also been observed in FM (Harris et


al., 2007). Substance P, an excitatory modulator of spinal nociceptive transmission, is


elevated in CSF of individuals with FM compared to those without FM (Russell et al.,


1994). Further, increased levels of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate have been


found in the CSF and brains of FM patients (Pyke et al., 2017; Sarchielli et al., 2007). In


support of a potential role for glutamate in FM, some patients experience reduced pain


following treatment with N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists such as


ketamine (Pastrak et al., 2021).


12

[PAGE 024]

Stress


FM has been hypothesized as a stress-related disorder (Van Houdenhove & Egle,


2004). A history of physical and psychological stressors has been associated with FM and


chronic widespread pain in numerous studies (Kaleycheva et al., 2023; Yavne et al.,


2018), and stressful events have been reported to precipitate FM onset by a subset of


patients. For example, in a study of 939 patients with FM, 27% of individuals reported


one or more precipitating events. Of those that identified a precipitating event, the


majority reported physical trauma (e.g., motor vehicle accidents, surgeries, childbirth,


etc.), and one fifth identified infectious illnesses (e.g., respiratory infection, Epstein-Barr


virus, etc.) as triggering events (Jiao et al., 2015). Elevated rates of PTSD have been


reported in individuals with FM (Hauser et al., 2013; Raphael et al., 2006). Evidence for


FM as a stress-related disorder further stems from abnormal findings in the stress


response system. Lower basal cortisol levels in FM have been observed in some studies


(Gonzalez-Vives et al., 2020; Riva et al., 2010), though not all (Tak et al., 2011), and


evidence of reduced heart rate variability and increased sympathetic activity in FM has


been described (Meeus et al., 2013; Tracy et al., 2016).


Small Fiber Pathology


Another area of FM research concerns small fiber pathology, as several studies


have shown that a subset of patients with FM have small fiber neuropathy (Giannoccaro


et al., 2014; Oaklander et al., 2013). Skin biopsy results showing reduced intraepidermal


nerve fiber density have been observed (Kosmidis et al., 2014) and may be related to


13

[PAGE 025]

increased FM severity in some patients (Evdokimov et al., 2019). Reduced diameter of


dermal C-fibers has also been reported (Doppler et al., 2015).


Genetics


Studies finding strong familial aggregation of FM have lent support to a role for


genetics (Arnold et al., 2004). A large-scale genetic study estimated heritability of FM at


13.9%, with higher rates estimated among younger age groups and lower heritability with


older age (Dutta et al., 2020). Genetic factors have been proposed to contribute to up to


50% of the risk of developing FM, and epigenetic changes have been hypothesized as


mechanisms involved in FM onset (D'A gnelli et al., 2019).


Multiple candidate gene polymorphisms that could influence pain processing have


been suggested. For example, FM has been associated with polymorphisms of genes


important for serotonergic function, including the 102T/C polymorphism in the serotonin


2A receptor gene (HTR2A), which was associated with FM susceptibility in one study


(Lee et al., 2012). Polymorphisms in the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) have also


been associated with FM in some studies (D'Agnelli et al., 2019), and have been related


to differences in conditioned pain modulation/inhibitory processes (Lindstedt et al.,


2011).


Alterations in the trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAARI) gene, which could


impact pain sensitivity via modulation of dopaminergic receptor activity (Xie & Miller,


2009), have also been associated with FM (Smith et al., 2012). Given the catechol-O-


methyltransferase (COMT) gene’s role in metabolism of catecholamines, alterations in


the COMT gene could impact the modulation of pain perception. Findings related to


14

[PAGE 026]

COMT gene variants in FM, however, have been inconsistent (Lee et al., 2012). Other


potential candidate genes have included the transient receptor potential vanilloid channel


2 gene (TRPV2), the myelin transcription factor 1 like gene (MYTIL), and the neurexin


3 gene (NRXN3) (D'Agnelli et al., 2019). TRPV2 is expressed on dorsal root and


trigeminal ganglia neurons and is involved in mechano- and thermosensation (Shibasaki,


2016). MYTIL is involved in neuronal differentiation and has been associated with


cognitive disability (D'Agnelli et al., 2019). Changes in NRXN3, a gene involved in cell


recognition and adhesion, could be involved in pain by influencing signal transmission in


the CNS (Docampo et al., 2014).


Immune Dysregulation


Immune and neuroimmune dysregulation has also been posited as a mechanism


for FM. In a positron emission tomography (PET) imaging study using a translocator


protein (TSPO) radioligand, increased microglial activation was observed among


individuals with FM compared to healthy controls (Albrecht et al., 2019). Differences in


peripheral pro-inflammatory (tumor necrosis alpha [TNF-a], interleukin [IL]-6, IL-8) and


anti-inflammatory (IL-10) cytokines have also been reported (O'Mahony et al., 2021).


Sex hormones are known to be involved in pain processing (Gregus et al., 2021) and sex-


specific immune responses may contribute to the increased prevalence of FM among


women (Meester et al., 2019).


15

[PAGE 027]

Psilocybin


Psychedelics refer to psychoactive substances that induce significant perceptual,


cognitive, and affective changes during acute drug action. The complex and unique


nature of such changes has been compared to that experienced during dreams, extreme


states such as psychosis, and religious and spiritual experiences. As a classic psychedelic,


psilocybin is thought to elicit such effects primarily via agonistic activity at the serotonin


type 2A receptor. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), dimethyltryptamine (DMT) of


ayahuasca, and mescaline from the peyote cactus are examples of other classic


psychedelics. Classic psychedelics have also been known as hallucinogens (a less favored


term given the implication of hallucinations as a principle effect), entheogens (meaning


“to generate the divine within’, referring to the association with spiritual and religious


experiences), and psychotomimetics (referencing the provocation of a psychotic-like


state) (Nichols, 2016). Seeking an alternative to psychotomimetic, Humphrey Osmond


introduced the term psychedelic (meaning “mind-manifesting”) in 1957 (Osmond, 1957).


Natural and Synthetic Sources


Psilocybin (4-phosphoryloxy-N, N-dimethyltryptamine or 3-[2-


(dimethylamino)ethyl]-177-indol-4-yl dihydrogen phosphate) and its active metabolite


psilocin (4-hydroxy-N, N-dimethyltryptamine or 3-[2-(dimethylamino)ethyl]-177-indol-4-


ol) are tryptamine alkaloids with structures closely resembling that of serotonin (Fricke et


al., 2019). Psilocybin is naturally produced by over 200 species of mushrooms. More


than 150 of the fungal species belong to the genus Psilocybe, though species from other


genera (e.g., Gymnopilus, Panaeolus, Pluteous, Conocybe, Copelandia, Inocybe) also


16

[PAGE 028]

contain psilocybin. More than half of the known Psilocybe mushrooms grow in Central


and South America, with some species common to continents across the world (e.g., P.


cubensis, P. cyanescens and P. semilanceata) (Guzman, 2009). Psilocybin and psilocin


are biosynthesized from the amino acid tryptophan in a series of steps, a process first


described in 1968 (Agurell & Nilsson, 1968), the understanding of which has since been


refined (Fricke et al., 2019). Concentration of psilocybin and psilocin typically range


from 0.2% to 1% by dry weight (Tyls et al., 2014), varying by mushroom species, size,


part (e.g. cap, stem, mycelium), age, and other factors. Fresh or dried mushrooms are


typically eaten whole, crushed into a powder, mixed with other foods such as chocolate,


or steeped in boiling water or tea for consumption.


Synthetic psilocybin is the predominant form of the substance utilized in clinical


research at present. Pure psilocybin appears as a white crystalline powder (Geiger et al.,


2018). The Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann and his colleagues first isolated psilocybin


and psilocin from P. mexicana in the late 1950s (Hofmann & Troxler, 1959). They also


were the first to structurally identify and chemically synthesize the compounds.


Hofmann’s employer, Sandoz pharmaceutical company, produced and sold synthetic


psilocybin, marketed as Indocybin, for use in psychedelic-assisted therapy and research


during the 1960s (Geiger et al., 2018). Hofman and colleagues’ protocol for synthetic


production starts with 4-hydroxyindole and later involves phosphorylation of psilocin


into psilocybin; several adjustments to the protocol have since been made to increase


yield. Most psilocybin used in research currently is created from chemical synthesis.


Procedures for in-vitro enzymatic and heterologous in-vivo production (e.g., from yeast


(Milne et al., 2020)) have also been published (Fricke et al., 2019).


17

[PAGE 029]

Pharmacodynamics


Psilocin, the active metabolite of psilocybin, is a partial agonist of the 5-


hydroxytrypamine (serotonin) type 2A (5HT2a) receptor, an excitatory G-protein coupled


receptor widely distributed in the human brain, especially in the cortex (Beliveau et al.,


2017). In addition to its strong binding potential for 5HT2, receptors, psilocin has strong


binding potential for serotonin type -1D, -1B, -1C, -5, -6, and -7 receptors, and moderate


binding potential for type -1
A and -1B receptors (Geiger et al., 2018). 5SHT2A receptors


are densely expressed in the claustrum and on layer V pyramidal neurons of the


prefrontal cortex (PFC) (Nichols et al., 2017). SHT2A receptors are also located on


cortical and subcortical inhibitory gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic interneurons


and expressed presynaptically on thalamocortical afferents to the PFC (Vollenweider &


Preller, 2020). Psilocin also inhibits the serotonin transporter (SERT) and exerts activity


at histamine, alpha-2A and -2B, and dopamine-3 (D3) receptors (Geiger et al., 2018).


Psilocin’s psychedelic effects primarily derive from its actions at the SHT>A


receptor. In animals trained with psilocybin, administration of a selective SHT2A receptor


antagonist (M100907) blocks stimulus control (Winter et al., 2007). Further, SHT24


receptor knockout mice given psilocin do not produce the characteristic head twitch


response, considered a behavioral proxy for human psychedelic effects (Halberstadt et al.,


2011). In humans, pretreatment with the 5HT24/2c receptor antagonist ketanserin or the


mixed 5HT24/D antagonist risperidone dose-dependently blocks most psilocybin-


induced effects (Vollenweider et al., 1998). Further, in a PET study, the intensity of


18

[PAGE 030]

psychedelic effects was correlated with plasma psilocin levels and 5HT2A receptor


occupancy (Madsen et al., 2019).


Psilocin modulates neural activity through multiple sites of action and


downstream effects. For example, preclinical research has shown that the compound


inhibits activity of the dorsal raphe nucleus by SHT\, autoreceptor agonism (Aghajanian


& Hailgler, 1975). In the rat, administration of psilocybin increases expression of several


immediate early genes associated with synaptic plasticity, particularly in the PFC (Jefsen


et al., 2021). In the human brain, neuroimaging research with psilocybin has indicated


acute excitatory effects (increased glucose metabolism, blood perfusion) in areas


associated with cognition, memory, and emotional processing (PFC regions and medial


temporal lobe) (Vollenweider & Preller, 2020). Psilocin leads to region-dependent


relative changes in glutamate, specifically increases in the medial PFC and decreases in


the hippocampus (Mason et al., 2020). Alterations in functional connectivity have also


been observed. Plasma psilocin level and subjective drug intensity have been negatively


correlated with acute reductions in brain network integrity (e.g., of the default mode


network [DMN]), and enhanced connectivity across networks (Madsen et al., 2021).


Pharmacokinetics


Psilocybin is a prodrug that undergoes first-pass dephosphorylation rapidly after


ingestion. Dephosphorylation occurs in the acidic environment of the stomach or by


alkaline phosphatase or other nonspecific esterases in the gut, transforming into the active


metabolite psilocin (Dinis-Oliveira, 2017). The bioavailability of psilocin is estimated as


50% after oral psilocybin ingestion (Hasler et al., 1997). Psilocin is lipid soluble and able


19

[PAGE 031]

to cross the blood-brain barrier. It is detectable in plasma within 20-40 minutes. Plasma


levels reach peak concentrations at about 80 to 105 minutes, remaining relatively stable


for approximately 50 minutes. This plateau is followed by a slower decline ending at


about 6 hours (Hasler et al., 1997; Passie et al., 2002). In a clinical study with doses of


oral psilocybin ranging from 0.3 to 0.6 mg/kg (Brown et al., 2017), linear


pharmacokinetics were observed, and the elimination half-life of psilocin was 3 hours,


with a standard deviation [SD] of 1.1. In another study, the half-life of psilocin was


approximately 2.7 hours following oral administration of psilocybin doses of 0.224 +


0.002 mg/kg (10-20 mg) (Hasler et al., 1997). The half-life of psilocin is considerably


shorter when psilocybin is administered intravenously (Hasler et al., 1997).


From psilocybin, psilocin is further metabolized via phase-I and phase-II


metabolism. The majority (80% or more) of psilocin undergoes phase-II reactions


involving glucuronidation by UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs), particularly


UGTIA1O0 in the small intestine and UGT1A9 in the liver (Manevski et al., 2010).


Another portion of psilocin undergoes phase-I reactions involving oxidative metabolism,


catalyzed by monoamine oxidase (MAO) or aldehyde dehydrogenase. From an


intermediary metabolite, 4-hydroxyindole-3-acetaldehyde (4-HIA), psilocin then


transforms into 4-hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid (4-HIAA) or 4-hydroxytryptophole (4-HT)


(Hasler et al., 1997; Passie et al., 2002). An alternative, minor oxidative pathway of


psilocin has also been suggested, yielding a product with an o-quinone or iminoquinone


structure (Dinis-Oliveira, 2017). Most psilocin is renally excreted as a psilocin-O-


glucuronide conjugate (Geiger et al., 2018; Grieshaber et al., 2001).


20

[PAGE 032]

History of Human Use


Psilocybin-containing mushrooms have been used by indigenous peoples for


thousands of years as sacred medicine traditions. Pre-Columbian Mesoamerican cultures


used such mushrooms in religious and healing ceremonies. Use was common among


Aztec, Maya, Totonac, Huastec, and Mazatec peoples (Carod-Artal, 2015). Prehistoric


ritual use has also been suggested from art historical evidence in Africa and Europe


(Froese et al., 2016).


Maria Sabina, a Mazatec curandera, introduced an American mycologist R.


Gordon Wasson to the use of psilocybin-containing mushrooms during a healing ritual in


Oaxaca, Mexico in 1955. Wasson later wrote about his experience in a popular Life


magazine article published in 1957. He also sent samples of mushrooms to Albert


Hofmann, whose earlier discovery of LSD had ignited increased scientific attention


towards psychedelic substances. The pharmaceutical company Sandoz had begun


distributing LSD-25 under the name Delysid to researchers and psychiatrists, noting


indications for use in analytical psychotherapy and in research on psychosis (Hofmann,


1980). Following Hofmann and colleagues’ isolation of psilocybin/psilocin in the late


1950s (Hofmann & Troxler, 1959), Sandoz began marketing psilocybin as Indocybin


with similar indications as Delysid (Geiger et al., 2018).


As the use of psychedelic substances in research and therapeutic practices grew,


interest in recreational use also expanded. High profile accounts of psychedelic


experiences contributed to their popularity, and the substances became associated with


the counter-culture movement. Media reports circulated about dangerous drug effects,


including claims of potential for chromosomal damage and insanity, prompting


21

[PAGE 033]

substantial public backlash. Multiple research experiments were also carried out with


controversy and questionable ethics during this time (Carhart-Harris & Goodwin, 2017).


Several restrictions on research and manufacture of the drugs were initiated in the mid-


1960s, and in 1970 the US Congress passed the Controlled Substances Act, classifying


LSD, psilocybin, and other psychedelics as Schedule I drugs. This designation denotes


drugs without any accepted medical use or accepted safety in use, and with high potential


for abuse ("Controlled Substances Act," 1970). Research of psychedelic substances thus


went dormant for decades. Since the early 2000s, however, a renewal of efforts to expand


understanding of these substances has gained substantial momentum.


Effects at Typical Dosages


When administered orally in humans the threshold for detection of psychoactive


effects is 3 to 5 mg of psilocybin, eliciting slight drowsiness and intensification of mood


(Hasler et al., 2004). Doses from 8 to 10 mg or more are considered to elicit psychedelic


effects, particularly perceptual distortions (Passie et al., 2002). High doses of > 25 mg are


associated with fuller, more profound subjective experiences. Following oral


administration of psilocybin, onset of subjective effects is usually between 20 and 40


minutes, peaking after 60 to 90 minutes and remaining relatively stable for another 60 to


120 minutes before wearing off. Total duration of effects is approximately 6 to 8 hours


(Hasler et al., 2004; Tyls et al., 2014). When administered intravenously, typical doses in


humans are 1-2 mg, onset of effect is rapid (approximately 1-2 minutes), and total


duration of effect is about 20 minutes (Tyls et al., 2014). The lethal dose of psilocybin in


humans has been estimated as greater than 1000 times the therapeutic dose (Gable, 2004).


22

[PAGE 034]

Findings from preclinical and clinical research with psilocybin/psilocin suggest


low risk for physiological harm and dependence, though repeated dosing results in


diminished effects (tolerance) (Gable, 1993, 2004; Johnson et al., 2018). Common acute


physiologic effects of psilocybin administration in humans include mild to moderate


increases in blood pressure, mild increases in heart rate, nausea, dizziness, pupil dilation,


and fatigue. Tremor, hyperreflexia, ataxia, lack of appetite, drowsiness, and vomiting


may also occur acutely. Fatigue and decreased energy may last for up to a day following


administration (Johnson et al., 2008; Passie et al., 2002; Studerus et al., 2011). Delayed-


onset, transient headaches are also commonly reported after psilocybin use, lasting into


the day following administration (Johnson et al., 2012).


Moderate to high doses of psilocybin produce an acute altered state of


consciousness, which may include significant changes in affect, a sense of euphoria,


dream- or trance-like experiences, detachment, and enhanced capacity for introspection.


Individuals may experience synesthesia and sensory distortions (e.g., visual alterations in


color perception, intensification of visual imagery, illusions), altered experience of time


and space, and emotional changes (e.g., intensification of mood, anxiety, panic, or fear,


emotional lability). In addition to acute affective and perceptual effects, psilocybin


evokes cognitive changes such as broadening of associations, reduction in attention span,


more imaginative thought, changes in body image, and alterations in the sense of self, or


ego-function (Letheby & Gerrans, 2017; Preller & Vollenweider, 2018; Studerus et al.,


2011). Higher doses are more likely to be stimulating and to involve visual distortions,


whereas lower doses tend to be mildly sedating and to increase visual acuity (Hasler et


al., 2004). Several studies by Griffiths and colleagues suggest that psilocybin elicits dose-


23

[PAGE 035]

dependent mystical-type experiences, in which individuals perceive a sense of unity


(internally and externally), noetic quality, sacredness, ineffability, transcendence of time


and space, and positive mood (Barrett & Griffiths, 2018). A recent meta-analysis of


studies that administered psilocybin to healthy volunteers also found positive, dose-


dependent associations between psilocybin, perceptual changes, and positively


experienced ego-dissolution (Hirschfeld & Schmidt, 2021).


Safety


The risks of psilocybin administration in general most often involve adverse


psychological effects. Intensely dysphoric and challenging experiences, sometimes


referred to as “bad trips”, are characterized by overwhelmingly frightening, psychotic-


like states, which may include paranoia, confusion, agitation, and extreme anxiety


(Johnson et al., 2008). Though these types of reactions are typically transient and


responsive to psychotherapeutic support, this type of experience could escalate to


potentially dangerous outcomes if an individual is unprepared or in an unsafe


environment. Other, relatively rare adverse psychological risks of psilocybin include a


prolonged state of psychological distress and/or psychotic reaction, the worsening of a


pre-existing psychotic disorder, and persistent visual disturbance effects (Bender &


Hellerstein, 2022). Thus, research with psychedelic substances involves considerable


attention to preparation and screening of participants and to aspects of the environment.


The nature of subjective experience varies substantially among individuals


depending not only on dose, but also on personal expectations or mindset in approaching


the experience and on the context, factors known respectively as set and setting. Set


24

[PAGE 036]

typically encompasses individual factors (e.g., personal attributes, expectations,


preparation, personality, mood, etc.), whereas setting refers to aspects of the physical and


social environment. For example, in clinical research studies, settings with PET imaging


are associated with increased anxiety during the experience (Studerus et al., 2011). In


terms of set, baseline states of decreased surrender and increased preoccupation,


apprehension, and confusion have been associated with increased likelihood of having a


dysphoric experience. Trait levels of absorption, acceptance, and openness positively


predict ratings of euphoric and mystical-type experiences (Aday et al., 2021).


Proposed by Johnson and colleagues (2008), safety guidelines serve to minimize


physiologic and psychologic risks with use of high doses of psilocybin in clinical


research. These guidelines include the following areas, in brief: careful screening of study


participants (e.g., exclusion of individuals with hypertension, personal or family history


of psychotic disorders, etc.); careful selection of study personnel; a calming, comfortable,


and safe physical environment; preparation of participants to thoroughly inform them of


psychedelic effects, risks, procedures, etc., and to build rapport and trust with study staff;


provision of support during the drug administration session; and post-


administration/follow-up support.


Research with Other Conditions


Studies conducted over 50 years ago reported potential benefits of classic


psychedelics for patients with conditions such as anxiety (Weston et al., 2020),


depressive disorders (Rucker et al., 2016), alcohol dependence (Krebs & Johansen,


2012), and cancer-related distress (Grof et al., 1973). Since the early 2000s, research on


25

[PAGE 037]

the therapeutic use of psilocybin in both clinical and non-clinical populations has


increasingly been underway. Psilocybin has shown promise for reducing anxiety and


depression among individuals with terminal illnesses such as advanced-stage cancer


(Agin-Liebes et al., 2020; Dos Santos et al., 2019), for individuals with tobacco (Garcia-


Romeu et al., 2014; Johnson et al., 2017) and alcohol dependence (Bogenschutz et al.,


2015), anxiety (Goldberg et al., 2020), obsessive-compulsive disorder (Moreno et al.,


2006), and treatment-resistant depression (Carhart-Harris et al., 2018). A meta-analysis


on randomized controlled trials of psilocybin and other classic psychedelic substances


reported both acute and long-term mood improvements among individuals with mood


disorders (Galvao-Coelho et al., 2021). The mystical-like experiences induced by


psilocybin have been associated with clinical response among several populations, e.g.,


anxiety and depression among late-stage cancer patients (Ross et al., 2016) and tobacco


dependence (Garcia-Romeu et al., 2014).


Classic Psychedelics and Pain


Early Clinical Research


Research in the 1960s and 1970s showed promise for clinical applications of


classic psychedelics in pain (Fanciullacci et al., 1977; Grof et al., 1973; Kast & Collins,


1964). In a study among 50 hospitalized patients with severe cancer-related, ischemic, or


neuropathic pain, Kast and Collins (1964) reported reductions in pain severity ratings and


increased pain-free periods after LSD administration when compared to meperidine and


dihydromorphinone. Further, in a case series, Grof and colleagues (Grof et al., 1973)


discussed benefits of LSD-assisted psychotherapy for 31 cancer patients in lowering pain


26

[PAGE 038]

severity, pre-occupation with pain and distress, anxiety, and depression. In addition, an


early case series of lower-dose LSD for treatment of phantom limb pain reported reduced


use of pain medications and lowered pain in 5 of 7 participants (Fanciullacci et al., 1977).


Recent Clinical Research


Relative to depression and other mental health conditions, few recent studies with


humans have examined pain (either acute or chronic) in relation to psychedelics, though


interest in this area has been surging. In an experimental study on acute pain, researchers


examined the effects of very low doses of LSD on pain tolerance among healthy


individuals who underwent cold pressor tests (CPTs) 1.5 and 5 hours after treatment


administration (Ramaekers et al., 2020). A dose of 20 mcg LSD was associated with


increased pain tolerance (immersion time) and reduced ratings of experienced pain and


unpleasantness when compared to placebo at both post-treatment timepoints (Ramaekers


et al., 2020). In an exploratory, placebo-controlled, crossover study regarding chronic


pain (migraine), a low dose of psilocybin (0.143mg/kg) was associated with fewer days


with migraine over a 2-week follow-up period (Schindler et al., 2021). Another


exploratory, placebo-controlled study utilized a pulse regimen with a low dose of


psilocybin for cluster headache (Schindler et al., 2022).


Multiple clinical trials are currently registered involving the use of psilocybin in


pain conditions, including phantom limb pain (clinicaltrials.gov; NCT05224336), cancer


pain (NCT 06001749, NCT05506982), chronic low back pain (NCT05351541), post-


treatment Lyme disease syndrome (NCT05305105), and various headache disorders


(cluster headache [NCT02981173], and migraine [NCT04218539]). Several trials are also


27

[PAGE 039]

underway involving administration of psilocybin among individuals with FM


(NCT05128162, NCT05068791, NCT05548075).


Findings from case reports, survey studies, and qualitative work have supported


and informed continued research on application of psychedelics in chronic pain. In two


cross-sectional retrospective surveys of patients who had used LSD and/or psilocybin for


cluster headaches, results showed reduced severity of headaches and longer remission


periods. Users also reported psilocybin and LSD to be more effective in preventing


cluster headaches than standard pharmacologic treatments (Schindler et al., 2015; Sewell


et al., 2006). In a qualitative analysis of online patient support group discussions,


psilocybin and LSD were reported as beneficial for the treatment and prevention of


cluster headaches and migraines (Andersson et al., 2017). Further, psilocybin combined


with mirror therapy led to remission of one patient’s phantom limb pain in a case report


(Ramachandran et al., 2018). A survey among individuals who microdosed has suggested


possible use in shingles, migraine, and other pain-related conditions (Fadiman & Korb,


2019). More recently, a case series described benefit of microdosing for chronic


neuropathic pain among three individuals (Lyes et al., 2023), and in another case report,


an individual with lupus experienced long-lasting improvement in joint pain following a


very high dose of psilocybin mushrooms (Arkfeld et al., 2023).


A qualitative study explored the use of classic psychedelics for past treatment


(self-medication) of chronic pain among 11 individuals (Bornemann et al., 2021). When


asked for retrospective pain ratings, 9 of the 11 individuals reported acute reductions in


pain during their psychedelic experience, whereas two described acute amplifications.


The majority of those who reported acute reductions in pain described gradual returns to


28

[PAGE 040]

baseline pain levels over 2-5 days. Two individuals reported enduring reductions in pain


lasting over 6 months following their psychedelic experience (Bornemann et al., 2021).


Another study used an online survey to examine the past use, knowledge, and


perceptions of psychedelics among 354 individuals with FM (Glynos et al., 2022).


Thirty-six individuals reported having chronic pain at the time they had taken a


psychedelic (most commonly LSD and psilocybin mushrooms). The majority


experienced either no change in symptoms (50%) or symptom improvement (47.2%). In


addition to generally neutral or positive perceptions held towards psychedelics, a


potentially powerful role for intention was highlighted. Of the 12 individuals in the study


who had taken a psychedelic substance intentionally to treat their pain, 11 reported


symptom improvement. Though interpretation of such findings is limited by selection


bias and other methodological constraints, the results call for further exploration of


psychedelics in relation to chronic pain.


There is not yet any published clinical data specifically on psychedelics and FM.


However, headache disorders (migraine, chronic tension-type headaches) are highly


comorbid with FM (Kleykamp et al., 2021), and several studies have pointed to


bidirectional relationships (Penn et al., 2019) and/or shared pathophysiology of FM and


chronic headaches (Sarchielli et al., 2007; Singh et al., 2019). It is therefore reasonable to


suspect a potentially beneficial effect of psychedelics on FM.


29

[PAGE 041]

Possible Mechanisms


SHT24 Agonism


Multiple mechanisms have been proposed supporting possible application of


psilocybin and other psychedelics in pain (Castellanos et al., 2020; Elman et al., 2022;


Whelan & Johnson, 2018; Zia et al., 2023). As a SHT2, receptor agonist, psilocybin may


influence chronic pain via serotonergic actions and downstream effects. Serotonin is


involved in the modulation of pain perception (Cortes-Altamirano et al., 2018), and, as


previously described, FM has been associated with decreased serotonergic functioning


(Sluka & Clauw, 2016). Polymorphisms of the 5HT2, receptor gene (Bondy et al., 1999)


and serotonin transporter gene have been related to FM in some studies (D'Agnelli et al.,


2019), and two of the three current FDA-approved medications for FM are serotonin-


norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors.


Descending serotonergic pathways in the CNS can either facilitate or inhibit


nociception. The nature of influence depends on the receptor types activated, the location


of receptors, and nature of the noxious stimulus. Whether 5HT2, receptor activation


promotes an anti-nociceptive vs. pro-nociceptive effect remains controversial. Evidence


suggests more likely an anti-nociceptive role in the brain, yet both pro- and anti-


nociceptive influences of 5HT2, receptor activation have been observed in the spinal cord


(Tao et al., 2019).


Preclinical reports of psilocybin and other 5HT2, receptor agonists have


suggested applications for pain. For example, a recent study was performed in a rat model


of inflammatory (formalin-induced) pain. Compared to saline, a single dose of psilocybin


reduced mechanical hypersensitivity in both ipsilateral and contralateral paws for 28 days


30

[PAGE 042]

(Kolbman et al., 2023). Also, in a central neuropathic pain model of spinal cord injury,


the 5HT2, agonist TCB-2 [(4-bromo-3,6-dimethoxybenzocyclobuten-1-yl)methylamine


hydrobromide] led to decreased thermal hyperalgesia and mechanical allodynia in mice,


an effect associated with upregulation of potassium chloride cotransporter 2 (KCC2)


(Sanchez-Brualla et al., 2018). In a preclinical model of orofacial inflammatory pain and


stress, thermal and mechanical hyperalgesia were reversed following intrathecal


administration of a 5SHT2, or SHT2c receptor agonist (Xue et al., 2020). Antinociceptive


effects of spinal 5HT24/5HToac receptor activation have also been observed in other


inflammatory (formalin) and neuropathic (chronic constriction injury) pain models in rats


(Sasaki et al., 2003). SHT2, receptor activation in the spinal cord has further been


associated with reduced allodynia and increased KCC2 expression in a model of knee


osteoarthritis in mice following electroacupuncture (Yuan et al., 2022). In contrast,


pronociceptive effects of SHT24/2c agonism have been reported. For example,


pretreatment with the 5HT2a2c agonist (2,5-dimethoxy-4-10dophenyl)-2-aminopropane


(DOJ) in the spinal cord augmented pain response behaviors in a peripheral inflammatory


pain model (Kjorsvik et al., 2001).


A few studies have suggested that psychedelics may reduce inflammation via


S5HT2a receptor activation (Flanagan & Nichols, 2018). In an in vitro study, (R)-1-(2,5-


dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane [(R)-DO]] strongly inhibited expression of


proinflammatory markers stimulated by tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a) in primary


rat aortic smooth muscle cells; this effect was completely blocked after pretreatment with


a 5HT2a receptor-selective antagonist (Yu et al., 2008). Similar findings have been


demonstrated in mice, in which systemic administration of (R)-DOI prevented TNF-a-


31

[PAGE 043]

induced increases in pro-inflammatory markers, such as interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1,


fractalkine, and others, in gut and vasculature tissues (Nau et al., 2013). Inhalation of (R)-


DOl also blocked the development of airways inflammation, pulmonary eosinophil


recruitment, and other features of allergic asthma in a mouse model (Nau et al., 2015).


Psychological Mechanisms


Brouwer and Carhart-Harris propose that the experiences induced by classic


psychedelics represent a pivotal mental state, characterized by enhanced cortical


plasticity, increased associative learning, and a greater capacity for the development of


major, enduring psychological change (Brouwer & Carhart-Harris, 2021). They


hypothesize that these states, mediated by 5HT2, receptor signaling, serve an adaptive


function, or allostatic recalibration, with the constellation of environmental and personal


contextual factors (such as set and setting) driving the direction of change (e.g., a path


towards symptom improvement or worsening). Carhart-Harris and Friston’s relaxed


beliefs under psychedelics (REBUS) model can also be considered within this


framework. The REBUS model posits that the psychedelic experience promotes the


relaxing or loosening of over-weighted priors (1.e., maladaptive habits or biases),


enabling significant change in beliefs to occur (Carhart-Harris & Friston, 2019).


Psychedelic experiences have been hypothesized to assist in disrupting patterns of rigid


thinking common to mood, anxiety, and other mental health conditions in this way.


The concepts described above have transdiagnostic therapeutic implications


applicable not only for mental health conditions but also in chronic pain. Given the


associations of catastrophizing, magnification, and other patterns of thinking with


32

[PAGE 044]

worsening of pain (Geisser et al., 1994), it is possible that psychedelics could benefit


individuals with chronic pain similarly. Two processes appeared to be linked with


experiences of symptom improvement in a qualitative study on self-medicating with


psychedelics for chronic pain (Bornemann et al., 2021). One of the processes was


described by the authors as positive reframing, in which individuals described changes in


their perspectives increasingly in directions towards acceptance, empowerment,


compassion, and hope, and away from depression and pain catastrophizing. Another


process, referred to as somatic presence, encompassed increased awareness of the mind-


body connection and physical presence, or embodiment. Individuals in the same study


often described concurrent engagement in additional practices such as movement or


breathwork during their psychedelic experience.


Several of the identified themes overlap substantially with components of


acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT). ACT is a type of psychotherapy that


employs mindfulness and acceptance strategies to foster psychological flexibility, which


represents the capacity to remain in contact with the present, regardless of distressing


thoughts, emotions, and sensations, and to engage in choices aligned with one’s values.


ACT has been shown to improve quality of life and functional impact of FM in several


clinical trials (Galvez-Sanchez et al., 2021). Psychological flexibility has also been


suggested to mediate psychedelics’ effects on mood and anxiety in some studies (Agin-


Liebes et al., 2022; Davis et al., 2020). It is possible that the use of psychedelics may


contribute to altered perspectives on pain and other related outcomes, such as depression


symptoms, in concert with (or potentially instead of) any partial or direct analgesic


effects. Increases in factors such as pain acceptance or present-moment awareness


33

[PAGE 045]

(mindfulness), and reductions in experiential avoidance, for example, could potentially


mediate longer-term improvements in functioning, quality of life, and well-being.


Study Overview


Few studies have examined retrospective reports of past use of psychedelics


including psilocybin in relation to chronic pain and FM. More research is needed to


determine if psychedelics help FM specifically, and whether psilocybin in particular


benefits FM. The nature of psilocybin effects on FM pain are also unknown (e.g.,


whether effects are acute or durable, direction of effects, related factors, etc.). To help


address these gaps, and to inform future clinical trials, a questionnaire was distributed


online among individuals with FM and past use of psychedelics. The purpose of this


study was to assess characteristics of past psychedelic use among individuals with FM,


and to explore reported effects on pain. No hypotheses were planned given the


exploratory, descriptive nature of this study. The research questions of interest included


the following:


1. How, and with what intentions and expectations, have individuals with FM used


classic psychedelics?


2. Have individuals with FM experienced changes in pain in relation to classic


psychedelics, and if so, which substance(s)?


3. How do individuals with FM describe the impact of classic psychedelic use on pain?


(e.g., strength, direction, duration of change)


34

[PAGE 046]

4. How do individuals with FM describe the impact of classic psychedelic use on other


symptoms of FM?


5. What factors are associated with any positive or negative impacts of classic


psychedelics on pain in FM?


35

[PAGE 047]

METHODS


Design and Ethical Approval


An exploratory, descriptive approach was employed involving the administration


of an online survey. The survey was intended for individuals who have used classic


psychedelics and who have FM. Nonprobability sampling was used. The survey included


both close-ended and open-ended questions to provide sources of both quantitative and


qualitative data. The study was approved by the University of Alabama at Birmingham


(UAB) Institutional Review Board (IRB-300009401, see Appendix A).


Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria


To be eligible for the study, individuals had to be able to access the survey online,


be at least 18 years of age, have a history of chronic pain, and have used a classic


psychedelic substance at least once in their lifetime. They were required to view an


information page about the study and voluntarily consent to participate. Individuals were


excluded from participating if they did not consent to the study, were under age 18,


denied a history of chronic pain, or denied past psychedelic use.


Recruitment


Participants were recruited using a combination of email distributions and social


media posts from September of 2022 through May of 2023. A brief description of the


study and survey link were posted on the UAB Neuroinflammation, Pain, and Fatigue


36

[PAGE 048]

Lab Twitter and Facebook accounts, shared with relevant Facebook groups, and posted


on multiple Reddit threads related to fibromyalgia and/or psychedelics. Individuals who


had previously expressed interest in chronic pain and fatigue studies at the UAB


Neuroinflammation, Pain, and Fatigue Lab were notified of the study opportunity via an


email that included the study link. Information about the study was also distributed to


colleagues and several fibromyalgia advocacy organizations to share on their respective


social media pages, if desired. A gift card raffle incentive was added to the protocol


following IRB approval of this change in December 2022, with the goal of increasing


interest in the study. The study information page was updated to include information


about this incentive.


Procedures


The survey was created and hosted on Qualtrics (Provo, UT), a secure platform


for conducting survey research online. Responses were collected anonymously. The


“Prevent Multiple Submissions” setting in Qualtrics was used to decrease the chance that


individuals would take the survey more than once. All data collected was stored on


secure computers located in Dr. Jarred Younger’s research office space at UAB.


Upon clicking the survey link, individuals interested in the study were presented


with a study information page. This page described the general purpose of the study and


types of questions included, the estimated length of time required to complete the study,


the data that would be collected, how it would be stored, and contact information for the


principal investigator. Participants were informed that the length of time estimated to


complete the survey was 30 minutes on average. At the bottom of this page, individuals


37

[PAGE 049]

interested in participating were asked to select whether they consented to the study or not.


If they selected, “I consent, begin study”, they were directed to the next survey page. The


survey remained open throughout the data collection period and was accessed via an


anonymous link. To preserve anonymity for participants, no IP addresses or other


identifying information were collected, and no contact with the researchers was required


to complete the survey.


When they reached the end of the survey, participants were asked whether they


wished to enter a random drawing for a $50 online gift card. If they responded “Yes”,


they were asked to click on a link which directed them to a separate Qualtrics form to


enter their name and email address. No names or email addresses were collected or stored


with the survey responses. Following the data collection period, names were randomly


drawn and a total of 17 electronic Amazon gift cards were distributed via email.


Questionnaire Development


The survey was developed by multiple research staff by drawing from literature


review and review of publicly available surveys related to past use of psychedelics.


Quantitative items included multiple choice and yes/no questions, checklist items, and


numerical pain rating scales (e.g., current and retrospective 0-10 pain severity ratings).


Qualitative data was drawn from full text, open-ended questions (e.g., “please describe


how your pain changed in relation to the psychedelic experience”). Questions were


developed to minimize task difficulty and only questions relevant to the research


questions of interest were included. Conditional and branching logic were utilized for


items that may or may not have applied to all participants, and a limited number of long


38

[PAGE 050]

lists and rating scales were used to minimize increased risk for response order bias. The


survey in full is attached in Appendix B.


Additional Survey Details


Survey items were presented to all participants in the same order (they were not


randomized or alternated between participants). The final survey contained a total of 90


questions over 40 pages (screens), with an average of two to three questions displayed


per screen. Certain questions were conditionally displayed depending on other item


responses. For example, individuals who reported never having experienced any change


in pain related to the use of a psychedelic were not asked to respond to items 4.10


through 4.49 since they were not applicable. For most questions, participants were


required to select a response in order to progress to the following page. Most items


included a non-response option of “Prefer not to answer” and/or a “Don’t know” option.


Participants were able to use a Back button throughout the survey if they needed to


review/change previous answers. Incomplete survey responses were recorded


automatically after one week.


To aid in spam and fraud detection, the following embedded Qualtrics survey


settings were enabled: Prevent multiple submissions, bot detection/reCAPTCHA, security


scan monitor, and RelevantID. Survey responses were regularly checked by the author for


possible spam throughout the data collection period.


39

[PAGE 051]

Information Collected


FM status and symptom severity: Participants were assessed for the presence of


current FM symptoms and severity using the 2016 revisions to the ACR 2011 self-


report criteria (Wolfe et al., 2016) embedded within the survey. The WPI (range 0-19)


and SSS score (range: 0-12) were summed to form a FM severity scale score (0-31) for


each participant, with higher scores reflecting increased symptom severity. An


individual met self-report criteria for current FM if the following were met: WPI > 7


and SSS > 5 OR WPI 4-6 and SSS score > 9; generalized pain (presence of pain in at


least 4 of 5 regions, not including jaw, chest, and abdominal pain), and the presence of


symptoms for at least 3 months.


Clinical FM diagnosis: Individuals were asked if they have ever been diagnosed by a


medical provider with FM and if so, the year of diagnosis.


Other medical conditions: Participants were asked to list any current pain conditions or


other medical conditions, including mental health conditions.


Demographic information: Demographic items were collected, including age in years,


sex assigned at birth, gender identity, racial identity, Hispanic ethnicity status, highest


education completed, current occupational status, most recent/current occupation,


relationship status, country of residence, and state of residence (if in US).


Medication and substance use: Participants were asked to list any current medications,


including over-the-counter medications and supplements. Participants were also asked


about use of the following substances: alcohol, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, bath


salts, CBD or cannabidiol products, cannabis/marijuana, cocaine, heroin, ketamine,


40

[PAGE 052]

kratom, MDMA, methamphetamine, opioids, stimulants, synthetic marijuana, and


nicotine/tobacco use.


Current pain intensity and interference: The PEG (Krebs et al., 2009), a shortened


version of the Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) (Cleeland & Ryan, 1994), was used to assess


current pain intensity and interference. The PEG items ask for 0-10 ratings over the


past week of average pain intensity, average pain interference with enjoyment of life,


and average pain interference with general activity. The scores were then averaged to


obtain an overall PEG score ranging from 0-10.


Type and frequency of use of classic psychedelics: Participants were asked whether


they had used any classic psychedelic in the past, including psilocybin, psilocybin


mushrooms, LSD, DMT, 5-MeO-DMT, mescaline, and ayahuasca. Participants who


answered “yes” to that question were asked to indicate frequency of use for each of the


classic psychedelics listed from the following options: “never”, “once”, 2-5 times”, “6-


10 times”, “11-20 times”, “21-50 times”, “51-100 times”, “101-300 times”, or “more


than 300 times”. Participants also had the option to write in other substance names and


indicate relative frequency of use.


Characteristics of experiences with classic psychedelics: Participants were asked to


describe any relevant psychedelic experience(s) with an open-ended question.


Participants were also asked about the setting of the experience (e.g., location, number


of people they were with at the time, their familiarity with others around them, etc.).


Change in pain related to use of classic psychedelics: Change in pain related to use of


classic psychedelics was assessed using the following yes/no question: “Have you ever


experienced a change in your pain that was related to the use of a psychedelic


41

[PAGE 053]

substance?” If participants respond with “yes”, they were presented with a series of


additional items inquiring about the type of change, the psychedelic substance(s)


involved, and the duration of change. Retrospective pain ratings using 0 (“no pain”) to


10 (“pain as bad as you can imagine”) numerical rating scales (NRS) were collected to


further explore participants” perceived changes in pain in relation to a past psychedelic


experience.


10. Change in other FM-related symptoms: Participants were asked broadly using an


open-ended question whether any other symptoms besides pain had changed in


relation to their psychedelic use.


11. Negative effects: Participants were asked whether they experienced any negative


effects from their psychedelic use and, if so, to provide additional details using free-


text. Participants’ responses to other open-ended items were also examined for reports


of negative effects. Any increases in pain reported were considered negative effects.


12. Reasons for use: Participants were asked about their reasons for using psychedelics


with two items. One was a “select all that apply” item, including a list of common


reasons drawn from the literature. The second item prompted participants to describe


using free text their strongest reasons for psychedelic use.


13. Expectations: Participants who reported any pain changes related to psychedelic use


were asked to describe their expectations prior to that occasion of use.


Analyses


Simple descriptive statistics were calculated using Microsoft Excel and IBM


SPSS (Version 29), including means, standard deviations, and frequencies, to summarize


42

[PAGE 054]

all quantitative data. Retrospective pain ratings in relation to classic psychedelic use were


graphed for visual representation.


For qualitative data, a conventional content analysis approach was used (Hsieh &


Shannon, 2005). All text responses to open-ended survey questions regarding psychedelic


use, pain, and other symptoms were read multiple times and coded using NVivo (R1)


software. Codes were derived inductively from the data and were developed and revised


throughout data familiarization. Codes were then grouped into categories based on


relatedness. To aid in presentation of results, quotes were selected from among the survey


responses and labeled with a participant identification or ID number, in addition to the


substance used, if applicable. Quotes are presented in the results as they were originally


written within the survey responses, unless otherwise indicated. Survey items relevant for


addressing each research question (RQ) are indicated below.


1. How, and with what intentions and expectations, have individuals with FM used


classic psychedelics? This question was explored via items related to frequency and


type of classic psychedelic(s) used, as well as items assessing reasons for use (#4.7


and #4.28), and expectations (#4.29) related to past use of classic psychedelics.


2. Have individuals with FM experienced changes in pain in relation to classic


psychedelics, and if so, which substance(s)? This question was answered based on


analysis of responses to items #4.9 (“Have you ever experienced a change in your pain


that was related to the use of a psychedelic substance?”) and #4.12 (“What psychedelic


substance was associated with the change in your pain?”)


43

[PAGE 055]

3. How do individuals with FM describe the impact of classic psychedelic use on pain


(e.g., strength, direction, duration of change)? Analyses primarily focused on the free


text responses to items #4.17 (“How did your pain changed in relation to the


psychedelic experience”) and #4.18 (“How long did you experience the change(s) in


your pain?’’), in addition to reported retrospective pain ratings (#4.27). Responses to


item #4.32 were also examined, specifically whether a participant checked the box(s)


for “an increase in my pain”, “a decrease in my pain”, and/or “a change in my


perspective on pain” experienced “during” and/or “following” the psychedelic


experience(s).


4. How do individuals with FM describe the impact of classic psychedelic use on other


symptoms of FM? Survey item #4.20 was primarily used to explore this research


question. Item #4.20 was open-ended and asked, “Please describe if, and how, any of


your other symptoms changed in relation to the psychedelic experience. Please include


how long you noticed these changes, if any.” A portion of item #4.32 was also used,


specifically whether a participant checked the box for any changes in other FM


symptoms experienced “during” and/or “following” the psychedelic experience(s).


5. What factors are associated with any positive or negative impacts of classic


psychedelics on pain in FM? To answer this question, free text responses to item #4.19


were analyzed (“Why do you think there was a change in your pain?”). Other item


responses were also examined, including those assessing motivation for use (#4.28),


44

[PAGE 056]

expectations (#4.29), preparation (#4.34 and #4.35), type (#4.12) and dose (#4.21 and

#4.22) of psychedelic substance, setting characteristics (#4.24, #4.25, and #4.26),


negative effects (#4.31), changes in perspective on pain/other FM symptoms/mental

health/quality of life (44.27), use of pain treatments (#4.36 and #4.37), other areas of

life (such as social activity, physical activity, etc.) (#4.38 and #4.39), and degree of

personal meaningfulness, spiritual experience, psychological insight, and/or awe


related to the psychedelic experience (#4.40 through #4.47).


45

[PAGE 057]

RESULTS


Survey Responses


From September of 2022 through May of 2023, the survey received a total of 874


responses (Figure 1). Seventy-eight were identified by Qualtrics as spam and 236 were


flagged as likely bots and/or fraudulent. Increased amounts of spam and fraudulent


responses were observed during several periods in late 2022 and early 2023. In


consideration of suggestions for identifying fraud in anonymous web-based surveys


(Dewitt et al., 2018), all survey responses were manually inspected and flagged for


possible removal if they demonstrated very short completion times, inconsistent


responding, high levels of non-response, low differentiation across grid items, or


duplicated or gibberish responses to open-ended items. This process resulted in the


removal of an additional 185 responses (170 due to duplicated responding evident across


surveys, and 15 due to inconsistent responding).


Fifty-one individuals consented to the study but did not complete the screening


questions, and 65 responses were ineligible due to having previously taken the survey.


Two respondents were ineligible due to being under the age of eighteen, 23 individuals


were ineligible due to no history of chronic pain, and 67 were ineligible due to never


having used a classic psychedelic. Sixty-five individuals passed the screening items but


discontinued the survey prior to completing it; of those 65, eleven completed at least 50%


of the survey items and were included in the analyses. Ninety-one individuals completed


the survey in full. Thus, the analysis set included 102 survey responses in total.


46

[PAGE 058]

Total responses recorded
in Qualtrics (N=874)

Ineligible (n=219):


[Responses removed due to * Did not consent to study (n=11)
* Discontinued screening (n=51)
spam/fraud (n=499):
* Previously took survey (n=65)
—| + Age under 18 (n=2)
* Identified by Qualtrics as spam
* No history of chronic pain (n=23)
(n=78)
* No past use of classic psychedelic
» Met Qualtrics fraudulent criteria La (n=67)
(n=236)
* Contained duplicated and/or |

gibberish text in open response
fields (n=170)
Me patterns of inconsistent
responding (n=15)
| |
i

Remaining survey records
(n= 156)


[ Completed less than 50% of survey
~~ |(excluded from analysis) (n=54)


1

Included in analysis
(n=102)


* Completed survey (n=91)
* Incomplete, > or = 50%
(n=11)


Figure 1. Inclusion and exclusion of participants.


Participant Characteristics


Demographics


Demographic and pain-related characteristics are summa
rized in Table 1 and

Table 2. Because the demographic items were at the end
of the survey, this information

was not available for the 11 participants who discont
inued early (6 of the FM group and 5

of the non-FM group). For the 91 participants who comple
ted the survey, the average age

was 44.9 years (SD = 13.9, range = 19-82). More than
half the participants reported

identifying as women (n = 55, or 53.9%). Two participants
identified as Black or African


47

[PAGE 059]

American (2.0%), 72 participants (70.6%) identified as white, and 10 participants (9.8%)


identified as multiracial (Native American or Alaska Native and white ( = 4), Black or


African American and white (n = 1), Asian and white (n = 2), unspecified (n = 3)). Seven


respondents (6.9%) reported Latin, Mexican, or Hispanic ethnicity. Demographic


characteristics are shown in Tables 1 and 2 for the total sample and for the participants


with FM (n = 64).


More than half of all participants (n = 57 or 55.9%) had obtained at least a


bachelor’s degree or higher education. About half of the total sample (n = 53 or 52%)


reported current employment (including full-time, part-time, and self-employed status),


and about one quarter of the sample reported disability (n = 25 or 24.5%). More than two-


thirds of the participants lived in the United States (n = 71 or 69.6%), most commonly in


the Southern and Western regions.


48

[PAGE 060]

Table 1. Participant demographic characteristics.

Characteristic FM (n = 64) Total (V= 102)
n % n %
Gender
Woman 39 60.9 55 53.9
Man 7 10.9 22 21.6
Two-spirit 1 1.6 1 1.0
Genderfluid, nonbinary, or other gender identity 6 9.4 6 5.9
Prefer not to answer 5 7.8 7 6.9
Race
Black/African American 2 3.1 2 2.0
Multiracial 9 14.1 10 9.8
White 44 68.8 72 70.6
Prefer not to answer 1 1.6 1 1.0
Hispanic * 3 4.7 7 6.9
Relationship status
Single 15 23.4 24 23.5
Married or in committed relationship 38 59.3 59 57.8
Divorced or separated 4 6.3 7 6.9
Widowed 0 0.0 1 1.0
Prefer not to answer 1 1.6 1 1.0
Highest educational level
High school or GED 1 1.6 2 2.0
Some college 9 14.1 16 15.7
Trade/technical training or associate degree 14 21.9 17 16.7
Bachelor’s degree 18 28.1 32 31.4
Graduate degree 16 25.0 25 24.5
Occupational status
Unemployed 4 6.3 6 5.9
Student 4 6.3 7 6.9
Employed, part-time 11 17.2 16 15.7
Employed, full-time 15 23.4 31 30.4
Self-employed 2 3.1 6 5.9
Homemaker 6 9.4 6 5.9
Disabled 24 37.5 25 24.5
Retired 4 6.3 9 8.8
Location of residence
Europe 9 14.1 15 14.7
Canada 4 6.3 4 3.9
Central America 0 0.0 1 1.0
United States 45 70.3 71 69.6
Northeast 5 7.8 9 8.8
South 15 23.4 28 27.5
Midwest 8 12.5 10 9.8
West 17 26.6 24 23.5
* Reflects the number and percentage of participants answering “yes” to this question.


49

[PAGE 061]

FM Status


In this study, participants were considered part of the FM group (n = 64 or 62.7%)


if they responded “Yes” to ever receiving a clinical diagnosis of FM, or if they met self-


report criteria (Wolfe et al., 2016) based on the Widespread Pain Index, Symptom


Severity Scale, and duration of pain symptoms. Half (n = 55 or 53.9%) of the total


sample (N = 102) reported ever receiving a diagnosis of fibromyalgia by a medical


provider. Among these participants, year of FM diagnosis ranged from 1970 to 2022.


Nine additional participants met the self-report criteria but denied ever having received a


diagnosis from a provider. They were therefore considered part of the FM group for the


purposes of this study. No demographic information was available for six of the 64


participants with FM due to early discontinuation of the survey.


Pain-related characteristics are shown in Table 2. Among the participants with


FM, the mean number of pain areas endorsed using the Widespread Pain Index (range: 0-


19) was 10.9 (SD = 4.6), with the shoulder girdles and neck most reported. The mean FM


severity scale score (range 0-31, with higher scores reflecting greater severity) was 19.9


(SD = 6.0) among those with FM, and 16.3 (SD = 7.4) across all participants. The


average pain intensity and interference (PEG) score was 6.8 (SD = 1.9) in the FM group.


50

[PAGE 062]

Table 2. Age and pain characteristics.


Characteristic FM (n = 64) Total (N = 102)
M SD Range M SD Range
Age 45.0 12.6 22-72 44.9 13.9 19-82
Widespread Pain Index 10.9 4.6 0-19 8.2 5.3 0-19
Symptom Severity Scale 9.1 2.2 2-12 8.1 2.8 1-12
FM Severity Scale 19.9 6.0 4-3] 16.3 7.4 1-31
Pain Intensity 6.3 1.7 1-10 5.7 2.1 0-10
Pain Interference 7.1 2.4 0-10 6.3 2.9 0-10
(enjoyment)
Pain Interference (activity) 6.9 2.3 0-10 6.4 2.7 0-10
PEG Total 6.8 1.9 0.3-10.0 6.1 2.4 0.0-10.0


Note. Age was missing for 11 participants total (6 with FM and 5 without FM).


Other Conditions


Most participants (n = 79, or 77.5%) described the presence of musculoskeletal


pain, and a quarter of the sample (n = 21, or 20.6%) reported chronic headache or


orofacial pain. Other than fibromyalgia, the most frequently cited pain conditions


included arthritis, degenerative disc disease, and migraine. Across the sample, depression


and anxiety were the most common mental health diagnoses reported. Further


information on pain and mental health conditions is summarized in Tables 3 and 4.


51

[PAGE 063]

Table 3. Pain types.


Type/Condition FM (n = 64) Total (N = 102)
n % n %
Musculoskeletal 64 100.0 79 77.5
Arthritis 15 23.4 20 19.6
Degenerative disc disease 6 9.4 15 14.7
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 7 10.9 10 9.8
Visceral 11 17.2 14 13.7
Irritable bowel syndrome 7 10.9 7 6.9
Endometriosis 3 4.7 5 4.9
Neuropathic 9 14.1 21 20.6
Spinal cord injury 2 3.1 5 4.9
Small fiber neuropathy 3 4.7 3 2.9
Chronic headache or orofacial pain 17 26.6 21 20.6
Migraine 12 18.8 13 12.7
Occipital neuralgia 1 1.6 3 2.9
Trigeminal neuralgia 2 3.1 3 2.9
Cluster headache 0 0.0 1 1.0
New daily persistent headache 0 0.0 1 1.0
Post-surgical pain 3 4.7 6 5.9
Cancer pain 2 3.1 4 3.9
Complex regional pain syndrome 3 4.7 4 3.9
Lupus 3 4.7 3 2.9
Sjogren’s syndrome 3 4.7 3 2.9
ME/CFS 13 20.3 13 12.7


Table 4. Mental health conditions reported.


Condition FM (n = 64) Total (V= 102)
n % n %
Depression 25 39.1 36 35.3
Anxiety 20 31.3 26 25.5
Stressor/trauma-related disorder 14 21.9 18 17.6
ADD or ADHD 8 12.5 13 12.7


Medication and Substance Use


Most participants reported current use of one or more medications or supplements


(Table 5). Among those with FM, vitamins, minerals, and other supplements were most


frequently reported (56.3%), followed by antidepressants (45.3%), NSAIDs (25%),


52

[PAGE 064]

opioids (23.4%), cardiovascular medications (23.4%), gabapentinoids (21.9%), and low-


dose naltrexone (20.3%).


Table 5. Medication use.


Medication/supplement use FM (n= 64) Total (N = 102)
n % n %
Supplement use 36 56.3 48 47.1
Antidepressant 29 45.3 39 38.2
Cardiovascular medication 15 23.4 25 24.5
Opioid 15 23.4 24 23.5
Gabapentinoid 14 21.9 19 18.6
NSAID 16 25.0 19 18.6
Gastrointestinal medication 11 17.2 18 17.6
Anxiolytic/sedative/hypnotic 8 12.5 16 15.7
Muscle relaxant 11 17.2 16 15.7
Acetaminophen 10 15.6 13 12.7
Low-dose naltrexone 13 20.3 13 12.7
Thyroid hormone replacement 10 15.6 12 11.8
Antihistamine 9 14.1 10 9.8
Immunosuppressant medication 7 10.9 9 8.8
Migraine medication 3 4.7 5 4.9
None reported 3 4.7 16 15.7


Note. “Supplement use” reflects the use of one or more vitamins, minerals, or other
nutritional supplements.


Approximately one-fifth of participants with FM endorsed current nicotine or


tobacco use. Most participants (76.6%) reported consuming zero alcohol-containing


drinks per week on average. The most frequently used non-psychedelic substances were


cannabis and cannabidiol (CBD) products, used regularly (at least once a month) by


40.6% and 26.6% of respondents with FM, respectively. Additional details on non-


psychedelic substance use are shown in Table 6.


53

[PAGE 065]

Table 6. Non-psychedelic substance use.


Substance use FM (n = 64) Total (N = 102)
n % n %
Nicotine/tobacco 15 23.4 26 25.5
Cannabis/marijuana 26 40.6 54 52.9
CBD or cannabidiol products 17 26.6 33 32.4
Benzodiazepines, non-prescribed 1 1.6 5 4.9
Opioids, non-prescribed 3 4.7 7 6.9
Ketamine 4 6.3 5 4.9
MDMA - - l 1.0
Cocaine - - 2 2.0
Kratom 3 4.7 6 5.9
Heroin - - 2 2.0
None of the above 29 45.3 33 32.4


Note. Participants were asked about regular, current use of any of the substances above,
defined as at least once a month.


Knowledge about Classic Psychedelics


Among participants with FM (n = 64), most rated themselves as “moderately


knowledgeable” (n = 25 or 39.1%), “slightly knowledgeable” (n = 16 or 25.0%), or “very


knowledgeable” (n = 14 or 21.9%) about classic psychedelics (Table 7). Few participants


with FM identified as being either “not at all knowledgeable” (n = 4 or 6.3%) or


“extremely knowledgeable” (n = 5 or 7.8%) about psychedelics.


Among participants without FM (n = 38), about one third rated themselves as


“moderately knowledgeable” (n = 14 or 36.8%) about classic psychedelics and one


quarter as “slightly knowledgeable” (n = 10 or 26.3%). None of these participants rated


themselves as “not at all knowledgeable’, and a relatively greater portion described


themselves as “extremely knowledgeable” (n = 8 or 21.1%).


54

[PAGE 066]

Table 7. Knowledge about psychedelics.


Self-rating FM (n= 64) Non-FM (n = 38) Total (N = 102)
n (%) n (%) n (%)
Not at all knowledgeable 4 (6.3) 0 (0.0) 4 (3.9)
Slightly knowledgeable 16 (25.0) 10 (26.3) 26 (25.5)
Moderately knowledgeable 25 (39.1) 14 (36.8) 39 (38.2)
Very knowledgeable 14 (21.9) 6 (15.8) 20 (19.6)
Extremely knowledgeable S (7.8) 8 (21.1) 13 (12.7)


RQ 1: Classic Psychedelic Use Among Individuals with FM


Type and Frequency of Use


Among participants with FM (n = 64), the most frequently used classic


psychedelics were psilocybin mushrooms, used at least once by 54 respondents (84.4%),


and LSD, used at least once by 46 participants (71.9%). A quarter of the FM sample (16


participants) endorsed past use of mescaline. Less frequently, individuals with FM


reported past use of DMT (n = 9 or 14.1%), 5-MeO-DMT ( = 6 or 9.4%), and ayahuasca


(n = 6 or 9.4%). Additional types of psychedelic use reported included lysergic acid


amide or LSA (n = 2) and the psychedelic phenethylamines 2C-I, 2CB, and 25I-NBOMe


or 25-I (n = 1, respectively).


About half of participants with FM (n = 31 or 48.4%) endorsed use of both


microdoses and macrodoses. Fifteen participants (23.4%) had used macrodoses only, and


ten participants (15.6%) reported use of only microdoses. Eight participants (12.5%) were


unsure of the dosage type(s) they had used. The average age of first psychedelic use was


23.9 years (range = 12 - 70, SD = 12.0), and the first substance used was most often


either LSD (n = 30) or psilocybin mushrooms (n = 27). The average age of most recent


psychedelic use was 36.2 years (range = 15 - 70, SD = 13.6).


55

[PAGE 067]

Practical Motives


Responses from a combination of close-ended and open-ended items were utilized


to examine motives for past psychedelic use. Motives were grouped broadly into four


categories: (1) use of psychedelics to self-medicate, (2) use of psychedelics for fun and


recreation, (3) use for growth or exploration, and (4) other reasons (Table 8).


Table 8. Reasons for use among participants with FM.


Category Subcategory FM (n = 64)
n(%)
Practical Motives
Self-medicating General mental health/well-being 34 (53.1)
Trauma 23 (35.9)
Depression 12 (18.8)
Anxiety 10 (15.6)
Pain-related 22 (34.4)
To reduce use of medications 3 (4.7)


Fun/recreation Fun/recreation 36 (56.3)


Growth/exploration Personal growth/exploration 29 (45.3)
Broaden consciousness/perspective 31 (48.4)
Spiritual reasons 26 (40.6)


Other reasons Curiosity 32 (50.0)
Social reasons 18 (28.1)
As an escape 16 (25.0)
Feel euphoric or elated 21 (32.8)
To enhance an activity 14 (21.9)
To feel more connected to nature 25 (39.1)


Contributing factors
Support from providers 6 (9.4)
Heard about others’ experiences 9 (14.1)


Change in reasons over time 6 (9.4)


56

[PAGE 068]

Self-Medicating


Participants often reported using psychedelics to self-medicate, 1.e., to improve


one’s health or help deal with a certain problem. Self-medicating in general involves use


of a medication or substance typically in the absence of a prescription or doctor’s


recommendation. When asked about their strongest reasons for using psychedelics,


participants described wanting to better manage, heal, or cope with a problem,


particularly a mental health or pain-related issue. Participants also noted an interest in


using psychedelics to reduce their need for prescription medications.


To improve mental health. Thirty-four participants with FM (53.1%) reported


using psychedelics to help with their mental health. Managing trauma-related symptoms


(n = 23 or 35.9%), depression (n = 12 or 18.8%), and anxiety (n = 10 or 15.6%) were the


most frequently mentioned mental health concerns motivating psychedelic use. Four


participants (6.3%) discussed using specifically to help with hopelessness and suicidal


ideation. For instance, when asked about their motivation for use, one individual who


microdosed psilocybin described: “I was suffering from severe depression and I almost


committed suicide” (ID79). Others wrote about using psychedelics to support them in


processing emotions tied to relationship issues, helping manage premenstrual dysphoric


disorder, and managing OCD (n = 1, respectively).


Four participants discussed looking to psychedelics to help deal with the


psychological impacts of one or more chronic health conditions. For example, one


participant with FM described how she became interested in using psychedelics to cope


with the emotional toll of long COVID, writing:


57

[PAGE 069]

Since getting Covid-19 again a year ago I have been dealing with worsening


health issues, along with increased depression and anxiety from being unable to


work. I've been hearing multiple people using Psilocybin and reading multiple


articles discussing the benefits of it on mental health so I wanted to see if it would


help my mental health while I recover. I've since found it to be helpful with pain


which has prompted me to continue use. (ID70)


To help with pain. More than a third of participants with FM (n = 22 or 34.4%)


described a pain-related reason as one of their strongest motivations to use psychedelics.


Participants expressed interest in treating various types of pain, including pain they


attributed to fibromyalgia, ME/CFS, myofascial pain, long COVID, CRPS, migraine, and


other conditions. Many of the written responses were similar to that of participant ID82,


who simply stated, “I wanted to see if it would help my pain.” Some participants


described wanting to use psychedelics specifically during periods of increased pain, such


as participant ID68, who wrote regarding their psilocybin use, “My pain was off the


charts. I was maxed out on prescription meds for the day & needed relief without going


to the hospital.”


Two participants with FM and other health conditions described how their interest


in psychedelic use grew after exhausting the treatment options available to them, with


little relief for their pain and other symptoms. One such participant described, “I have


tried traditional medicine, alternative therapies, supplements etc without much success.


This was a last resort” (ID20).


58

[PAGE 070]

While most participants primarily sought relief from pain, some described an


interest in enhancing their ability to cope with or better understand their pain. For


example, one participant was motivated to use psilocybin for “exploration and


understanding/working with my pain symptoms” (ID 18). Similarly, another participant


had wanted to use psilocybin “to have a better understanding of my MECFS and


Fibromyalgia” (ID57).


To reduce use of medication. Three participants expressed motivation to use


psychedelics to reduce their use of prescribed medications. One participant shared about


their interest in growing psilocybin mushrooms for pain management, stating, “I am


interested in attempting microdosing in an effort to reduce my medication needs” (ID52).


Another participant described the use of a psychedelic to help with withdrawals from a


pain medication taper. For one individual, their interest in the use of mushrooms was


driven in part by a desire to reduce risk for chemical dependence from opioids:


As a person in recovery from alcohol misuse & already prescribed the strongest


pain medication on the market, I am very mindful of what I put in my body.


Mushrooms provide the same, if not better, pain relief as IV morphine without the


risk of chemical dependence ... I don’t want to keep stacking opiates on top of


opiates, even if they are prescribed. (ID68)


Recreation


More than half of participants with FM endorsed past use of psychedelics for fun


or recreation (n = 36 or 56.3%). When asked to describe their strongest reasons for


59

[PAGE 071]

psychedelic use, nearly a third of participants (n = 20 or 31.3%) shared recreational


motives, such as “thought it would be fun” (ID45). Several participants specified having


used psychedelics for recreation in a social context or when they were younger in age.


Growth/Exploration


When asked to consider general reasons for past psychedelic use from a list of


possible options, many participants endorsed past use for the purposes of broadening


consciousness or perspective (n = 31 or 48,4%), for personal growth or exploration (n =


29 or 45.3%) and for spiritual reasons (n = 26 or 40.6%). When asked about their


motivation for use, one such participant described, “to explore my consciousness, feel


more spiritually connected, and to improve my quality of life” (ID57).


Other Reasons


Other reasons endorsed included curiosity, social reasons, as an escape, and to


feel euphoric or elated. The use of psychedelics to enhance an activity, such as music, or


to feel more connected to nature was also reported.


Contributing Factors


In addition to practical motives, participants described additional factors that


contributed to their reasons for use. Participants were encouraged after receiving support


from providers and after hearing about others’ experiences with psychedelics.


60

[PAGE 072]

Received support/encouragement from providers. Receiving support from


doctors, therapists, or other providers was mentioned by some respondents (n = 6) as a


contributing factor to their strongest reasons for use. As one participant described,


sometimes support was found unexpectedly: “I decided to discuss it with my doctor and


was surprised at how supportive he was. He said he had others in his practice that are


microdosing with positive results” (ID20).


Heard about others’ positive experiences. When asked about their strongest


reasons for use, nine participants in the FM group (14.1%) mentioned having heard about


others’ positive experiences with psychedelic use. They wrote about having been inspired


by positive research findings or experiences shared on social media sites. Others


described having been motivated to try psychedelics after talking about them with a


friend or family member who themselves had experienced some form of benefit, as the


following participant explained, “I was first inspired by the research done at John’s [sic]


Hopkins University by Dr. Roland Griffiths, along with hearing from a close friend of


mine who said Psilocybin, along with meditation, probably saved his life” (ID57).


Change in Reasons for Psychedelic Use over Time


Some participants (n = 6) delineated a change in their reasons for psychedelic use


over time. They discussed having initially used psychedelics for one reason (often


recreationally or out of curiosity), then later having developed different motivations for


use, such as for mental health or pain. For example, one participant shared, “When I was


61

[PAGE 073]

younger it was a recreational thing. I read a lot about people having good results with


managing pain and past trauma with Psilocybin. It is the pain and past trauma” (ID41).


Expectations Related to Psychedelic Use


Participants who reported a change in pain following use of a psychedelic were


asked to indicate their expectations, if any, regarding their psychedelic use at that time.


Of the participants with FM who either responded to this question or who described their


expectations elsewhere in the survey (n = 38), most described having either little to no


expectations (n = 13), e.g., “none” (ID36) or “I wasn’t sure what to expect” (ID64), or


positive expectations (n = 13), such as “I only expected to have a fun night” (ID77).


Four individuals described pain-related expectations. Of these four, three


expected their pain to be helped in some way, whereas one participant expected increased


pain and other unpleasant feelings. Overall, relatively few participants reported having


had negative expectations (n = 3).


RQ 2 and RQ 3: Changes in Pain with Classic Psychedelic Use


Participants were asked with a close-ended item whether they had ever


experienced a change in pain with use of a psychedelic. In response to this question,


about half of the participants with FM (n = 36 or 56.3%) responded “Yes” (Table 9).


More than a quarter (n = 17 or 26.6%) had never experienced a change in pain with past


use, and 11 participants (17.2%) were unsure.


62

[PAGE 074]

Table 9. Any change in pain with past psychedelic use.


Have you ever experienced a change in your pain FM Non-FM Total
that was related to the use of a psychedelic (n = 64) (n = 38) (N = 102)
substance?
n (%) n (%) n (%)
Yes 36 (56.3) 19 (50) 55 (53.9)
No 17 (26.6) 14 (36.8) 31 (30.4)
Don’t know 11 (17.2) 5 (13.2) 16 (15.7)


Among the 36 participants who reported a change in pain, the type of substance


used was most often psilocybin mushrooms (n = 29 or 80.5%). A smaller number of


participants reported a change in pain with use of LSD (n = 6), mescaline (n = 2), and


DMT (n = 1). All participants reported oral ingestion. When asked to describe how often


they had experienced pain-related changes with psychedelic use, most participants


endorsed more than one occasion (once, n = 2; twice, n = 4; three to five times, n = 10;


six to ten times, n = 7; more than 10 times, n = 9; unsure of how many times, n = 4).


Of the 36 participants who reported pain changes, most (n = 32 or 88.9%)


described an acute reduction in pain lasting at least one hour during the period of drug


effects (Table 10). Three participants (8.3%) reported an acute worsening in pain, and


one participant reported no acute change. When asked about duration of pain changes,


many participants (n = 25 or 69.4%) noted lingering improvements in pain, lasting for


one to two days or longer. Retrospective pain ratings were provided from 33 of the 36


participants and are presented in Figures 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7 by corresponding


substance/dosage type. Means from the retrospective pain ratings are also shown in Table


11.


63

[PAGE 075]

Table 10. Direction of pain changes by psychedelic substance.

Any* LSD Psilocybin Psilocybin Mescaline DMT
(micro) (full)
n = 36 n=6 n=9 n= 20 n=2 n=1
Increased Pain 4 2 1 1 0 0
During 3 2 0 1 0 0
Following l 0 1 0 0 0
Decreased Pain 35 5 9 19 2 1
During 32 3 9 18 2 1
Following 25 S 4 14 2 1


Note. “During” refers to acute changes in pain during the active period of psychedelic
drug effects. “Following” refers to changes present after that period, of any duration. Five
participants reported experiencing both increases and decreases in pain either during or
after the acute effects of the drug.


Table 11. Means of retrospective pain ratings by psychedelic substance.

Average Pain Rating (0-10)
Prior to use During Immediately Short-term Longer-term
After

Substance M(SD) M(SD) M(SD) M(SD) M(SD)
LSD 6.2(2.3) 4.5(3.8) 2.0(1.4) 3.0(2.4) 4.2(2.6)
Mescaline 7.0(4.2) 3.5(5.0) 3.0.8) 2.0(1.4) 4.0(1.4)
Psilocybin (micro) 7.3(2.1) 3.3(2.3) 5.0(2.8) 5.4(1.8) 5.9(2.3)
Psilocybin (full) 7.2(1.6) 1.6(2.1) 1.9(2.3) 2.7(2.6) 4.7(2.7)

Note. Total N for retrospective pain ratings = 33 (LSD, n = 6; mescaline, n = 2;
psilocybin, microdose, n = 8; psilocybin, full or macrodoses, n = 17). “Immediately after”
was specified in the survey as in the 1-2 days following use, “short-term” as within 1
week following use, and “longer-term” as over the next month or longer. Pain ratings
were not provided from the 1 participant who described a change in pain with the use of
DMT.


Pain Changes with Use of Psilocybin Mushrooms

Twenty-nine FM participants reported pain changes with use of psilocybin (nine

using microdoses, and 20 using full or macrodoses [low dose, n = 2; moderate/medium

dose, n = 8; high dose, n = 6; very high dose, n = 1; don’t know or unspecified, n = 3]).


64

[PAGE 076]

Of these 29 participants, 27 (93.1%) described reductions in pain, while two (6.9%)


described pain amplifications.


Among the nine FM participants who described pain changes with microdosing,


four reported regular use for pain relief. Dosage schedules varied from one to five days a


week. All nine participants reported acute reductions in pain intensity, lasting up to four


to six hours (Figure 2). One of the nine reported experiencing worse pain on the day


following use.


Retrospective Pain Ratings
Psilocybin Mushroom Use (Microdoses) el 9
10 a»
[|] )2 ()
eID?|
9 ——=1D7
8 a» ]])79
a |[)8()
S 7 SS — ——1D92
= 6 N m Vean
LS 4
& 5


3\
a 3 WN
N
2

1

0
Prior to use During Immediately Short-term Longer-term
after


Figure 2. Retrospective pain ratings — Psilocybin microdoses.


Note. Ratings were provided by 8 individuals who reported use of microdoses. The mean
ratings for these 8 individuals are displayed by the thicker black line. “Immediately after”
was specified in the survey as in the 1-2 days following use, “short-term” as within 1
week following use, and “longer-term” as over the next month or longer.


65

[PAGE 077]

Of the 20 FM participants who endorsed pain changes with use of psilocybin


macrodoses (Figures 3 and 4), 18 reported acute pain reduction and one reported pain


amplification. One participant reported no acute pain change with use, but a subsequent


reduction in pain below their baseline level for up to one week. Thirteen of the 20


participants described enduring periods of pain reduction ranging from one or more days


to months after use. Six individuals with FM reported regular use of psilocybin


macrodoses (weekly or biweekly) to alleviate pain. Durations of pain reduction and


associated psilocybin dosage types are depicted in Figure 5.


Retrospective Pain Ratings ID4
Psilocybin Mushroom Use (Low/Medium Doses) ——1D7
—— ID44
jun oO e ID50
e 1D62
NO > 1D64
———ID68
oo
=——ID78
SI ——
11) 82
e| [9]
(0-10) om co Vean

Nn

Rating BK


Pain Oo


N


Prior to use During Immediately Short-term Longer-term
after


Figure 3. Retrospective pain ratings — Psilocybin low/medium doses.


Note. Ratings were provided by 10 individuals who reported use of low or medium doses.
The mean ratings for these 10 individuals are displayed by the thicker black line.
“Immediately after” was specified in the survey as in the 1-2 days following use, “shortterm” as within 1 week following use, and “longer-term” as over the next month or
longer.


66

[PAGE 078]

Retrospective Pain Ratings
Psilocybin Mushroom Use (High Doses)
-—ID18
== ID30
10
e [D4]
9 e|) 52
e=ID77
8 == ID93
27 ——1D96

= mo Vean
S 6 Ñ
On
& 5
S
m 4
E
a 3 Aa
2

1

0
UE
Prior to use During Immediately Short-term Longer-term
after


Figure 4. Retrospective pain ratings — Psilocybin high doses.


Note. Ratings were provided by 7 individuals who reported use of high or very high
doses. The mean ratings for these 7 individuals are displayed by the thicker black line.
“Immediately after” was specified in the survey as in the 1-2 days following use, “shortterm” as within 1 week following use, and “longer-term” as over the next month or
longer.


67

[PAGE 079]

— SO


NN


WB


WBN


of Participants
un


Eh


GU

Number
DN.


re


O


Acute drug 1-2 days 3-6 days 1-2 weeks >2 - 4 weeks >] month
period only
Duration of Pain Reduction Reported


m Microdose Low dose Medium dose &High/Very High dose


Figure 5. Duration of pain reduction by psilocybin dosage type.


Note. The two individuals who microdosed and reported reductions in pain lasting greater
than 1 month did not report dosing schedules.


Pain Changes with Use of LSD


All individuals who endorsed pain change(s) with use of LSD described having


taken a medium or moderate dose (n = 6) (Figure 6). Two of the 6 participants reported

acute increases in pain. One of the two with pain increases experienced a return to their

baseline pain level following the period of acute drug effects. The other participant


reported a subsequent reduction (below their baseline pain level) for several weeks. Of

the remaining four participants, one reported no acute pain change, and three experienced


acute pain reductions. All four described reductions in pain following LSD use, lasting

several days, up to a month or longer.


68

[PAGE 080]

Retrospective Pain Ratings
LSD Use


10
ee [D27

9 w= ID29

8 ——=1D36

S 7 e==ID65

S 6 ——ID83
3 5
On


lax}
DNA ——1D87
= 4 ee Vean


© 3
2

1

0
Prior to use During Immediately Short-term Longer-term
after


Figure 6. Retrospective pain ratings — LSD.


Note. Ratings were provided by 6 individuals who reported use of LSD. The mean ratings
for these 6 individuals are displayed by the thicker black line. “Immediately after” was
specified in the survey as in the 1-2 days following use, “short-term” as within 1 week
following use, and “longer-term” as over the next month or longer.


Pain Changes with Use of Other Classic Psychedelics


One participant reported regular use of DMT for pain, and two participants


reported mescaline-related pain changes (Figure 7). For mescaline use, both participants


described reductions in pain during the period of acute drug effects and immediately


afterwards (ranging from 24 to 36 hours). DMT use was described as helpful for pain by


a participant who also reported benefit from psilocybin for pain. DMT dosage


information was not provided.


69

[PAGE 081]

Retrospective Pain Ratings
Mescaline Use 1Ds4

jun oO
w= ID55

\o


oo


SI


(0-10) om


Nn

Rating


Pain w


N


Prior to use During Immediately Short-term Longer-term
after


Figure 7. Retrospective pain ratings — Mescaline.


Note. Ratings were provided by 2 individuals who reported use of mescaline.
“Immediately after” was specified in the survey as in the 1-2 days following use, “shortterm” as within 1 week following use, and “longer-term” as over the next month or
longer.


70

[PAGE 082]

Impact of Psychedelic Use on Pain


Thirty-six participants in the FM group provided written responses regarding the


impact of psychedelic use on their pain. Impacts on pain were grouped into two major


categories: (1) changes in pain and physical sensations; and (2) changes in an individual’s


relationship with pain (Table 12).


Table 12. Impact of classic psychedelic use on pain.


Category Subcategory Frequency of cases
n (% of 36)
PAIN AND PHYSICAL
SENSATIONS
During use Pain reduced 32 (88.9%)
Pain increased 3 (8.3%)
Body relaxation 6 (16.7%)
Feeling of lightness 4 (11.1%)
Feeling connected to body 2 (5.6%)
Moving without pain 3 (8.3%)
Following use Pain reduced 25 (69.4%)
Pain increased 1 (2.8%)
RELATIONSHIP WITH PAIN
Change in pain-related distress Improved coping with pain 5 (13.9%)
Provided distraction from pain 2 (5.6%)
Changed perspective on pain 3 (8.3%)
Control over pain 2 (5.6%)
Pain as separate from self 1 (2.8%)


Functional improvement 6 (16.7%)
Reduced use of pain medication 11 (30.6%)


Changes in Pain and Physical Sensations


Reduced pain. Thirty-two participants described acute reductions in their pain, or


periods of complete pain relief, during psychedelic use. For most of them (n = 23), pain


intensity decreased or was dulled. For nine participants, pain went away completely for a


71

[PAGE 083]

brief period, as one described, “During the experience I didn’t feel pain”


(ID7/psilocybin). Another individual wrote that their “pain disappeared from all areas as


if it didn’t exist nor ever had for 4 hours” (ID21/psilocybin). Among those whose pain


reduced, several (n = 3) likened the effect to decreasing the volume on a dial: “It was like


the volume knob was turned down significantly” (ID97/psilocybin).


Twenty-five participants described reductions in their pain that extended past the


period of acute drug effects. Over half of this subset of participants (n = 14) reported pain


relief enduring from one to five days after psychedelic use. Other periods of pain relief


ranged from one to four weeks (n = 6), and up to a month or longer (n = 5). The


following participant shared about the change they experienced for several weeks after an


experience with psilocybin, “The constant aching/throbbing pain I feel throughout my


body subsided to a minimal or nonexistent level following the experience for about 2


weeks. I went from crying in pain every day to almost feeling normal again” (1D77).


Some participants described regular, ongoing use of psychedelics for pain relief


(psilocybin microdoses [n = 4], psilocybin macrodoses [n = 6], mescaline [n = 1], and


DMT [n = 1]). After years of struggling with FM in addition to functional neurological


disorder, regular use of psilocybin macrodoses had helped one person get rid of their pain


completely, as they described:


For a decade my fibromyalgia never let up. Then whenI started taking psilocybin


it went away 80% of the time after a few weeks. Then after a couple months of


weekly psilocybin therapy (3-5 grams) my pain has stopped completely. (ID96)


72

[PAGE 084]

Increased pain. Three participants described acute increases in pain intensity (two


with use of LSD, and one with use of psilocybin). One of these participants shared about


a particularly uncomfortable experience, despite having had positive experiences with

LSD previously:


I have used psilocybin and lsd many times in the past and had wonderful


experiences and very significant spiritual experiences but this was the first time I

used LSD since I developed fibromyalgia and it caused the most intense pain flare


up imaginable. It felt like I was being burned alive on my back and neck and the


back of my head at the base of my head. I would have given anything for it to


stop. (1D27)


This individual considered presenting to the emergency room due to the intensity of their


pain. Another participant described tense body aches with acute use of LSD, followed by


a pain reduction (below their baseline pain level) for several weeks. In addition to

increases in pain reported with use of LSD, one participant reported worsened pain the


day after microdosing psilocybin.


Body relaxation. Six participants described feeling physical relaxation and release


from tension. For one, a sense of relaxation precipitated the acute disappearance of their

pain. They wrote, “As soon as the effects begin and the whole body relaxation starts, my


pain immediately vanishes and I overall feel lighter.” (ID50/psilocybin)


Feelings of lightness. Pain reduction was accompanied by a sense of lightness for


four participants (including the one quoted immediately above). Another participant


73

[PAGE 085]

described this acutely as a “feeling of weightlessness - as if you're in a pool”


(ID70/psilocybin). A different participant shared how “the heaviness of pain had


retreated” (1D7) over several days following psilocybin use.


Feeling connected to body. Two participants wrote about feeling more connected


to their bodies with psychedelic use. For one, this connection also involved a greater


sense of acceptance: “I felt very connected to my body, instead of aware and resistant to


its experience” (ID57/psilocybin).


Moving without pain. Three participants described how much they enjoyed


getting up to walk or stretch without their usual sensations of pain during the acute


period:


I remember reaching this point where it felt like I could stretch out every muscle


in my body, and it felt insanely good that I could move and not wince in pain ...


Pd been having trouble doing basic things like getting up. When that point came


that the pain went away, I remember stretching out my back as much as I could


because I actually could do it. It was such a relief to not have that pain that had


been gnawing at me for weeks. (ID64/psilocybin)


Changes in Relationship with Pain


In addition to changes in pain itself and other physical sensations, participants


described how psychedelics had influenced their relationship with pain. These changes


involved coping, distraction, perspective, functional improvement, and use of pain


74

[PAGE 086]

treatments. Other interesting reports included descriptions related to control over pain and

viewing pain as separate from oneself.


Coping with pain. Better pain coping, or management, was described by five

participants. One participant described how they experienced benefits in coping for


longer than they noticed actual pain reduction. They shared:


I experience total lack of pain during the trip and up to a day after. For the next 3


to 5 days I experience greatly reduced pain and for the next 2 weeks I experience


pain closer to my average but I am able to cope far better than without having


taken mushrooms. (ID50)


Psychedelics were helpful for another participant in coping with the despair and isolation


their chronic pain had caused:


I struggle with despair; I used to be very fit and healthy and nowI can injure


myself so easily I can barely keep up with basic activities of daily living... There's


so much that I loved to do...that's just beyond me now. I feel that psychedelics do


a great job of helping me manage that despair, and cope with the


aloneness/isolation that chronic pain can cause. (ID30)


Perspective on pain. Three participants wrote about changes in their perspective


on pain. When discussing an experience with psilocybin, one participant shared, “It


helped me get a better perspective on how pain was interacting with my life, as well as


when my mental state was amplifying pain from a sensation into a cause of suffering”

(ID18). Also, in results from a close-ended question in the survey, more than half of the


75

[PAGE 087]

36 participants endorsed having experienced changes in their perspective on pain, during


(n = 19 or 52.8%) and/or following (n = 21 or 58.3%) psychedelic use.


Distraction from pain. Two participants described the effect of psychedelic use on

their pain as an acute distraction. One of these participants shared that they had been


hoping for more of a lasting perspective change (which they did not experience), but that

psilocybin “did offer a distracting experience that was pleasant for someone whose life in


bed was like groundhog's day everyday” (ID8).


Control over pain. Two participants described an enhanced sense of control over


pain. For one, this sense occurred following an emotional interaction with a vision of


their younger self and a feeling of release:


I looked down at my younger self, locked eyes, and told him everything was ok.


In that moment I felt love and as if I released something. I then came back to my


present and felt as though all of my ability to feel was being shut down limb by


limb until I was numb. I felt as though this meant I could control pain.


(ID41/psilocybin)


Pain as separate from self. For another participant, in addition to a sense of


control, their experience with LSD involved imagery in which pain was depicted as


malleable figures, separate from oneself: “Pain spasms were entities that appeared like

cartoon figures I could crush like paper and throw it away. I was able to stop them at their

entrance and the pain was gone for a day” (ID36).


76

[PAGE 088]

Functional improvement and mobility. Six participants shared about


improvements in physical functioning and mobility. Despite their pain remaining at the


same level, one participant noticed increased activity while microdosing psilocybin:


I have noticed that sometimes I might be in the same amount of pain that I have


been in without the psilocybin, but I have also increased what I do during the


week. I used to be bed ridden and not be able to wash my hair, but now I can


maybe wash my hair once every other week and I am doing daily yoga, where I


used to do none. (ID19)


Use ofpain treatments. Thirteen participants reported changes in their use of pain


treatments following psychedelic use. Eleven of the thirteen reduced their use of


analgesic medications, including opioids, gabapentin, muscle relaxants, and others. One


participant described not needing as much pain medication as previously following a


period of microdosing: “I cut my pain meds completely while using, since I have been


unable to locate a reliable source of psilocybin I have started taking pain meds but half as


much as before” (ID72). Another participant with a history of long-term opioid analgesic


use reported, in relation to microdosing psilocybin, “My pain decreased and allowed me


to completely taper off tramadol. I had been on opiates over 10 years and it finally helped


me get off of them” (ID19). A couple participants also reported seeking out new pain


treatment or management methods following psychedelic use, such as working with a


pain psychologist.


77

[PAGE 089]

Beliefs about Why Pain Changed


When asked why they thought they had experienced a change in their pain,


participants suggested possible physiological effects, positive emotional changes,


relaxation, and improved coping. Nearly all the responses provided to this question were


from individuals who reported positive impacts of psychedelic use on their pain.


Eleven participants said they were unsure why their pain had changed, most of


whom went on to contemplate possible reasons. For others, understanding why their pain


had changed was not important, as one participant shared, “I have no idea and frankly, I


don't care. I just know that I took mushrooms and a little while later, I could live life for a


while without pain” (ID76).


Physiological Changes


Twenty-two participants hypothesized about potential physiological effects


leading to changes in pain, particularly via the brain or nervous system. Neural rewiring


and/or neuroplasticity was mentioned by five individuals, and three participants


wondered whether changes in specific neurotransmitters (dopamine or serotonin) could


have played a role. One participant pondered whether psychedelics had helped reduce


inflammation. The following participant likened the change they imagined within their


brain to freeing up space on a computer:


I figure that my brain learned to send improper signals that there was something


wrong with my central nervous system. Which there was nothing wrong in the 8


mri’s that ve had of my CNS. I think of psilocybin as clearing the cache on your


brain like you would your computer so that it unlearns unhealthy habits that don’t


78

[PAGE 090]

serve you properly. Now I’m creating new habits that are healthier and helpful.


Some thing [sic] that western medicine could not do for me. (ID96)


Reduced Psychological Pain


Three participants discussed their improvements in physical pain as being driven


at least in part by reductions in their psychological or emotional pain with use of


psychedelics. One participant had described confronting loneliness and trauma during


their experience with psilocybin, eventually reaching their inner self and feeling love and


joy. When asked why they believed their pain had changed, they wrote, “The


psychological pain that affected my nervous system had been relieved” (ID7). Another


participant described having “let go” of issues contributing to their pain: “I feel like


shrooms allow me to “let go” way more than I’d be able to without them. By that I mean


let go of whatever I’m carrying around that’s causing physical or emotional pain” (ID64).


Relaxation and Mind-Body Connection


Four participants suggested that psychedelics had helped their pain by promoting


relaxation. In the following excerpt, a participant described the changes they noticed with


use of psilocybin. In addition to changes in physical and mental relaxation, they note


shifts in their perception of pain and the amount of attention directed towards it,


comparing the experience to biofeedback:


I believe that it alters how I perceive pain and makes it less of a priority and less


startling to me, therefore lessening my body's reaction over all. It also forces full


body relaxation as well as mental relaxation both of which no doubt contribute to


79

[PAGE 091]

the dampening effect. It reminds me of the bio-feedback therapy I had been given


when I was 17 wherein they had me relax my body fully, make myself completely


aware of the pain and then dismiss it as a way of coping. A method that I had


found to be very effective. (ID50)


Acceptance


Two participants suggested acceptance of pain as a potential mechanism of


change. For one participant, pain did not completely go away but they noticed being


better able to cope with it. When asked why their pain had changed, they responded,


“Maybe because it's mentally easier to accept my pain? It doesn't make it go away


entirely, it just makes it easier to cope with, perhaps?” (1D30)


Awe


One participant connected their experience of surrender and awe with use of


mescaline to their reduction in pain, writing, “there’s a surrender that happens, a


surrender to oneness and I think the mind is so in awe with that it takes away from the


physical pain” (ID55/mescaline).


RQ 4: Impact of Psychedelic Use on Other Symptoms


In addition to pain-related changes, 31 participants endorsed changes in their


mental health with psychedelic use, and 25 participants reported changes in other FM


symptoms, including brain fog, fatigue/energy, and gastrointestinal issues (Table 13).


80

[PAGE 092]

Table 13. Other changes reported with psychedelic use.


Frequency of cases
n (% of 36)
Improved mental health/well-being 31 (86.1)
Relieved depression 13 (36.1)
Lowered anxiety 10 (27.8)
Helped with processing trauma 6 (16.7)
Improved other symptoms of FM 25 (69.4)
Reduced fatigue/energy 6 (16.7)
Reduced brain fog 7 (19.4)
Reduced GI issues 4 (11.1)
Reduced light and/or noise sensitivity 2 (5.6)


Note. Only participants who answered “yes” or “don’t know” to whether they
experienced a change in pain with use of a psychedelic were presented with questions
related to changes in mental health, quality of life, and other symptoms of FM.


Mental Health Symptoms


Depression and Anxiety


Among participants with FM, psychedelic use was associated with reported


improvements in depression (n = 13) and anxiety (n = 10). One participant wrote, “In


addition to physical pain relief, I experienced a reduction in anxiety and depressive


feelings. These effects lasted as long as for [sic] the physical pain and helped me manage


stress for up to a few days after usage” (ID97/psilocybin). Another participant described


effects on anxiety lingering for up to a month:


Using psychedelics always eases my anxiety disorder and helps me realize that I


should only worry about the things that I can control. It sort of resets my brain in


a way that allows me to live with minimal to no anxiety for up to a month after


each experience. (ID77/psilocybin)


81

[PAGE 093]

Increases in anxiety were also reported with psychedelic use, as well as symptoms of


fear, paranoia, and increased irritability (for details, see below section on Negative


Effects).


Trauma


Six participants with pain-related changes reported that psychedelics had helped


them with processing trauma. In addition to experiencing substantial relief from pain, one


participant reported lasting reductions in depression, anxiety, and trauma symptoms,


stating, “I was free from depression for about 3 months and my anxiety didn’t begin to


return until 6-8 weeks post experience...I was still aware of the trauma I had been


through, but I began processing and accepting it” (ID41/psilocybin). Similarly,


psychedelic use helped another participant “move through some emotions” related to


PTSD and their role as a caretaker, stating, “I no longer feel like I'm fighting to swim up-


stream and have the ability to flow with the current” (ID55/mescaline).


Brain Fog


Seven participants noticed improvements in their cognitive symptoms, or brain


fog, after using psychedelics. Having written about their experience with microdosing


psilocybin, one participant shared, “I felt like my brain was not as heavy, tense and


foggy” (ID92). Another participant, with both FM and ME/CFS, described their surprise


at experiencing a clearing in brain fog with psilocybin use, which endured for several


months:


82

[PAGE 094]

Something that was extraordinary to me was how my usually debilitating brain-


fog was GONE. I didn’t have problems connecting my thoughts to my speech,


which usually disturbs me greatly. I usually have extreme monkey-mind, but I had


no issues connecting my thoughts in my head. Word retrieval wasn’t an issue. It


was the longest I held a conversation without anxiety, an ME/CES crash, or


general brain fog in years. (ID57)


Fatigue/Energy


Reduced fatigue or increased energy was reported by six FM participants who had


used psilocybin. Most of these participants reported use of microdoses, though one had


experienced fatigue improvement with use of a macrodose. For one of the participants


who microdosed, reduced fatigue was accompanied by improved sleep. Increased fatigue


was reported by one participant following use of psilocybin (for details, see below section


on Negative Effects).


Gastrointestinal Problems


Four participants described improvements in gastrointestinal or digestive issues.


After use of a moderate dose of psilocybin, one of the four noted, “My IBS was


completely cured for a few days. I had no stomach pain or abdominal pain, nothing upset


my stomach, I could eat whatever I wanted and I enjoyed food for the first time in a long


time” (1D44). Eight participants reported gastrointestinal upset with psychedelic use (for


details, see below section on Negative Effects).


83

[PAGE 095]

RQ 5: Factors Associated with Positive and Negative Impacts on Pain


Among those who reported pain changes with psychedelic use, most participants


described having positive overall experiences with psychedelics. Several participants,


however, reported negative experiences or effects from psychedelic use, including


increased pain and other unpleasant symptoms.


Negative Effects


Fifteen individuals with FM reported negative effects in relation to their


psychedelic use (Table 14). These individuals either responded “yes” to a close-ended


item regarding negative effects, or they described negative effects within free-text


responses. The most frequently mentioned negative effects were gastrointestinal upset (n


= 8) and emotional distress (n = 8). Other symptoms included increased pain,


headache/migraine, fatigue, difficulty sleeping, and feeling cold. Most negative effects


occurred during the period of acute drug effects, though four individuals reported


symptoms occurring one or more days after use.


Gastrointestinal Upset


Gastrointestinal upset was reported by eight participants, seven of whom


experienced nausea and/or vomiting during the period of acute drug effects. These


participants had either used psilocybin (macrodoses) or LSD.


84

[PAGE 096]

Table 14. Negative effects reported with psychedelic use.


Total Acute Day or more following use
n (% of 43) n n
Any negative effects 15 (34.9) 12 4
Pain increase 4 (9.3) 3 l
Headache/migraine 2 (4.7) 1 l
GI upset 8 (18.6) 7 1
Nausea 4 1
Vomiting 3
Acid reflux 1
Felt cold 2 (4.7) 2
Fatigue 1 (2.3) 1
Difficulty sleeping 1 (2.3) 1
Emotional distress 8 (18.6) 6 2
Fear 2
Anxiety 4
Paranoia 2
Flashbacks l
Irritability/sensitivity 1


Note. Some participants reported multiple negative effects.


Distressing Psychological Symptoms


Negative emotional experiences were described by eight participants, ranging


from mild anxiety to fear and paranoia. One participant described difficulty with sleep


and flashbacks following use of LSD.


Increased Pain


As noted in the results section for RQ 2, four participants reported intensification


of pain with psychedelic use. Two of the four experienced acute worsening of pain with


LSD. The other two participants had used psilocybin, one of whom described acute body


aches during use of an unspecified dose. The other participant reported worse pain the


day following microdosing psilocybin, as they described, “The only negative effect is the


85

[PAGE 097]

day after I am extremely exhausted and pain is worse” (ID21). The participant who


experienced a strong pain intensification during use of LSD wrote that in general they


had noticed changes to their response to drugs since developing FM. They also had been


experiencing a pain flare on the day of their LSD use, as they described:


I have had many changes to my response to drugs since I developed


fibromyalgia...I had previously taken the same batch of the tabs a year or two ago


with no effect besides feeling tired more quickly, but that day I was having a


“flare up” and went ahead with taking the Isd anyway. (1D27)


Preparation and Additional Characteristics of Psychedelic Use


Preparation


Of the 36 participants with FM who reported a change in pain with use of a


psychedelic, about half (n = 17) answered “Yes” when asked whether they prepared in


some way prior to their use. Several forms of preparation were described, including self-


preparation, preparing the setting, talking with others about their plans to use a


psychedelic, and preparing the substance/dose itself. Participants described preparing


themselves mentally and physically by reading about what to expect with use of


psychedelics (n = 1), dedicating time to the experience (n = 4), setting an intention (n =


4), engaging in a relaxing and/or mindful activity (n = 7), monitoring their mindset (n =


1), and getting enough sleep, staying hydrated, and eating healthily or fasting prior to use


(n = 7). Two participants described stopping use of certain medications with known


contraindications prior to psychedelic use. Notifying someone about their plans, and/or


arranging to have social support available, was described by four individuals.


86

[PAGE 098]

Setting


Several participants (n = 5) wrote about the importance of having a comfortable


setting for the experience. Most participants (n = 31) reported location of use as their


home or the home of a friend, partner, or family member. About a third (n = 11)


described being alone at the time. Three individuals mentioned having someone present


to assist if needed, such as a “sitter”, and one participant was with a shaman during their


experience. Two individuals reported having integration sessions with a therapist.


Subjective Experience Ratings


Insight. Among the 36 participants with pain changes, twenty-three (63.9%)


reported their experience had been psychologically insightful (“extremely insightful” =


11, “moderately insightful” = 7, “mildly insightful” = 9, “not at all insightful” = 4).


Meaning. When asked whether their psychedelic experience had been profound


and personally meaningful, eighteen (50%) responded “Yes”.


Awe. When asked whether they had experienced awe, wonder, or amazement with


use of a psychedelic, 20 (56%) of the 36 participants with pain changes selected from


“somewhat” to “completely”.


87

[PAGE 099]

Intensity. Participants rated the intensity of their psychedelic experience as


“mildly intense” (n = 8), “moderately intense” (n = 12), “strongly intense” (n = 7), or


“overwhelmingly intense” (n = 5).


Spiritual. Participants were asked whether they had a spiritual or mystical


experience during their use of psychedelics. About 40% (n = 15) of those who had


experienced pain changes responded “Yes” to this item.


Additional Changes Following Psychedelic Use


Behavioral Changes


Several close-ended items assessed whether participants with psychedelic-related


pain changes experienced behavior changes following psychedelic use. In response to


these items, participants endorsed changes in physical activity/exercise (n = 16),


relationships (7 = 16), and social activity (n = 13). When these changes were elaborated


upon in free-text responses, participants generally described increased physical activity.


For example, one participant described how psilocybin had helped them “make a


recommitment to practices (meditation, yoga) that are useful for pain management”


(ID18). Participants reported that psychedelic use had improved their social functioning


and deepened their relationships. It had also prompted two participants to leave unhealthy


relationships. Other behavioral changes reported following psychedelic use included


reduced alcohol (n = 2) and cannabis use (n = 2).


88

[PAGE 100]

Quality of Life


More than two-thirds of participants with pain changes (n = 20) answered “Yes”


when asked whether they had experienced changes in their quality of life following


psychedelic use. Six participants denied experiencing such changes. Among those who


provided additional detail, participants’ written responses generally indicated perceived


improvement in quality of life.


Reset


Eight participants described psychedelics as providing them with a “reset”, be it


physically, mentally, or both. For example, one participant expressed, “Shrooms kinda


give me a small reset in physical and emotional functioning” (ID64).


Practicality, Support, and Access


In addition to reports about psychedelic use and symptom changes, several


participants shared concerns about practicality, support, and access to psychedelics.


Concerning practicality, four participants reported taking full or macrodoses of


psilocybin on a weekly to biweekly basis to help their pain. Though they described


several benefits from this pattern of use, a couple of them found the schedule difficult to


maintain. The repeated dosing could become impractical, as one participant wrote:


Despite my success with this treatment, I found it difficult to cope with having a


profound psychedelic experience that frequently, especially while trying to care


for young children, doing my job, and managing my household. Giving up 6


hours a week or more often is difficult for busy humans. I'm very good at coping


89

[PAGE 101]

with pain and pushing through as I've been doing it my whole life and that seems


somehow better than mucking around with tripping so much. I still can and will


take psychedelics for a break when needed, but it takes a few doses to have effect


and things actually get worse after the first dose so I have to set aside time for it


all. My kids are getting older now so I might get back to it eventually. (ID4)


For another participant, the use of full doses of psilocybin provided some pain relief, but


the effects were not long-lasting enough for them to continue. They noted a desire for


more ongoing pain reduction, without interference in functioning, and became interested


in trying microdosing for these reasons. Describing their experience with pain and


macrodoses, the participant explained:


I felt that it was short-lived relief. I was concerned about having to ingest too


much over time, which leads me to believe that microdosing may be a much


better way to go... I liked that it was gone and out of my body soon, too. If so,


that would be awesome for the bad days. It meant that 24 hours later, I could go


right back to work, driving and be legal and safe. Mj doesn't have that quality,


sadly...I think that microdosing is my next experiment with pain. I'm wondering,


[sic] if I can control pain with small amounts at regular intervals. (ID52)


On the other hand, some participants who had tried micro- or lower doses of


psilocybin expressed interest in using higher doses to see if effects may be stronger and


more durable for their pain, but they were concerned about doing so without additional


support. Several participants also shared about their desire for increased access to


psychedelics, more psychedelic research, and decriminalization.


90

[PAGE 102]

DISCUSSION


This study examined reports of naturalistic psilocybin mushroom and other classic


psychedelic use among individuals with FM. In an online survey, a combination of close-


ended and open-ended items assessed characteristics of past use and related changes in


pain or other symptoms. No hypotheses were established given the descriptive,


exploratory nature of the study.


Of the 102 total responses received from individuals with chronic pain and past


classic psychedelic use, 64 met self-report criteria for FM or reported an FM diagnosis.


Use of psilocybin mushrooms was most often reported, followed by LSD, and over a


third of participants with FM described pain-related reasons for use. Over 50% of those


with FM (n = 36) reported experiencing any change in pain with psychedelic use. The


direction of change was a reduction in pain for most participants (n = 32 or 88.9%),


varying in duration from hours to days, and sometimes longer. Improvements in cognitive


symptoms, fatigue, and gastrointestinal issues were also reported by a small subset of


participants.


Several of the main findings will be discussed below, beginning with the use of


psychedelics for the purpose of self-medicating. Reports regarding reductions in pain and


other FM symptoms with psychedelic use will then be discussed, followed by potential


factors involved in pain-related changes and negative experiences. Finally, a summary of


limitations, future directions, and conclusion will be presented.


91

[PAGE 103]

Self-Medicating with Classic Psychedelics


Self-medicating with psychedelics for mental or physical health issues was


frequently reported among FM participants in this study. When asked about their reasons


for psychedelic use, about half of the FM participants (n = 34 or 53.1%) endorsed


wanting to improve their mental health in some way, and over a third (n = 22 or 34.4%)


described pain-related reasons. These results are generally consistent with findings


suggesting health-related motives as common among users of psychedelics (Glynos et al.,


2023; Mason & Kuypers, 2018; Matzopoulos et al., 2021; Pestana et al., 2021). In a large


online survey of U.S. adults (weighted N = 251,297,495), use for general mental health


and well-being was reported by nearly two-thirds of individuals that used psilocybin


mushrooms (Matzopoulos et al., 2021). In that same survey, nearly a third of those that


used psilocybin mushrooms reported doing so to manage a diagnosed mental health


condition. Self-medicating for various health reasons is also frequently reported among


individuals who microdose psychedelics (Hutten et al., 2019; Lea, Amada, Jungaberle,


Schecke, & Klein, 2020; Lea, Amada, Jungaberle, Schecke, et al., 2020; Rootman et al.,


2021).


Few prior studies have examined motives for psychedelic use specifically in


chronic pain or FM populations. In a survey among individuals with FM by Glynos et al.


(2022), fun/recreation and spiritual/psychological/personal exploration were the most


frequently reported reasons for psychedelic use. These motives were also frequently


endorsed in the present study. Use for self-medicating purposes (1.e., treatment of chronic


pain, improving mental health, and managing past trauma) was reported among


individuals with FM in the survey by Glynos et al. (2022), though at relatively lower


92

[PAGE 104]

rates. It is possible that due to differences in recruitment/eligibility, the current study


included more individuals who had used psychedelics for pain or mental health reasons.


It is also possible that the practice of self-medicating with psychedelics could be gaining


popularity among those with FM.


Reductions in Pain with Psychedelic Use


About half of the FM participants in this study endorsed any change in pain with


past use of a classic psychedelic. Among that subset of participants, most (88.9%)


described an acute reduction in pain. Three individuals reported acute pain increases, and


one described worse pain on the day following use. Overall, these results are similar to


those by Glynos et al. (2022), in whose survey 50% of respondents with FM endorsed no


change in chronic pain symptoms with past psychedelic use, 47.2% reported improved


symptoms, and 2.8% indicated worsened symptoms. Results are also consistent with


those of Bonnelle et al. (2022), in whose survey most individuals with chronic pain and


past psychedelic use described pain reductions in relation to use (67.9% of those who had


used microdoses, and 72.4% of those who used macrodoses).


Results further align with those of Bornemann et al. (2021), in whose qualitative


study, 9 of 11 individuals with chronic pain reported acute pain reductions with


psychedelic use, and 2 of 11 reported acute pain amplifications. Reported durations of


analgesic relief ranged from about 3 to 7 days, with pain gradually returning to its


baseline level, whereas psychological effects related to pain persisted longer (up to


several months or more) (Bornemann et al., 2021). This pattern was similar to that


observed in the present study, in which most participants described returns to baseline


93

[PAGE 105]

pain levels within hours to days of use, but generally more durable changes in emotions


and other psychological factors, such as improved mood, reduced anxiety, and improved


pain coping.


Microdosing vs. Macrodosing


In this study, some individuals reported reductions in pain with use of microdoses,


and others with macrodoses. In general, those who reported changes in pain with use of


macrodoses tended to report greater magnitude and longer durations of pain reduction


than those who microdosed. A similar trend was described by Cavarra et al. (2023)


among a subsample of FM participants with past psychedelic use. In their study,


macrodoses or full doses were associated with greater pain relief, relative to both


conventional medications/cannabis and microdoses. Though based on subjective,


retrospective reporting, data from the present study as well as past findings suggest


potential pain-related dosage effects warranting further research.


Dosage effects may also interact with intentions related to pain. Among


participants with chronic pain, Bonnelle et al. (2022) examined differences in perceived


pain relief between those who had pain management intentions and those who did not.


They reported that perceived pain relief with use of macrodoses did not differ by the


presence of pain-related intentions. However, in the case of microdosing, participants


who had used psychedelics with the intention of managing their pain reported greater


pain relief. Also, in the survey by Glynos et al. (2022), nearly all the individuals with FM


who reported pain treatment intentions described symptom improvement following


psychedelic use (11 out of 12), though specific dosage types were not mentioned. Taken


94

[PAGE 106]

together, pain-related intentions may influence perceived pain changes with psychedelics


and could vary by dosage.


LSD, Mescaline, and DMT


Though most participants in this study who described pain improvement in


relation to psychedelics had used psilocybin mushrooms, pain reductions were also


described by five participants who had used LSD, two participants who had used


mescaline, and one individual who had used DMT. LSD has previously been associated


with pain relief in several case series with phantom limb pain (Fanciullacci et al., 1977;


Kuromaru et al., 1967), a clinical study in severe pain related to terminal illness (Kast &


Collins, 1964), and multiple studies involving cluster headache (Andersson et al., 2017;


Di Lorenzo et al., 2016; Schindler et al., 2015; Sewell et al., 2006).


Compared to psilocybin and LSD, mescaline and DMT have been studied


considerably less in relation to pain. Some Indigenous peoples have traditionally used


peyote to reduce pain during childbirth and to treat pain associated with rheumatism,


toothache, burns, and other conditions (Schultes, 1938). Interestingly, in a recent clinical


study among participants without any major health conditions, significant increases in


plasma oxytocin were observed following administration of mescaline, surpassing those


elicited by LSD and psilocybin (Ley et al., 2023). Given oxytocin’s potential for reducing


pain sensitivity (Goodin et al., 2015; Mekhael et al., 2023), this characteristic of


mescaline could be relevant for future investigations into its effects on pain.


A few reports of pain relief from use of DMT have been described in qualitative


studies, including one among individuals with cluster headache and migraine (Andersson


95

[PAGE 107]

et al., 2017), and a naturalistic field study which included an individual with FM


(Michael et al., 2023). Also, in a case report involving use of changa (a combination of


DMT and Peganum harmala seeds), an individual with chronic fatigue and FM


experienced about 2 weeks of pain relief following several administration sessions (Ona


& Troncoso, 2019).


Reductions in Opioid Use


Rates of prescription opioid use among individuals with FM have remained high


(Bruce et al., 2021), despite their association with poorer outcomes and multiple clinical


guidelines advising against their use (Goldenberg et al., 2016). In this study, several


participants reported a reduced need for pain medications, including opioids, following


use of psychedelics. It is possible that reductions in pain driven by psychedelics could

indirectly reduce reliance on opioid analgesics. Reductions in opioid use following


psychedelic use have been previously reported in multiple cross-sectional surveys


(Glynos et al., 2023; Lea, Amada, Jungaberle, Schecke, et al., 2020) and a longitudinal


survey (Fadiman & Korb, 2019). Reductions in opioid use following psychedelic use

have further been reported among individuals with opioid use disorder (OUD) (Argento


et al., 2022; Garcia-Romeu et al., 2019). Several clinical trials are currently planned or


underway investigating potential application of psilocybin in OUD (NCT04161066;


NCT06005662) and in the tapering of long-term opioid therapy for chronic pain


(NCT05585229).


96

[PAGE 108]

Impacts on Other Symptoms in FM


In this study, some participants reported improvements in mental health, quality


of life, and other FM symptoms (1.e., cognitive symptoms, fatigue, gastrointestinal issues)


following psychedelic use. Improvements in mental health have previously been reported


in surveys of individuals who self-medicate with psychedelics (Hutten et al., 2019; Kopra


et al., 2023; Mason & Kuypers, 2018; Raison et al., 2022; Rootman et al., 2021).


Findings from studies specific to chronic pain and/or FM have also suggested benefits


from psychedelic use on mood, well-being, and quality of life (Bonnelle et al., 2022;


Bornemann et al., 2021; Glynos et al., 2022). Given that currently available treatments


are associated with only modest effects on quality of life in FM (Mascarenhas et al.,


2021), such findings warrant further investigation, and could potentially be related to or


independent of changes in pain.


Besides changes in mental health and quality of life, benefits in brain fog or


thinking difficulties, fatigue/energy, and gastrointestinal symptoms were also described


by some participants in this study. Improved cognition and increased energy have been


reported in survey studies of microdosing, though there is limited evidence supporting


these types of changes in laboratory studies (Polito & Liknaitzky, 2022). In research with


psilocybin specifically, a recent scoping review (Bonnieux et al., 2023) suggested acute


increases in creativity with microdoses. Conversely, psilocybin macrodoses tended to


acutely worsen cognitive performance and creativity, with mostly neutral and


occasionally positive effects reported after the acute drug period (Bonnieux et al., 2023).


While acute gastrointestinal upset is a well-known side effect of psilocybin use


(Johnson et al., 2008), a few participants in this study described improvements in


97

[PAGE 109]

gastrointestinal symptoms following use. To this writer’s knowledge, no clinical studies


have been published as of yet regarding effects of psilocybin on gastrointestinal


symptoms or conditions such as IBS.


Potential Factors Involved in Pain-Related Changes


This study was not designed to identify mechanisms or mediators of change in


pain with the use of psychedelics, but findings will be discussed to consider several


potential factors. In the present study, acute experiences of pain relief included for some


participants a sense of increased relaxation, body connection, and movement. More


durable changes in relation to pain and psychedelic use involved improved mental health


and coping with pain, incorporation of positive behavioral changes, better functioning,


and adoption of altered perspectives. Several themes related to changes in pain will be


highlighted below, in addition to possible physiologic mechanisms.


Mind-Body Connection


An increased sense of embodiment or physical presence was described by


Bornemann et al. (2021) among individuals with chronic pain who had self-medicated


with psychedelics. In their study, participants reported greater body connection both


acutely and over longer periods, with some also engaging in concurrent mind-body


practices during psychedelic use, such as breathwork, visualization, meditation, and


movement. Use of similar mind-body practices with psychedelics was described


positively by participants in the present study, in addition to a few reports of enhanced


sense of connection to the body, and an enjoyment in moving without pain. Interoceptive


98

[PAGE 110]

awareness has been proposed as a possible mechanism of mind-body therapies in chronic


pain (Gnall et al., 2024) and could play a role in pain-related effects of psychedelic


experiences. As previously suggested by Bornemann et al. (2021), measures of body


awareness or mind-body connection may be useful to include in clinical trials. Of note,


however, neither changes in body awareness nor mindfulness were associated with pain


relief from psychedelic use in the survey by Bonnelle et al. (2022).


Cognitive and Behavioral Changes


Psychedelic experiences could positively influence pain in FM by assisting with


the alteration of pain-related beliefs and promoting increased engagement in more


adaptive behaviors. Some participants in this study mentioned positive shifts in their


perspective on pain and improved pain coping, which were broadly consistent with the


theme of positive reframing described by Bornemann et al. (2021). These changes could


reflect increased psychological flexibility, which has been proposed to mediate


psychedelic effects on anxiety and mood (Agin-Liebes et al., 2022; Davis et al., 2020),


and may contribute to improved outcomes in FM (Eastwood & Godfrey, 2023; Vallejo et


al., 2021).


Participants also reported engaging in new or previously stopped activities (e.g.,


exercise) following psychedelic use. Spontaneous health behavior changes have been


associated with psychedelics in past studies, and behavior change in relation to addiction


is an active area of psychedelic research (Teixeira et al., 2022). Such changes could help


indirectly facilitate reductions in chronic pain by improving pain management and quality


of life.


99

[PAGE 111]

Two participants in this study described acute experiences with psychedelics


involving an increased sense of control over pain and associated imagery. Psychedelic


experiences could elicit similar effects as in guided imagery, which has been associated


with increased self-efficacy and functional status in a prior study in FM (Menzies et al.,


2006). Increased agency over pain has previously been reported in relation to psychedelic


use (Bornemann et al., 2021), and an increased sense of control has been associated with


improved functioning in FM (Rubio Fidel et al., 2022).


Possible Physiological Mechanisms


As described earlier in the Introduction section, psilocybin or other classic


psychedelics could modulate pain in FM via serotonergic actions. Reduced serotonergic


functioning has been associated with FM (Sluka & Clauw, 2016), in addition to


polymorphisms of the 5HT2, receptor gene (Bondy et al., 1999) and the serotonin


transporter gene (D'Agnelli et al., 2019). There is also limited research suggesting that


supplementation of 5-HTP benefits pain in FM (Sarzi Puttini & Caruso, 1992).


The role of SHT24 receptor activation in descending pain modulation is unclear,


with some studies suggesting facilitative and others inhibitory effects (Tao et al., 2019).


In addition to SHT2a, psilocybin’s active metabolite psilocin binds to other serotonergic


receptors, such as the 5HT\, receptor, the activation of which has been more frequently


associated with analgesic effects in preclinical research (Tao et al., 2019). Other possible


physiologic mechanisms could involve dopaminergic actions of psychedelics, changes in


neuroplasticity, alterations in connectivity of brain networks, and effects of psychedelics


in reducing inflammation (Castellanos et al., 2020; Zia et al., 2023).


100

[PAGE 112]

Negative Experiences


Though most participants in this study described positive experiences with


psychedelics, several negative experiences were reported. Gastrointestinal upset and


emotional distress were the most frequently reported negative effects, and pain increases


were also described. Acute worsening of pain with psychedelic use has previously been


noted among individuals with chronic pain and FM (Bonnelle et al., 2022; Bornemann et


al., 2021; Glynos et al., 2022), though at relatively lower rates than neutral or positive


effects on pain. Though pain reductions seem to occur more frequently, increases in pain


are important to recognize and may be underreported, underscoring the importance of


monitoring for such effects in future clinical trials.


It is possible that individual differences, substance/dosage type, or setting


characteristics may increase the likelihood of pain amplification for some people.


Multiple studies have highlighted dosage, planning/preparation, and other aspects of ‘set’


and ‘setting’ as significant contributing factors to whether someone’s experience with


psychedelics is perceived overall as negative or positive (Bender & Hellerstein, 2022;


Johnson et al., 2008). Several participants in this study described having sought


information about psychedelics prior to use, and many considered preparation to be


important, both for mitigation of negative effects and for improving their overall


experience. In a large survey of individuals who had self-treated with psychedelics for a


mental health condition or specific worry/concern, increased negative outcomes were


associated with LSD use, younger age, and higher intensity of the experience (Kopra et


al., 2023). Higher intensity of experience was also associated with more positive


101

[PAGE 113]

outcomes, along with use of psilocybin mushrooms, treatment of PTSD, and seeking


information or advice about psychedelics before use (Kopra et al., 2023).


Limitations


There are several limitations to this study. The use of an online questionnaire


inherently limited the sample only to individuals with internet access and a capable


device. Though the survey was designed to be anonymous, some individuals may have


felt uncomfortable answering sensitive items related to medical history or disclosing past


use of classic psychedelic substances given their legal status, which may have made them


less likely to complete the survey or provide as much detail, resulting in nonresponse


bias. The use of social media groups and forums for recruitment may have further


contributed to selection bias, leading to higher inclusion of individuals with positive


experiences with, or particularly strong opinions of, psychedelics.


In addition to selection and non-response bias, the survey may have been affected


by recall bias, and the accuracy of reported dosage amounts is uncertain. Individuals may


have had difficulty remembering aspects of a psychedelic experience, or any related


changes in pain, especially if an experience occurred a long time ago. Participants may


have also become fatigued or bored over the course of the survey, contributing to early


termination, or rushing through items without thinking through their answers. Some


participants did not know or remember dosage amounts. Others reported approximate


dosages, which may or may not have been accurate.


Finally, the process of coding and qualitative analysis is inherently subjective and


influenced by the researcher’s assumptions, and potentially, expectations. Results


102

[PAGE 114]

regarding psychedelics and reported changes are not appropriate for generalizability, nor


do they imply causation. This study population was quite heterogenous, with many types


of pain conditions reported in addition to FM. Thus, it is unknown whether the types of


changes that were described from use of psychedelics were specific to pain in FM.


Clinical trials are required to further assess the potential benefit of psilocybin and other


psychedelics in FM and other chronic pain conditions.


Future Directions


The present findings lend support to a growing body of work indicating a possible


role for psychedelics in chronic pain and FM, though all studies published to date on FM


have been based on retrospective reports. There is a need to determine with clinical


studies whether psychedelics such as psilocybin are tolerable and safe when administered


in FM, and whether they lead to any improvements in pain. Several initial trials are


currently underway. If future studies suggest preliminary efficacy, many questions


remain surrounding optimal dosage, frequency of doses and treatment protocol, the role


of psychotherapy, and the mechanisms involved. Other areas of exploration include the


importance of subjective or mystical-type effects to any reported improvements in pain,


the degree to which intentions and expectancy play a role in perceived changes, and


whether psychedelics may help reduce the need for other pain medications, such as


opioid analgesics or gabapentinoids.


Most participants in this study did not use psychedelics in a clinical setting or


with psychotherapeutic support, though some mentioned that a supportive individual was


either present or available during their experience, and a few mentioned working with a


103

[PAGE 115]

therapist. It is unknown whether the greatest potential for psychedelics to alleviate pain


will be realized by combining psychotherapy with psilocybin or other psychedelics. It is


possible that psychotherapy could augment the drug’s benefits by enhancing processes


such as cognitive reframing and behavioral changes, supporting improved pain


management and overall functioning. If so, future questions will concern whether a


particular type of psychotherapy (e.g., acceptance and commitment therapy, cognitive


behavioral therapy for chronic pain, etc.) confers increased benefit, in addition to method


of delivery (e.g., frequency of sessions, modality).


Conclusion


This study used an online survey to explore reports of past classic psychedelic use


in relation to changes in pain among individuals with FM. Most participants had used


psilocybin mushrooms or LSD. About half of the participants with FM described any


change in pain with past psychedelic use, with the direction of change typically being a


pain reduction. A small subset of participants also reported a reduced need for opioid


analgesics or other pain medications following psychedelic use. This study, in


combination with prior research, suggests potential for the application of psilocybin, and


possibly other psychedelics, in FM, though evidence at present is weak. Clinical trials are


necessary to determine whether psychedelics are helpful for pain or other symptoms in


FM.


104

[PAGE 116]

REFERENCES


Ablin, J., Fitzcharles, M. A., Buskila, D., Shir, Y., Sommer, C., & Hauser, W. (2013).
Treatment of fibromyalgia syndrome: recommendations of recent evidence-based
interdisciplinary guidelines with special emphasis on complementary and
alternative therapies. Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine,
2013, 485272. https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/485272

Aday, J. S., Davis, A. K., Mitzkovitz, C. M., Bloesch, E. K., & Davoli, C. C. (2021).
Predicting Reactions to Psychedelic Drugs: A Systematic Review of States and
Traits Related to Acute Drug Effects. ACS Pharmacol Trans! Sci, 4(2), 424-435.
https://do1.org/10.1021/acsptsci.1c00014


Aghajanian, G. K., & Hailgler, H. J. (1975). Hallucinogenic indoleamines: Preferential
action upon presynaptic serotonin receptors. Psychopharmacology
Communications, 1(6), 619-629. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1063421


Agin-Liebes, G., Zeifman, R., Luoma, J. B., Garland, E. L., Campbell, W. K., & Weiss,
B. (2022). Prospective examination of the therapeutic role of psychological
flexibility and cognitive reappraisal in the ceremonial use of ayahuasca. J
Psychopharmacol, 36(3), 295-308. https://doi.org/10.1177/026988 11221080165


Agin-Liebes, G. I., Malone, T., Yalch, M. M., Mennenga, S. E., Ponte, K. L., Guss, J.,
Bossis, A. P., Grigsby, J., Fischer, S., & Ross, S. (2020). Long-term follow-up of
psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy for psychiatric and existential distress in
patients with life-threatening cancer. J Psychopharmacol, 34(2), 155-166.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881119897615


Agurell, S., & Nilsson, J. L. (1968). Biosynthesis of psilocybin. II. Incorporation of
labelled tryptamine derivatives. Acta Chemica Scandinavica, 22(4), 1210-1218.
https://do1.org/10.3891/acta.chem.scand.22-1210

Ahles, T. A., Yunus, M. B., & Masi, A. T. (1987). Is chronic pain a variant of depressive
disease? The case of primary fibromyalgia syndrome. Pain, 29(1), 105-111.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3959(87)90183-7


Albrecht, D. S., Forsberg, A., Sandstrom, A., Bergan, C., Kadetoff, D., Protsenko, E.,
Lampa, J., Lee, Y. C., Hoglund, C. O., Catana, C., Cervenka, S., Akeju, O.,
Lekander, M., Cohen, G., Halldin, C., Taylor, N., Kim, M., Hooker, J. M.,
Edwards, R.R.,... Loggia, M. L. (2019). Brain glial activation in fibromyalgia -
A multi-site positron emission tomography investigation. Brain, Behavior, and
Immunity, 75, 72-83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2018.09.018


105

[PAGE 117]

Albrecht, D. S., MacKie, P. J., Kareken, D. A., Hutchins, G. D., Chumin, E. J., Christian,
B. T., & Yoder, K. K. (2016). Differential dopamine function in fibromyalgia.
Brain Imaging and Behavior, 10(3), 829-839. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11682-
015-9459-4


Alfici, S., Sigal, M., & Landau, M. (1989). Primary fibromyalgia syndrome--a variant of
depressive disorder? Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 51(3), 156-161.
https://doi.org/10.1159/000288150


Amtmann, D., Liljenquist, K., Bamer, A., Bocell, F., Jensen, M., Wilson, R., & Turk, D.
(2018). Measuring Pain Catastrophizing and Pain-Related Self-Efficacy: Expert
Panels, Focus Groups, and Cognitive Interviews. Patient, 11(1), 107-117.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40271-017-0269-1


Andersson, M., Persson, M., & Kjellgren, A. (2017). Psychoactive substances as a last
resort-a qualitative study of self-treatment of migraine and cluster headaches.
Harm Reduct J, 14(1), 60. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12954-017-0186-6


Argento, E., Socias, M. E., Hayashi, K., Choi, J., Mackay, L., Christie, D., Milloy, M. J.,
& DeBeck, K. (2022). Psychedelic use is associated with reduced daily opioid use
among people who use illicit drugs in a Canadian setting. International Journal
on Drug Policy, 100, 103518. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2021.103518


Arkfeld, D. G., Alexopoulos, C., & Gonzales, S. A. B. (2023). Potential Benefits of
Psilocybin for Lupus Pain: A Case Report. Current Rheumatology Reviews.
https://do1.org/10.2174/1573397119666230904150750


Arnold, L. M., Hudson, J. I., Hess, E. V., Ware, A. E., Fritz, D. A., Auchenbach, M. B.,
Starck, L. O., & Keck, P. E., Jr. (2004). Family study of fibromyalgia. Arthritis
and Rheumatism, 503), 944-952. https://doi.org/10.1002/art.20042


Baraniuk, J. N., Whalen, G., Cunningham, J., & Clauw, D. J. (2004). Cerebrospinal fluid
levels of opioid peptides in fibromyalgia and chronic low back pain. BMC
Musculoskeletal Disorders, 5, 48. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-5-48


Barrett, F. S., & Griffiths, R. R. (2018). Classic Hallucinogens and Mystical Experiences:
Phenomenology and Neural Correlates. Current Topics in Behavioral
Neurosciences, 36, 393-430. https://do1.org/10.1007/7854
2017 474


Beliveau, V., Ganz, M., Feng, L., Ozenne, B., Hojgaard, L., Fisher, P. M., Svarer, C.,
Greve, D. N., & Knudsen, G. M. (2017). A High-Resolution In Vivo Atlas of the
Human Brain's Serotonin System. Journal of Neuroscience, 37(1), 120-128.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSC1.2830-16.2016


106

[PAGE 118]

Bender, D., & Hellerstein, D. J. (2022). Assessing the risk-benefit profile of classical
psychedelics: a clinical review of second-wave psychedelic research.
Psychopharmacology, 239(6), 1907-1932. https://doi.org/10.1007/s002 13-02 1-
06049-6


Bogenschutz, M. P., Forcehimes, A. A., Pommy, J. A., Wilcox, C. E., Barbosa, P. C., &
Strassman, R. J. (2015). Psilocybin-assisted treatment for alcohol dependence: a
proof-of-concept study. J Psychopharmacol, 29(3), 289-299.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881114565144


Boland, E. W. (1947). Psychogenic rheumatism; the musculoskeletal expression of
psychoneurosis. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 6(4), 195-203.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18900060


Bondy, B., Spaeth, M., Offenbaecher, M., Glatzeder, K., Stratz, T., Schwarz, M., de
Jonge, S., Kruger, M., Engel, R. R., Farber, L., Pongratz, D. E., & Ackenheil, M.
(1999). The T102C polymorphism of the 5-HT2A-receptor gene in fibromyalgia.
Neurobiology of Disease, 6(5), 433-439. https://doi.org/10.1006/nbdi.1999.0262

Bonnelle, V., Smith, W. J., Mason, N. L., Cavarra, M., Kryskow, P., Kuypers, K. P.,
Ramaekers, J. G., & Feilding, A. (2022). Analgesic potential of macrodoses and
microdoses of classical psychedelics in chronic pain sufferers: a population
survey. Br J Pain, 16(6), 619-631. https://doi.org/10.1177/2049463722 1114962

Bonnieux, J. N., VanderZwaag, B., Premji, Z., Garcia-Romeu, A., & Garcia-Barrera, M.
A. (2023). Psilocybin's effects on cognition and creativity: A scoping review. J
Psychopharmacol, 37(7), 635-648. https://doi.org/10.1177/026988 11231179801

Bornemann, J., Close, J. B., Spriggs, M. J., Carhart-Harris, R., & Roseman, L. (2021).
Self-Medication for Chronic Pain Using Classic Psychedelics: A Qualitative
Investigation to Inform Future Research. Front Psychiatry, 12, 735427.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.202
1.735427

Brouwer, A., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2021). Pivotal mental states. J Psychopharmacol,
35(4), 319-352. https://doi.org/10.1177/026988 1120959637

Brown, R. T., Nicholas, C. R., Cozzi, N. V., Gassman, M. C., Cooper, K. M., Muller, D.,
Thomas, C. D., Hetzel, S. J., Henriquez, K. M., Ribaudo, A. S., & Hutson, P. R.
(2017). Pharmacokinetics of Escalating Doses of Oral Psilocybin in Healthy
Adults. Clinical Pharmacokinetics, 56(12), 1543-1554.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40262-017-0540-6


107

[PAGE 119]

Bruce, B. K., Allman, M. E., Rivera, F. A., Abril, A., Gehin, J. M., Oliphant, L. M.,
Nordan, L. M., White, L. J., Martinez, D., & Niazi, S. K. (2021). Opioid Use in
Fibromyalgia Continues Despite Guidelines That Do Not Support Its Efficacy or
Risk. Journal of Clinical Rheumatology, 27(5), 187-193.
https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000001273


Carhart-Harris, R. L., Bolstridge, M., Day, C. M. J., Rucker, J., Watts, R., Erritzoe, D. E.,
Kaelen, M., Giribaldi, B., Bloomfield, M., Pilling, S., Rickard, J. A., Forbes, B.,
Feilding, A., Taylor, D., Curran, H. V., & Nutt, D. J. (2018). Psilocybin with
psychological support for treatment-resistant depression: six-month follow-up.
Psychopharmacology, 235(2), 399-408. https://doi.org/10.1007/s002 13-017-4771-
X


Carhart-Harris, R. L., & Friston, K. J. (2019). REBUS and the Anarchic Brain: Toward a
Unified Model of the Brain Action of Psychedelics. Pharmacological Reviews,
71(3), 316-344. https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.118.017160


Carhart-Harris, R. L., & Goodwin, G. M. (2017). The Therapeutic Potential of
Psychedelic Drugs: Past, Present, and Future. Neuropsychopharmacology, 42(11),
2105-2113. https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2017.84


Carod-Artal, F. J. (2015). Hallucinogenic drugs in pre-Columbian Mesoamerican
cultures. Neurologia, 30(1), 42-49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nrl.2011.07.003


Castellanos, J. P., Woolley, C., Bruno, K. A., Zeidan, F., Halberstadt, A., & Furnish, T.
(2020). Chronic pain and psychedelics: a review and proposed mechanism of
action. Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, 45(7), 486-494.
https://doi.org/10.1136/rapm-2020-101273


Cavarra, M., Mason, N. L., Kuypers, K. P. C., Bonnelle, V., Smith, W. J., Feilding, A.,
Kryskow, P., & Ramaekers, J. G. (2023). Potential analgesic effects of
psychedelics on select chronic pain conditions: A survey study. European Journal
of Pain (London, England). https://doi.org/10.1002/ejp.2171


Choy, E., Perrot, S., Leon, T., Kaplan, J., Petersel, D., Ginovker, A., & Kramer, E.
(2010). A patient survey ofthe impact of fibromyalgia and the journey to
diagnosis. BMC Health Services Research, 10, 102. https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-
6963-10-102


Cleeland, C. S., & Ryan, K. M. (1994). Pain assessment: global use of the Brief Pain
Inventory. Annals of the Academy of Medicine, Singapore, 23(2), 129-138.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8080219


Controlled Substances Act, (1970).
https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title2 1/chapter13 &edition=pr
elim

108

[PAGE 120]

Cortes-Altamirano, J. L., Olmos-Hernandez, A., Jaime, H. B., Carrillo-Mora, P., Bandala,
C., Reyes-Long, S., & Alfaro-Rodriguez, A. (2018). Review: 5-HT1, 5-HT2, 5-
HT3 and 5-HT7 Receptors and their Role in the Modulation of Pain Response in
the Central Nervous System. Current Neuropharmacology, 16(2), 210-221.
https://doi.org/10.2174/1570159X 1566617091 1121027


D'Agnelli, S., Arendt-Nielsen, L., Gerra, M. C., Zatorri, K., Boggiani, L., Baciarello, M.,
& Bignami, E. (2019). Fibromyalgia: Genetics and epigenetics insights may
provide the basis for the development of diagnostic biomarkers. Molecular Pain,
15, 1744806918819944. https://doi.org/10.1177/1744806918819944


Davis, A. K., Barrett, F. S., & Griffiths, R. R. (2020). Psychological flexibility mediates
the relations between acute psychedelic effects and subjective decreases in
depression and anxiety. J Contextual Behav Sci, 15, 39-45.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2019.11.004


Derry, S., Cording, M., Wiffen, P. J., Law, S., Phillips, T., & Moore, R. A. (2016).
Pregabalin for pain in fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, 9(9), CD011790. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD011790.pub2


Derry, S., Wiffen, P. J., Hauser, W., Mucke, M., Tolle, T. R., Bell, R. F., & Moore, R. A.
(2017). Oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for fibromyalgia in adults.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 3(3), CD012332.
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD012332.pub2


Dewitt, J., Capistrant, B., Kohli, N., Rosser, B. R. S., Mitteldorf, D., Merengwa, E., &
West, W. (2018). Addressing Participant Validity in a Small Internet Health
Survey (The Restore Study): Protocol and Recommendations for Survey
Response Validation. JMIR Res Protoc, 7(4), e96.
https://do1.org/10.2196/resprot.7655


Di Lorenzo, C., Coppola, G., Di Lorenzo, G., Bracaglia, M., Rossi, P., & Pierelli, F.
(2016). The use of illicit drugs as self-medication in the treatment of cluster
headache: Results from an Italian online survey. Cephalalgia, 36(2), 194-198.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0333 102415583145


Dinis-Oliveira, R. J. (2017). Metabolism of psilocybin and psilocin: clinical and forensic
toxicological relevance. Drug Metabolism Reviews, 49(1), 84-91.
https://doi.org/10.1080/03602532.2016.1278228


Docampo, E., Escaramis, G., Gratacos, M., Villatoro, S., Puig, A., Kogevinas, M.,
Collado, A., Carbonell, J., Rivera, J., Vidal, J., Alegre, J., Estivill, X., & Rabionet,
R. (2014). Genome-wide analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy
number variants in fibromyalgia suggest a role for the central nervous system.
Pain, 155(6), 1102-1109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2014.02.016


109

[PAGE 121]

Doppler, K., Rittner, H. L., Deckart, M., & Sommer, C. (2015). Reduced dermal nerve
fiber diameter in skin biopsies of patients with fibromyalgia. Pain, 156(11), 2319-
2325. https://doi.org/10.1097/].pain.0000000000000285


Dos Santos, R. G., Bouso, J. C., & Hallak, J. E. C. (2019). Serotonergic
hallucinogens/psychedelics could be promising treatments for depressive and
anxiety disorders in end-stage cancer. BMC Psychiatry, 19(1), 321.
https://do1.org/10.1186/s12888-019-2288-z


Dutta, D., Brummett, C. M., Moser, S. E., Fritsche, L. G., Tsodikov, A., Lee, S., Clauw,
D. J., & Scott, L. J. (2020). Heritability of the Fibromyalgia Phenotype Varies by
Age. Arthritis Rheumatol, 72(5), 815-823. https://doi.org/10.1002/art.41171


Eastwood, F., & Godfrey, E. (2023). The efficacy, acceptability and safety of acceptance
and commitment therapy for fibromyalgia — a systematic review and meta-
analysis. British Journal of Pain, 20494637231221451.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2049463723 1221451


Edwards, R. R., Bingham, C. O., 3rd, Bathon, J., & Haythornthwaite, J. A. (2006).
Catastrophizing and pain in arthritis, fibromyalgia, and other rheumatic diseases.
Arthritis and Rheumatism, 55(2), 325-332. https://doi.org/10.1002/art.2 1865


Elman, I., Pustilnik, A., & Borsook, D. (2022). Beating pain with psychedelics: Matter
over mind? Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 134, 104482.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.12.005

Evdokimov, D., Frank, J., Klitsch, A., Unterecker, S., Warrings, B., Serra, J., Papagianni,
A., Saffer, N., Meyer Zu Altenschildesche, C., Kampik, D., Malik, R. A.,
Sommer, C., & Uceyler, N. (2019). Reduction of skin innervation is associated
with a severe fibromyalgia phenotype. Annals of Neurology, 86(4), 504-516.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.25565

Fadiman, J., & Korb, S. (2019). Might Microdosing Psychedelics Be Safe and
Beneficial? An Initial Exploration. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 51(2), 118-
122. https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2019.1593561


Fanciullacci, M., Bene, E. D., Franchi, G., & Sicuteri, F. (1977). Brief report: Phantom
limb pain: sub-hallucinogenic treatment with lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-
25). Headache, 17(3), 118-119. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1526-
4610.1977.hed1703118.x


Flanagan, T. W., & Nichols, C. D. (2018). Psychedelics as anti-inflammatory agents.
International Review of Psychiatry, 30(4), 363-375.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09540261.2018.1481827


110

[PAGE 122]

Fricke, J., Lenz, C., Wick, J., Blei, F., & Hoffmeister, D. (2019). Production Options for
Psilocybin: Making of the Magic. Chemistry, 25(4), 897-903.
https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.201802758


Froese, T., Guzman, G., & Guzman-Davalos, L. (2016). On the origin of the genus
Psilocybe and its potential ritual use in Ancient Africa and Europe. Economic
Botany, 70(2), 103-114.


Gable, R. S. (1993). Toward a comparative overview of dependence potential and acute
toxicity of psychoactive substances used nonmedically. American Journal of
Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 19(3), 263-281.
https://do1.org/10.3109/00952999309001618


Gable, R. S. (2004). Comparison of acute lethal toxicity of commonly abused
psychoactive substances. Addiction, 99(6), 686-696.
https://doi.org/10.1111/.1360-0443.2004.00744.x


Galvao-Coelho, N. L., Marx, W., Gonzalez, M., Sinclair, J., de Manincor, M., Perkins,
D., & Sarris, J. (2021). Classic serotonergic psychedelics for mood and depressive
symptoms: a meta-analysis of mood disorder patients and healthy participants.
Psychopharmacology, 238(2), 341-354. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-020-
05719-1


Galvez-Sanchez, C. M., Duschek, S., & Reyes Del Paso, G. A. (2019). Psychological
impact of fibromyalgia: current perspectives. Psychology Research and Behavior
Management, 12, 117-127. https://doi.org/10.2147/PRBM.S178240


Galvez-Sanchez, C. M., Montoro, C. I., Moreno-Padilla, M., Reyes Del Paso, G. A., & de
la Coba, P. (2021). Effectiveness of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy in
Central Pain Sensitization Syndromes: A Systematic Review. J Clin Med, 10(12).
https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm10122706


Garcia-Romeu, A., Davis, A. K., Erowid, E., Erowid, F., Griffiths, R. R., & Johnson, M.
W. (2019). Persisting Reductions in Cannabis, Opioid, and Stimulant Misuse
After Naturalistic Psychedelic Use: An Online Survey. Front Psychiatry, 10, 955.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00955


Garcia-Romeu, A., Griffiths, R. R., & Johnson, M. W. (2014). Psilocybin-occasioned
mystical experiences in the treatment of tobacco addiction. Curr Drug Abuse Rev,
7(3), 157-164. https://do1.org/10.2174/1874473708666150107121331


Geiger, H. A., Wurst, M. G., & Daniels, R. N. (2018). DARK Classics in Chemical
Neuroscience: Psilocybin. ACS Chemical Neuroscience, 9(10), 2438-2447.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00186


111

[PAGE 123]

Geisser, M. E., Robinson, M. E., Keefe, F. J., & Weiner, M. L. (1994). Catastrophizing,
depression and the sensory, affective and evaluative aspects of chronic pain. Pain,
59(1), 79-83. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3959(94)90050-7


Gendelman, O., Amital, H., Bar-On, Y., Ben-Ami Shor, D., Amital, D., Tiosano, S.,
Shalev, V., Chodick, G., & Weitzman, D. (2018). Time to diagnosis of
fibromyalgia and factors associated with delayed diagnosis in primary care. Best
Practice & Research: Clinical Rheumatology, 32(4), 489-499.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2019.01.019

Giannoccaro, M. P., Donadio, V., Incensi, A., Avoni, P., & Liguori, R. (2014). Small
nerve fiber involvement in patients referred for fibromyalgia. Muscle and Nerve,
49(5), 757-759. https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.24156


Glynos, N. G., Fields, C. W., Barron, J., Herberholz, M., Kruger, D. J., & Boehnke, K. F.
(2023). Naturalistic Psychedelic Use: A World Apart from Clinical Care. Journal
of Psychoactive Drugs, 55(4), 379-388.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2022.2108356


Glynos, N. G., Pierce, J., Davis, A. K., McAfee, J., & Boehnke, K. F. (2022).
Knowledge, Perceptions, and Use of Psychedelics among Individuals with
Fibromyalgia. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 1-12.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2021.2022817


Gnall, K. E., Sinnott, S. M., Laumann, L. E., Park, C. L., David, A., & Emrich, M.
(2024). Changes in Interoception in Mind-body Therapies for Chronic Pain: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. International Journal of Behavioral
Medicine. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12529-023-10249-z


Goldberg, S. B., Pace, B. T., Nicholas, C. R., Raison, C. L., & Hutson, P. R. (2020). The
experimental effects of psilocybin on symptoms of anxiety and depression: A
meta-analysis. Psychiatry Research, 284, 112749.
https://do1.org/10.1016/1.psychres.2020.112749

Goldenberg, D. L., Clauw, D. J., Palmer, R. E., & Clair, A. G. (2016). Opioid Use in
Fibromyalgia: A Cautionary Tale. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 91(5), 640-648.
https://do1.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.02.002


Gonzalez-Vives, S., Diaz-Marsa, M., De la Vega, I., Palomares, N., Vazquez, S., Lopez-
Villatoro, J. M., Palomo, T., & Carrasco, J. L. (2020). Hypothalamic-pituitary
axis response to a 0.25-MG dexamethasone test in women with fibromyalgia.
Stress, 23(3), 284-289. https://doi.org/10.1080/10253890.2019.1678024

Goodin, B. R., Ness, T. J., & Robbins, M. T. (2015). Oxytocin - a multifunctional
analgesic for chronic deep tissue pain. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 21(7),
906-913. https://doi.org/10.2174/1381612820666141027111843


112

[PAGE 124]

Gregus, A. M., Levine, I. S., Eddinger, K. A., Yaksh, T. L., & Buczynski, M. W. (2021).
Sex differences in neuroimmune and glial mechanisms of pain. Pain, 162(8),
2186-2200. https://doi.org/10.1097/j.pain.00000000000022 15


Grieshaber, A. F., Moore, K. A., & Levine, B. (2001). The detection of psilocin in human
urine. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 46(3), 627-630.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1 1373000

Grof, S., Goodman, L. E., Richards, W. A., & Kurland, A. A. (1973). LSD-assisted
psychotherapy in patients with terminal cancer. International
Pharmacopsychiatry, 8(3), 129-144. https://doi.org/10.1159/000467984

Guzman, G. (2009). The Hallucinogenic Mushrooms: Diversity, Traditions, Use and
Abuse with Special Reference to the Genus Psilocybe. In J. K. Misra & S. K.
Deshmukh (Eds.), Fungi from different environments (1st ed., pp. 22). CRC Press.
https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429061653


Halberstadt, A. L., Koedood, L., Powell, S. B., & Geyer, M. A. (2011). Differential
contributions of serotonin receptors to the behavioral effects of indoleamine
hallucinogens in mice. J Psychopharmacol, 25(11), 1548-1561.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881 110388326


Harris, R. E., Clauw, D. J., Scott, D. J., McLean, S. A., Gracely, R. H., & Zubieta, J. K.
(2007). Decreased central mu-opioid receptor availability in fibromyalgia.
Journal of Neuroscience, 27(37), 10000-10006.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2849-07.2007


Hasin, D. S., Sarvet, A. L., Meyers, J. L., Saha, T. D., Ruan, W. J., Stohl, M., & Grant, B.
F. (2018). Epidemiology of Adult DSM-5 Major Depressive Disorder and Its
Specifiers in the United States. JAMA Psychiatry, 75(4), 336-346.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.4602


Hasler, F., Bourquin, D., Brenneisen, R., Bar, T., & Vollenweider, F. X. (1997).
Determination of psilocin and 4-hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid in plasma by HPLC-
ECD and pharmacokinetic profiles of oral and intravenous psilocybin in man.
Pharmaceutica Acta Helvetiae, 72(3), 175-184. https://doi.org/10.1016/s003 1-
6865(97)00014-9


Hasler, F., Grimberg, U., Benz, M. A., Huber, T., & Vollenweider, F. X. (2004). Acute
psychological and physiological effects of psilocybin in healthy humans: a
double-blind, placebo-controlled dose-effect study. Psychopharmacology, 172(2),
145-156. https://do1.org/10.1007/500213-003-1640-6


Hauser, W., & Fitzcharles, M. A. (2018). Facts and myths pertaining to fibromyalgia.
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 20(1), 53-62.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29946212


113

[PAGE 125]

Hauser, W., Galek, A., Erbsloh-Moller, B., Kollner, V., Kuhn-Becker, H., Langhorst, J.,
Petermann, F., Prothmann, U., Winkelmann, A., Schmutzer, G., Brahler, E., &
Glaesmer, H. (2013). Posttraumatic stress disorder in fibromyalgia syndrome:
prevalence, temporal relationship between posttraumatic stress and fibromyalgia
symptoms, and impact on clinical outcome. Pain, 154(8), 1216-1223.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2013.03.034


Hauser, W., & Henningsen, P. (2014). Fibromyalgia syndrome: a somatoform disorder?
European Journal of Pain (London, England), 18(8), 1052-1059.
https://do1.org/10.1002/1.1532-2149.2014.00453.x

Hauser, W., Sarzi-Puttini, P., & Fitzcharles, M. A. (2019). Fibromyalgia syndrome:
under-, over- and misdiagnosis. Clinical and Experimental Rheumatology, 37
Suppl 116(1), 90-97. https: //www.ncb1.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30747096


Hirschfeld, T., & Schmidt, T. T. (2021). Dose-response relationships of psilocybin-
induced subjective experiences in humans. J Psychopharmacol, 35(4), 384-397,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881121992676


Hofmann, A. (1980). LSD—My Problem Child. McGraw-Hill Book Company.


Hofmann, A., & Troxler, F. (1959). [Identification of psilocin]. Experientia, 15(3), 101-
102. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02 166696 (Identifizierung von Psilocin.)


Hooten, W. M. (2016). Chronic Pain and Mental Health Disorders: Shared Neural
Mechanisms, Epidemiology, and Treatment. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 91(7),
955-970. https://do1.org/10.1016/1.mayocp.2016.04.029


Hsieh, H. F., & Shannon, S. E. (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.
Qualitative Health Research, 15(9), 1277-1288.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732305276687

Hudson, J. I., Arnold, L. M., Keck, P. E., Jr., Auchenbach, M. B., & Pope, H. G., Jr.
(2004). Family study of fibromyalgia and affective spectrum disorder. Biological
Psychiatry, 56(11), 884-891. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.08.009


Hudson, J. I., Goldenberg, D. L., Pope, H. G., Jr., Keck, P. E., Jr., & Schlesinger, L.
(1992). Comorbidity of fibromyalgia with medical and psychiatric disorders.
American Journal of Medicine, 92(4), 363-367. https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-
9343(92)90265-d

Hutten, N., Mason, N. L., Dolder, P. C., & Kuypers, K. P. C. (2019). Self-Rated
Effectiveness of Microdosing With Psychedelics for Mental and Physical Health
Problems Among Microdosers. Front Psychiatry, 10, 672.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00672


114

[PAGE 126]

Jefsen, O. H., Elfving, B., Wegener, G., & Muller, H. K. (2021). Transcriptional
regulation in the rat prefrontal cortex and hippocampus after a single
administration of psilocybin. J Psychopharmacol, 35(4), 483-493.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881120959614


Jiao, J., Vincent, A., Cha, $. S., Luedtke, C. A., Kim, C. H., & Oh, T. H. (2015). Physical
Trauma and Infection as Precipitating Factors in Patients with Fibromyalgia.
American Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 94(12), 1075-1082.
https://doi.org/10.1097/PHM.0000000000000300


Johnson, M., Richards, W., & Griffiths, R. (2008). Human hallucinogen research:
guidelines for safety. J Psychopharmacol, 22(6), 603-620.
https://do1.org/10.1177/026988 1108093587

Johnson, M. W., Garcia-Romeu, A., & Griffiths, R. R. (2017). Long-term follow-up of
psilocybin-facilitated smoking cessation. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol
Abuse, 43(1), 55-60. https://doi.org/10.3 109/00952990.2016.1170135


Johnson, M. W., Griffiths, R. R., Hendricks, P. S., & Henningfield, J. E. (2018). The
abuse potential of medical psilocybin according to the 8 factors of the Controlled
Substances Act. Neuropharmacology, 142, 143-166.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.05.012

Johnson, M. W., Sewell, R. A., & Griffiths, R. R. (2012). Psilocybin dose-dependently
causes delayed, transient headaches in healthy volunteers. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 123(1-3), 132-140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2011.10.029


Julien, N., Goffaux, P., Arsenault, P., & Marchand, S. (2005). Widespread pain in
fibromyalgia is related to a deficit of endogenous pain inhibition. Pain, 114(1-2),
295-302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2004.12.032


Kaleycheva, N., Cullen, A. E., Evans, R., Harris, T., Nicholson, T., & Chalder, T. (2023).
The role of lifetime stressors in adult fibromyalgia: a response to Joan S.
Crawford's letter to the editor. Psychological Medicine, 53(5), 2190-2191.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291721002828


Kast, E. C., & Collins, V. J. (1964). Study of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide as an
Analgesic Agent. Anesthesia and Analgesia, 43, 285-291.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14169837


Kjorsvik, A., Tjolsen, A., & Hole, K. (2001). Activation of spinal serotonin(2A/2C)
receptors augments nociceptive responses in the rat. Brain Research, 910(1-2),
179-181. https://do1.org/10.1016/50006-8993(01)02652-x


115

[PAGE 127]

Kleykamp, B. A., Ferguson, M. C., McNicol, E., Bixho, I., Arnold, L. M., Edwards, R.
R., Fillingim, R., Grol-Prokopczyk, H., Turk, D. C., & Dworkin, R. H. (2021).
The Prevalence of Psychiatric and Chronic Pain Comorbidities in Fibromyalgia:
an ACTTION systematic review. Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism, 51(1),
166-174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2020.10.006

Kolbman, N., Liu, T., Guzzo, P., Gilligan, J., Mashour, G. A., Vanini, G., & Pal, D.
(2023). Intravenous psilocybin attenuates mechanical hypersensitivity in a rat
model of chronic pain. Current Biology, 33(24), R1282-R1283.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2023.10.016

Kopra, E. I., Ferris, J. A., Winstock, A. R., Kuypers, K. P., Young, A. H., & Rucker, J. J.
(2023). Investigation of self-treatment with lysergic acid diethylamide and
psilocybin mushrooms: Findings from the Global Drug Survey 2020. J
Psychopharmacol, 37(7), 733-748. https://doi.org/10.1177/026988 11231158245


Kosmidis, M. L., Koutsogeorgopoulou, L., Alexopoulos, H., Mamali, I.,
Vlachoyiannopoulos, P. G., Voulgarelis, M., Moutsopoulos, H. M., Tzioufas, A.
G., & Dalakas, M. C. (2014). Reduction of Intraepidermal Nerve Fiber Density
(IENFD) in the skin biopsies of patients with fibromyalgia: a controlled study.
Journal of the Neurological Sciences, 347(1-2), 143-147.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2014.09.035


Krebs, E. E., Lorenz, K. A., Bair, M. J., Damush, T. M., Wu, J., Sutherland, J. M., Asch,
S. M., & Kroenke, K. (2009). Development and initial validation of the PEG, a
three-item scale assessing pain intensity and interference. Journal of General
Internal Medicine, 24(6), 733-738. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-009-098
1-1


Krebs, T. S., & Johansen, P. O. (2012). Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) for alcoholism:
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Psychopharmacol, 26(7), 994-
1002. https://doi.org/10.1177/026988 1112439253


Kudlow, P. A., Rosenblat, J. D., Weissman, C. R., Cha, D. S., Kakar, R., McIntyre, R. S.,
& Sharma, V. (2015). Prevalence of fibromyalgia and co-morbid bipolar disorder:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal ofAffective Disorders, 188, 134-
142. https://do1.org/10.1016/1.jad.2015.08.030


Kuromaru, S., Okada, S., Hanada, M., Kasahara, Y., & Sakamoto, K. (1967). The effect
of LSD on the phantom limb phenomenon. Journal - Lancet, 87(1), 22-27.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6043203

Lacasse, A., Bourgault, P., & Choiniere, M. (2016). Fibromyalgia-related costs and loss
of productivity: a substantial societal burden. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders,
17, 168. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-016-1027-6


116

[PAGE 128]

Lea, T., Amada, N., Jungaberle, H., Schecke, H., & Klein, M. (2020). Microdosing
psychedelics: Motivations, subjective effects and harm reduction. International
Journal on Drug Policy, 75, 102600.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2019.11.008

Lea, T., Amada, N., Jungaberle, H., Schecke, H., Scherbaum, N., & Klein, M. (2020).
Perceived outcomes of psychedelic microdosing as self-managed therapies for
mental and substance use disorders. Psychopharmacology, 237(5), 1521-1532.
https://do1.org/10.1007/500213-020-05477-0


Lee, Y. H., Choi, S. J., Ji, J. D., & Song, G. G. (2012). Candidate gene studies of
fibromyalgia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Rheumatology
International, 320), 417-426. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-010-1678-9


Letheby, C., & Gerrans, P. (2017). Self unbound: ego dissolution in psychedelic
experience. Neurosci Conscious, 2017(1), nix016.
https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/nix016


Ley, L., Holze, F., Arikci, D., Becker, A. M., Straumann, I., Klaiber, A., Coviello, F.,
Dierbach, S., Thomann, J., Duthaler, U., Luethi, D., Varghese, N., Eckert, A., &
Liechti, M. E. (2023). Comparative acute effects of mescaline, lysergic acid
diethylamide, and psilocybin in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
cross-over study in healthy participants. Neuropsychopharmacology, 48(11),
1659-1667. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386-023-01607-2


Lindstedt, F., Berrebi, J., Greayer, E., Lonsdorf, T. B., Schalling, M., Ingvar, M., &
Kosek, E. (2011). Conditioned pain modulation is associated with common
polymorphisms in the serotonin transporter gene. PloS One, 6(3), e18252.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0018252


Loge-Hagen, J. S., Saele, A., Juhl, C., Bech, P., Stenager, E., & Mellentin, A. I. (2019).
Prevalence of depressive disorder among patients with fibromyalgia: Systematic
review and meta-analysis. Journal ofAffective Disorders, 245, 1098-1105.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2018.12.001

Lyes, M., Yang, K. H., Castellanos, J., & Furnish, T. (2023). Microdosing psilocybin for
chronic pain: a case series. Pain, 164(4), 698-702.
https://doi.org/10.1097/].pain.0000000000002778


Madsen, M. K., Fisher, P. M., Burmester, D., Dyssegaard, A., Stenbaek, D. S.,
Kristiansen, S., Johansen, S. S., Lehel, S., Linnet, K., Svarer, C., Erritzoe, D.,
Ozenne, B., & Knudsen, G. M. (2019). Psychedelic effects of psilocybin correlate
with serotonin 2A receptor occupancy and plasma psilocin levels.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 44(7), 1328-1334. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386-
019-0324-9


117

[PAGE 129]

Madsen, M. K., Stenbaek, D. S., Arvidsson, A., Armand, S., Marstrand-Joergensen, M.
R., Johansen, S. S., Linnet, K., Ozenne, B., Knudsen, G. M., & Fisher, P. M.
(2021). Psilocybin-induced changes in brain network integrity and segregation
correlate with plasma psilocin level and psychedelic experience. European
Neuropsychopharmacology, 50, 121-132.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroneuro.2021.06.001


Manevski, N., Kurkela, M., Hoglund, C., Mauriala, T., Court, M. H., Yli-Kauhaluoma, J.,
& Finel, M. (2010). Glucuronidation of psilocin and 4-hydroxyindole by the
human UDP-glucuronosyltransferases. Drug Metabolism and Disposition: The
Biological Fate of Chemicals, 38(3), 386-395.
https://doi.org/10.1124/dmd.109.031138


Marques, A. P., Santo, A., Berssaneti, A. A., Matsutani, L. A., & Yuan, S. L. K. (2017).
Prevalence of fibromyalgia: literature review update. Rev Bras Reumatol Engl Ed,
57(4), 356-363. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rbre.2017.01.005


Mascarenhas, R. O., Souza, M. B., Oliveira, M. X., Lacerda, A. C., Mendonca, V. A.,
Henschke, N., & Oliveira, V. C. (2021). Association of Therapies With Reduced
Pain and Improved Quality of Life in Patients With Fibromyalgia: A Systematic
Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med, 181(1), 104-112.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.5651

Mason, N. L., & Kuypers, K. P. (2018). Mental health of a self-selected sample of
psychedelic users and self-medication practices with psychedelics. Journal of
Psychedelic Studies, 2(1), 45-52.


Mason, N. L., Kuypers, K. P. C., Muller, F., Reckweg, J., Tse, D. H. Y., Toennes, S. W.,
Hutten, N., Jansen, J. F. A., Stiers, P., Feilding, A., & Ramaekers, J. G. (2020).
Me, myself, bye: regional alterations in glutamate and the experience of ego
dissolution with psilocybin. Neuropsychopharmacology, 45(12), 2003-2011.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386-020-0718-8


Matzopoulos, R., Morlock, R., Morlock, A., Lerer, B., & Lerer, L. (2021). Psychedelic
Mushrooms in the USA: Knowledge, Patterns of Use, and Association With
Health Outcomes. Front Psychiatry, 12, 780696.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.202
1.780696

Meester, I., Rivera-Silva, G. F., & Gonzalez-Salazar, F. (2019). Immune System Sex
Differences May Bridge the Gap Between Sex and Gender in Fibromyalgia.
Frontiers in Neuroscience, 13, 1414. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2019.01414


118

[PAGE 130]

Meeus, M., Goubert, D., De Backer, F., Struyf, F., Hermans, L., Coppieters, I., De
Wandele, I., Da Silva, H., & Calders, P. (2013). Heart rate variability in patients
with fibromyalgia and patients with chronic fatigue syndrome: a systematic
review. Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism, 43(2), 279-287.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2013.03.004


Meeus, M., & Nijs, J. (2007). Central sensitization: a biopsychosocial explanation for
chronic widespread pain in patients with fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue
syndrome. Clinical Rheumatology, 26(4), 465-473.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-006-0433-9


Mekhael, A. A., Bent, J. E., Fawcett, J. M., Campbell, T. S., Aguirre-Camacho, A.,
Farrell, A., & Rash, J. A. (2023). Evaluating the efficacy of oxytocin for pain
management: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
clinical trials and observational studies. Can J Pain, 7(1), 2191114.
https://doi.org/10.1080/24740527.2023.2191114


Menzies, V., Taylor, A. G., & Bourguignon, C. (2006). Effects of guided imagery on
outcomes of pain, functional status, and self-efficacy in persons diagnosed with
fibromyalgia. Journal ofAlternative and Complementary Medicine, 12(1), 23-30.
https://doi.org/10.1089/acm.2006.12.23


Michael, P., Luke, D., & Robinson, O. (2023). An encounter with the self: A thematic
and content analysis ofthe DMT experience from a naturalistic field study.
Frontiers in Psychology, 14, 1083356.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1083356


Milne, N., Thomsen, P., Molgaard Knudsen, N., Rubaszka, P., Kristensen, M., &
Borodina, I. (2020). Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the
de novo production of psilocybin and related tryptamine derivatives. Metab Eng,
60, 25-36. https://do1.org/10.1016/1.ymben.2019.12.007


Moreno, F. A., Wiegand, C. B., Taitano, E. K., & Delgado, P. L. (2006). Safety,
tolerability, and efficacy of psilocybin in 9 patients with obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67(11), 1735-1740.
https://doi.org/10.4088/jcp.v67n1110


Nau, F., Jr., Miller, J., Saravia, J., Ahlert, T., Yu, B., Happel, K. I., Cormier, S. A., &
Nichols, C. D. (2015). Serotonin 5-HT(2) receptor activation prevents allergic
asthma in a mouse model. American Journal of Physiology: Lung Cellular and
Molecular Physiology, 308(2), L191-198.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplung.00138.2013


Nau, F., Jr., Yu, B., Martin, D., & Nichols, C. D. (2013). Serotonin 5-HT2A receptor
activation blocks TNF-alpha mediated inflammation in vivo. PloS One, 8(10),
e75426. https://do1.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0075426


119

[PAGE 131]

Nichols, D. E. (2016). Psychedelics. Pharmacological Reviews, 68(2), 264-355.
https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.115.011478

Nichols, D. E., Johnson, M. W., & Nichols, C. D. (2017). Psychedelics as Medicines: An
Emerging New Paradigm. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 101(2), 209-
219. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.557


O'Brien, A. T., Deitos, A., Trinanes Pego, Y., Fregni, F., & Carrillo-de-la-Pena, M. T.
(2018). Defective Endogenous Pain Modulation in Fibromyalgia: A Meta-
Analysis of Temporal Summation and Conditioned Pain Modulation Paradigms.
Journal of Pain, 19(8), 819-836. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2018.01.010

O'Mahony, L. F., Srivastava, A., Mehta, P., & Ciurtin, C. (2021). Is fibromyalgia
associated with a unique cytokine profile? A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Rheumatology (Oxford, England), 60(6), 2602-2614.
https://do1.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keab146


Oaklander, A. L., Herzog, Z. D., Downs, H. M., & Klein, M. M. (2013). Objective
evidence that small-fiber polyneuropathy underlies some illnesses currently
labeled as fibromyalgia. Pain, 154(11), 2310-2316.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2013.06.001


Okifuji, A., Gao, J., Bokat, C., & Hare, B. D. (2016). Management of fibromyalgia
syndrome in 2016. Pain Manag, 6(4), 383-400. https://doi.org/10.2217/pmt-2016-
0006


Ona, G., & Troncoso, S. (2019). Long-lasting analgesic effect of the psychedelic drug
changa: A case report. Journal of Psychedelic Studies, 3(1), 7-13.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1556/2054.2019.001

Osmond, H. (1957). A review of the clinical effects of psychotomimetic agents. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences, 66(3), 418-434.
https://do1.org/10.1111/1.1749-6632.1957.tb40738.x


Parkitny, L., & Younger, J. (2017). Reduced Pro-Inflammatory Cytokines after Eight
Weeks of Low-Dose Naltrexone for Fibromyalgia. Biomedicines, 5(2).
https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines5020016


Passie, T., Seifert, J., Schneider, U., & Emrich, H. M. (2002). The pharmacology of
psilocybin. Addiction Biology, 7(4), 357-364.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1355621021000005937


Pastrak, M., Abd-Elsayed, A., Ma, F., Vrooman, B., & Visnjevac, O. (2021). Systematic
Review of the Use of Intravenous Ketamine for Fibromyalgia. Ochsner J, 21(4),
387-394. https://doi.org/10.31486/t0].21.0038


120

[PAGE 132]

Patten, D. K., Schultz, B. G., & Berlau, D. J. (2018). The Safety and Efficacy of Low-
Dose Naltrexone in the Management of Chronic Pain and Inflammation in
Multiple Sclerosis, Fibromyalgia, Crohn's Disease, and Other Chronic Pain
Disorders. Pharmacotherapy, 38(3), 382-389. https://doi.org/10.1002/phar.2086

Penn, I. W., Chuang, E., Chuang, T. Y., Lin, C. L., & Kao, C. H. (2019). Bidirectional
association between migraine and fibromyalgia: retrospective cohort analyses of
two populations. BMJ Open, (4), e026581. https://doi.org/10.1 136/bmjopen-
2018-02658 1


Pestana, J., Beccaria, F., & Petrilli, E. (2021). Psychedelic substance use in the Reddit
psychonaut community. A qualitative study on motives and modalities. Drugs and
Alcohol Today, 21(2), 112-123. https://doi.org/10.1108/DAT-03-2020-0016

Petrini, L., & Arendt-Nielsen, L. (2020). Understanding Pain Catastrophizing: Putting
Pieces Together. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 603420.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.603420

Polito, V., & Liknaitzky, P. (2022). The emerging science of microdosing: A systematic
review of research on low dose psychedelics (1955-2021) and recommendations
for the field. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 139, 104706.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104706

Preller, K. H., & Vollenweider, F. X. (2018). Phenomenology, Structure, and Dynamic of
Psychedelic States. Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences, 36, 221-256.
2016 459
https://doi.org/10.1007/7854

Pyke, T. L., Osmotherly, P. G., & Baines, $. (2017). Measuring Glutamate Levels in the
Brains of Fibromyalgia Patients and a Potential Role for Glutamate in the
Pathophysiology of Fibromyalgia Symptoms: A Systematic Review. Clinical
Journal of Pain, 33(10), 944-954.
https://doi.org/10.1097/AJP.0000000000000474

Raison, C. L., Jain, R., Penn, A. D., Cole, S. P., & Jain, S. (2022). Effects of Naturalistic
Psychedelic Use on Depression, Anxiety, and Well-Being: Associations With
Patterns of Use, Reported Harms, and Transformative Mental States. Front
Psychiatry, 13, 831092. https://doi.org/10.33 89/fpsyt.2022.831092

Ramachandran, V., Chunharas, C., Marcus, Z., Furnish, T., & Lin, A. (2018). Relief from
intractable phantom pain by combining psilocybin and mirror visual-feedback
(MVF). Neurocase, 24(2), 105-110.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13554794.2018.1468469


121

[PAGE 133]

Ramaekers, J. G., Hutten, N., Mason, N. L., Dolder, P., Theunissen, E. L., Holze, F.,
Liechti, M. E., Feilding, A., & Kuypers, K. P. (2020). A low dose of lysergic acid
diethylamide decreases pain perception in healthy volunteers. J
Psychopharmacol, 26988 1120940937.
https://doi.org/10.1177/026988 1120940937


Raphael, K. G., Janal, M. N., Nayak, S., Schwartz, J. E., & Gallagher, R. M. (2006).
Psychiatric comorbidities in a community sample of women with fibromyalgia.
Pain, 124(1-2), 117-125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2006.04.004


Reed, B. D., Harlow, S. D., Sen, A., Edwards, R. M., Chen, D., & Haefner, H. K. (2012).
Relationship between vulvodynia and chronic comorbid pain conditions.
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 120(1), 145-151.
https://do1.org/10.1097/4A0G.0b013e31825957cf


Reynolds, M. D. (1978). Clinical diagnosis of psychogenic rheumatism. Western Journal
of Medicine, 128(4), 285-290. https: //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/307307


Riva, R., Mork, P. J., Westgaard, R. H., Ro, M., & Lundberg, U. (2010). Fibromyalgia
syndrome is associated with hypocortisolism. International Journal of Behavioral
Medicine, 17(3), 223-233. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12529-010-9097-6


Rootman, J. M., Kryskow, P., Harvey, K., Stamets, P., Santos-Brault, E., Kuypers, K. P.
C., Polito, V., Bourzat, F., & Walsh, Z. (2021). Adults who microdose
psychedelics report health related motivations and lower levels of anxiety and
depression compared to non-microdosers. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 22479.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-01811-4


Ross, S., Bossis, A., Guss, J., Agin-Liebes, G., Malone, T., Cohen, B., Mennenga, S. E.,
Belser, A., Kalliontzi, K., Babb, J., Su, Z., Corby, P., & Schmidt, B. L. (2016).
Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilocybin treatment for
anxiety and depression in patients with life-threatening cancer: a randomized
controlled trial. J Psychopharmacol, 30(12), 1165-1180.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881116675512


Rubio Fidel, L., Garcia-Palacios, A., Herrero, R., Molinari, G., & Suso-Ribera, C. (2022).
Coping and Beliefs as Predictors of Functioning and Psychological Adjustment in
Fibromyalgia Subgroups. Pain Res Manag, 2022, 1066192.
https://do1.org/10.1155/2022/1066192


Rucker, J. J., Jelen, L. A., Flynn, S., Frowde, K. D., & Young, A. H. (2016). Psychedelics
in the treatment of unipolar mood disorders: a systematic review. J
Psychopharmacol, 30(12), 1220-1229.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881 116679368


122

[PAGE 134]

Russell, I. J., Orr, M. D., Littman, B., Vipraio, G. A., Alboukrek, D., Michalek, J. E.,
Lopez, Y., & MacKillip, F. (1994). Elevated cerebrospinal fluid levels of
substance P in patients with the fibromyalgia syndrome. Arthritis and
Rheumatism, 37(11), 1593-1601. https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780371106


Russell, I. J., Vaeroy, H., Javors, M., & Nyberg, F. (1992). Cerebrospinal fluid biogenic
amine metabolites in fibromyalgia/fibrositis syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis.
Arthritis and Rheumatism, 35(5), 550-556.
https://doi.org/10.1002/art. 1780350509


Rusu, C., Gee, M. E., Lagace, C., & Parlor, M. (2015). Chronic fatigue syndrome and
fibromyalgia in Canada: prevalence and associations with six health status
indicators. Health Promot Chronic Dis Prev Can, 35(1), 3-11.
https://doi.org/10.24095/hpcdp.35.1.02


Sanchez-Brualla, I., Boulenguez, P., Brocard, C., Liabeuf, S., Viallat-Lieutaud, A.,
Navarro, X., Udina, E., & Brocard, F. (2018). Activation of 5-HT2A Receptors
Restores KCC2 Function and Reduces Neuropathic Pain after Spinal Cord Injury.
Neuroscience, 387, 48-57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.08.033


Sarchielli, P., Di Filippo, M., Nardi, K., & Calabresi, P. (2007). Sensitization, glutamate,
and the link between migraine and fibromyalgia. Curr Pain Headache Rep, 11(5),
343-351. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11916-007-0216-2


Sarzi Puttini, P., & Caruso, I. (1992). Primary fibromyalgia syndrome and 5-hydroxy-L-
tryptophan: a 90-day open study. Journal of International Medical Research,
20(2), 182-189. https://doi.org/10.1177/030006059202000210


Sasaki, M., Obata, H., Saito, S., & Goto, F. (2003). Antinociception with intrathecal
alpha-methyl-5-hydroxytryptamine, a 5-hydroxytryptamine 2A/2C receptor
agonist, in two rat models of sustained pain. Anesthesia and Analgesia, 96(4),
1072-1078. https://doi.org/10.1213/01.ANE.0000050560.15341.A8


Schindler, E. A., Gottschalk, C. H., Weil, M. J., Shapiro, R. E., Wright, D. A., & Sewell,
R. A. (2015). Indoleamine Hallucinogens in Cluster Headache: Results of the
Clusterbusters Medication Use Survey. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 47(5),
372-381. https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2015.1107664


Schindler, E. A. D., Sewell, R. A., Gottschalk, C. H., Luddy, C., Flynn, L. T., Lindsey,
H., Pittman, B. P., Cozzi, N. V., & D'Souza, D. C. (2021). Exploratory Controlled
Study of the Migraine-Suppressing Effects of Psilocybin. Neurotherapeutics,
18(1), 534-543. https://doi.org/10.1007/s133 11-020-00962-y


123

[PAGE 135]

Schindler, E. A. D., Sewell, R. A., Gottschalk, C. H., Luddy, C., Flynn, L. T., Zhu, Y.,
Lindsey, H., Pittman, B. P., Cozzi, N. V., & D'Souza, D. C. (2022). Exploratory
investigation of a patient-informed low-dose psilocybin pulse regimen in the
suppression of cluster headache: Results from a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Headache, 62(10), 1383-1394.
https://doi.org/10.1111/head. 14420

Schmidt-Wilcke, T., & Diers, M. (2017). New Insights into the Pathophysiology and
Treatment of Fibromyalgia. Biomedicines, 5(2).
https://do1.org/10.3390/biomedicines5020022


Schultes, R. E. (1938). The appeal of peyote (Lophophora williamsii) as a medicine.
American Anthropologist, 40(4), 698-715.


Sewell, R. A., Halpern, J. H., & Pope, H. G., Jr. (2006). Response of cluster headache to
psilocybin and LSD. Neurology, 66(12), 1920-1922.
https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000219761.05466.43


Shibasaki, K. (2016). Physiological significance of TRPV2 as a mechanosensor,
thermosensor and lipid sensor. Journal of Physiological Sciences, 66(5), 359-365.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12576-016-0434-7

Singh, L., Kaur, A., Bhatti, M. S., & Bhatti, R. (2019). Possible Molecular Mediators
Involved and Mechanistic Insight into Fibromyalgia and Associated Co-
morbidities. Neurochemical Research, 44(7), 1517-1532.
https://do1.org/10.1007/s11064-019-02805-5


Sluka, K. A., & Clauw, D. J. (2016). Neurobiology of fibromyalgia and chronic
widespread pain. Neuroscience, 338, 114-129.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.06.006

Smith, S. B., Maixner, D. W., Fillingim, R. B., Slade, G., Gracely, R. H., Ambrose, K.,
Zaykin, D. V., Hyde, C., John, S., Tan, K., Maixner, W., & Diatchenko, L.
(2012). Large candidate gene association study reveals genetic risk factors and
therapeutic targets for fibromyalgia. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 64(2), 584-593.
https://do1.org/10.1002/art.33338


Srinivasan, S., Maloney, E., Wright, B., Kennedy, M., Kallail, K. J., Rasker, J. J., Hauser,
W., & Wolfe, F. (2019). The Problematic Nature of Fibromyalgia Diagnosis in
the Community. ACR Open Rheumatol, 1(1), 43-51.
https://do1.org/10.1002/acr2.1006


Studerus, E., Kometer, M., Hasler, F., & Vollenweider, F. X. (2011). Acute, subacute and
long-term subjective effects of psilocybin in healthy humans: a pooled analysis of
experimental studies. J Psychopharmacol, 25(11), 1434-1452.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881 110382466


124

[PAGE 136]

Tak, L. M., Cleare, A. J., Ormel, J., Manoharan, A., Kok, I. C., Wessely, S., & Rosmalen,
J. G. (2011). Meta-analysis and meta-regression of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis activity in functional somatic disorders. Biological Psychology, 87(2), 183-
194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2011.02.002

Tangen, S. F., Helvik, A. S., Eide, H., & Fors, E. A. (2020). Pain acceptance and its
impact on function and symptoms in fibromyalgia. Scand J Pain, 20(4), 727-736.
https://doi.org/10.1515/sjpain-2020-0049

Tao, Z. Y., Wang, P. X., Wei, S. Q., Traub, R. J., Li, J. F., & Cao, D. Y. (2019). The Role
of Descending Pain Modulation in Chronic Primary Pain: Potential Application of
Drugs Targeting Serotonergic System. Neural Plasticity, 2019, 1389296.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/1389296

Teixeira, P. J., Johnson, M. W., Timmermann, C., Watts, R., Erritzoe, D., Douglass, H.,
Kettner, H., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2022). Psychedelics and health behaviour
change. J Psychopharmacol, 36(1), 12-19.
https://doi.org/10.1177/026988 11211008554

Tracy, L. M., Ioannou, L., Baker, K. S., Gibson, S. J., Georgiou-Karistianis, N., &
Giummarra, M. J. (2016). Meta-analytic evidence for decreased heart rate
variability in chronic pain implicating parasympathetic nervous system
dysregulation. Pain, 157(1), 7-29.
https://doi.org/10.1097/].pain.0000000000000360

Tyls, F., Palenicek, T., & Horacek, J. (2014). Psilocybin--summary of knowledge and
new perspectives. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 24(3), 342-356.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroneuro.2013.12.006

Vallejo, M. A., Vallejo-Slocker, L., Offenbaecher, M., Hirsch, J. K., Toussaint, L. L.,
Kohls, N., Sirois, F., & Rivera, J. (2021). Psychological Flexibility Is Key for
Reducing the Severity and Impact of Fibromyalgia. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(14).
https://doi.org/10.3390/1jerph18147300

Van Houdenhove, B., & Egle, U. T. (2004). Fibromyalgia: a stress disorder? Piecing the
biopsychosocial puzzle together. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 73(5), 267-
275. https://doi.org/10.1159/000078843

Van Liew, C., Brown, K. C., Cronan, T. A., Bigatti, S. M., & Kothari, D. J. (2013).
Predictors of pain and functioning over time in fibromyalgia syndrome: an
autoregressive path analysis. Arthritis Care & Research, 652), 251-256.
https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.21792


125

[PAGE 137]

Vollenweider, F. X., & Preller, K. H. (2020). Psychedelic drugs: neurobiology and
potential for treatment of psychiatric disorders. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience.
21(11), 611-624. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-020-0367-2


Vollenweider, F. X., Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen, M. F., Babler, A., Vogel, H., &
Hell, D. (1998). Psilocybin induces schizophrenia-like psychosis in humans via a
serotonin-2 agonist action. Neuroreport, 9(17), 3897-3902.
https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-199812010-00024


Walitt, B., Nahin, R. L., Katz, R. S., Bergman, M. J., & Wolfe, F. (2015). The Prevalence
and Characteristics of Fibromyalgia in the 2012 National Health Interview
Survey. PloS One, 10(9), e0138024. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0138024


Welsch, P., Uceyler, N., Klose, P., Walitt, B., & Hauser, W. (2018). Serotonin and
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) for fibromyalgia. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews, 2(2), CD010292.
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010292.pub2

Weston, N. M., Gibbs, D., Bird, C. I. V., Daniel, A., Jelen, L. A., Knight, G., Goldsmith,
D., Young, A. H., & Rucker, J. J. (2020). Historic psychedelic drug trials and the
treatment of anxiety disorders. Depression and Anxiety, 37(12), 1261-1279.
https://doi.org/10.1002/da.23065

Whelan, A., & Johnson, M. I. (2018). Lysergic acid diethylamide and psilocybin for the
management of patients with persistent pain: a potential role? Pain Manag, 8(3),
217-229. https://doi.org/10.2217/pmt-2017-0068


Winter, J. C., Rice, K. C., Amorosi, D. J., & Rabin, R. A. (2007). Psilocybin-induced
stimulus control in the rat. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 87(4),
472-480. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbb.2007.06.003


Wolfe, F., Clauw, D. J., Fitzcharles, M. A., Goldenberg, D. L., Hauser, W., Katz, R. L.,
Mease, P. J., Russell, A. S., Russell, I. J., & Walitt, B. (2016). 2016 Revisions to
the 2010/2011 fibromyalgia diagnostic criteria. Seminars in Arthritis and
Rheumatism, 46(3), 319-329. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2016.08.012


Wolfe, F., Clauw, D. J., Fitzcharles, M. A., Goldenberg, D. L., Hauser, W., Katz, R. S.,
Mease, P., Russell, A. S., Russell, I. J., & Winfield, J. B. (2011). Fibromyalgia
criteria and severity scales for clinical and epidemiological studies: a modification
of the ACR Preliminary Diagnostic Criteria for Fibromyalgia. Journal of
Rheumatology, 38(6), 1113-1122. https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum. 100594


126

[PAGE 138]

Wolfe, F., Clauw, D. J., Fitzcharles, M. A., Goldenberg, D. L., Katz, R. S., Mease, P.,
Russell, A. S., Russell, I. J., Winfield, J. B., & Yunus, M. B. (2010). The
American College of Rheumatology preliminary diagnostic criteria for
fibromyalgia and measurement of symptom severity. Arthritis Care & Research,
62(5), 600-610. https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.20140


Wolfe, F., & Rasker, J. J. (2021). The Evolution of Fibromyalgia, Its Concepts, and
Criteria. Cureus, 13(11), e20010. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.20010


Wolfe, F., Schmukler, J., Jamal, S., Castrejon, I., Gibson, K. A., Srinivasan, S., Hauser,
W., & Pincus, T. (2019). Diagnosis of Fibromyalgia: Disagreement Between
Fibromyalgia Criteria and Clinician-Based Fibromyalgia Diagnosis in a
University Clinic. Arthritis Care & Research, 71(3), 343-351.
https://do1.org/10.1002/acr.23731


Wolfe, F., Smythe, H. A., Yunus, M. B., Bennett, R. M., Bombardier, C., Goldenberg, D.
L., Tugwell, P., Campbell, S. M., Abeles, M., Clark, P., & et al. (1990). The
American College of Rheumatology 1990 Criteria for the Classification of
Fibromyalgia. Report of the Multicenter Criteria Committee. Arthritis and
Rheumatism, 33(2), 160-172. https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780330203


Wolfe, F., Walitt, B., Perrot, S., Rasker, J. J., £ Hauser, W. (2018). Fibromyalgia
diagnosis and biased assessment: Sex, prevalence and bias. PloS One, 13(9),
e0203755. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0203755


Wood, P. B., Schweinhardt, P., Jaeger, E., Dagher, A., Hakyemez, H., Rabiner, E. A.,
Bushnell, M. C., & Chizh, B. A. (2007). Fibromyalgia patients show an abnormal
dopamine response to pain. European Journal of Neuroscience, 25(12), 3576-
3582. https://do1.org/10.1111/1.1460-9568.2007.05623.x


Xie, Z., & Miller, G. M. (2009). Trace amine-associated receptor 1 as a monoaminergic
modulator in brain. Biochemical Pharmacology, 78(9), 1095-1104.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2009.05.031


Xue, Y., Wei, S. Q., Wang, P. X., Wang, W. Y., Liu, E. Q., Traub, R. J., & Cao, D. Y.
(2020). Down-regulation of Spinal 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C Receptors Contributes to
Somatic Hyperalgesia induced by Orofacial Inflammation Combined with Stress.
Neuroscience, 440, 196-209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.05.044


Yavne, Y., Amital, D., Watad, A., Tiosano, S., & Amital, H. (2018). A systematic review
of precipitating physical and psychological traumatic events in the development
of fibromyalgia. Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism, 48(1), 121-133.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2017.12.011


127

[PAGE 139]

Younger, J., & Mackey, S. (2009). Fibromyalgia symptoms are reduced by low-dose
naltrexone: a pilot study. Pain Medicine, 10(4), 663-672.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1526-4637.2009.00613.x

Younger, J., Noor, N., McCue, R., & Mackey, S. (2013). Low-dose naltrexone for the
treatment of fibromyalgia: findings of a small, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, counterbalanced, crossover trial assessing daily pain levels.
Arthritis and Rheumatism, 65(2), 529-538. https://doi.org/10.1002/art.37734

Yu, B., Becnel, J., Zerfaoui, M., Rohatgi, R., Boulares, A. H., & Nichols, C. D. (2008).
Serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine(2A) receptor activation suppresses tumor necrosis
factor-alpha-induced inflammation with extraordinary potency. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 327(2), 316-323.
https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.108.143461

Yuan, X. C., Wang, Y. Y., Tian, L. X., Yan, X. J., Guo, Y. X., Zhao, Y. L., Baba, $. S.,
Jia, H., Wang, H. S., Li, M., & Huo, F. Q. (2022). Spinal 5-HT2A receptor is
involved in electroacupuncture inhibition of chronic pain. Molecular Pain, 18,
17448069221087583. https://doi.org/10.1177/1744806922 1087583

Yunus, M. B. (2002). Gender differences in fibromyalgia and other related syndromes.
Journal of Gender-Specific Medicine, 5(2), 42-47.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11974674

Yunus, M. B. (2007). Fibromyalgia and overlapping disorders: the unifying concept of
central sensitivity syndromes. Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism, 36(6), 339-
356. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.12.009

Zia, F. Z., Baumann, M. H., Belouin, S. J., Dworkin, R. H., Ghauri, M. H., Hendricks, P.
S., Henningfield, J. E., Lanier, R. K., Ross, S., & Berger, A. (2023). Are
psychedelic medicines the reset for chronic pain? Preliminary findings and
research needs. Neuropharmacology, 233, 109528.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2023.109528


128

[PAGE 140]

APPENDIX A


STUDY IRB APPROVAL FORM


129

[PAGE 141]

470 Administration Building
Lie TE UNIVERSITY OF 701 20th Street South
ALABAMA AT BIRMINGHAM Birmingham,
AL 35294-0104
Office of the Institutional Review Board for Human Use 205.934.3789 | Fax A uned.
ir uab.edu


APPROVAL LETTER


TO: Hodgin, Kathleen


FROM: University of Alabama at Birmingham Institutional Review Board

Federalwide Assurance # FWA00005960

IORG Registration # IRBO0000196 (IRB 01)

IORG Registration + IRBO0000726 (IRB 02)

IORG Registration # 1RB00012550 (IRB 03)


DATE: 27-Jun-2022


RE: IRB-300009401
IRB-300009401-002

Classic Psychedelics in Chronic Pain Survey


The IRB reviewed and approved the Initial Application submitted on 23-Jun-2022 for the
above referenced project. The review was conducted in accordance with UAB’s Assurance of
Compliance approved by the Department of Health and Human Services.


Type of Review: Exempt

Exempt Categories: 2

Determination: Exempt
Approval Date: 27-Jun-2022

Approval Period: No Continuing Review


The following apply to this project related to informed consent and/or assent:


e Waiver of HIPAA


Research Project Title:


USE OF PSILOCYBIN AND OTHER CLASSIC PSYCHEDELICS IN FIBROMYALGIA: A SURVEY STUDY


130

[PAGE 142]

Student Name:


KATHLEEN HODGIN


Documents Included in Review:


e |RB EPORTFOLIO

e IRB PERSONNEL EFORM


To access stamped consent/assent forms (full and expedited protocols only) and/or other
approved documents:
1. Open your protocol in IRAP.
2. On the Submissions page, open the submission corresponding to this approval letter. NOTE:
The Determination for the submission will be “Approved.”
3. In the list of documents, select and download the desired approved documents. The
stamped consent/assent form(s) will be listed with a category of Consent/Assent Document
(CF, AF, Info Sheet, Phone Script, etc.)


131

[PAGE 143]

APPENDIX B


SURVEY


132

[PAGE 144]

Classic Psychedelics in Chronic Pain Survey _UAB IRB Protocol #: IRB-300009401

SECTION | (Informed Consent)


The purpose of this research is to learn more about how classic psychedelics might interact with chronic
widespread pain, such as in fibromyalgia. We are interested in hearing from individuals who have
experienced chronic, widespread pain, and have taken a classic psychedelic (psilocybin mushrooms,
LSD, mescaline, peyote or San Pedro cactus, DMT or ayahuasca). Please do not count drugs such as
cannabis/marijuana, MDMA/ecstasy, MDA, ketamine, PCP, nitrous oxide, or salvia divinorum.


If you agree to join this research study, you will be presented with questions about your health, pain,
substance use, and experience(s) with use of psychedelics. You will be asked about any changes in pain
or other symptoms related to past psychedelic experiences. Participation in this study takes on average
30 minutes.


If you complete this study, you will have an option to enter into a random drawing for a $50 e-gift
card. Your name and email address will be collected on a form that is separate from your survey
responses so that they will not be linked in any way.


Your participation in this research is voluntary and you may withdraw from the study at any time. Your
responses will be kept confidential. If you complete the written section of the survey, we may quote
from your text responses. However, if you provide specific identifying information, we will edit your
responses to protect your confidentiality. All data is encrypted and maintained on password-protected
servers that only the research team can access.


There is a chance that you may experience emotional distress or discomfort when asked to recall or
describe experiences during the survey. You may discontinue this survey at any time.

If you have any questions or concerns about the research, please contact Kathleen Hodgin at
psychedelicpainsurvey@gmail.com. If you have questions about your rights as a research participant, or
concerns or complaints about the research, you may contact the UAB Office of the IRB (OIRB) at (205)
934-3789 or toll free at 1-855-860-3789. Regular hours for the OIRB are 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. CT,
Monday through Friday.

If you are not ready to complete the survey now, please return to this page at a time that is convenient
for you. During the survey, please do not hit the "back" button on your internet browser as it may erase
your answers or prematurely terminate your session. We recommend using a tablet or computer,
rather than a cell phone, to complete this survey if possible. Please try to complete the survey in one
sitting.


By clicking 'l consent, begin the study' you affirm that:

1, You have read the information above
2. You voluntarily agree to participate
3. You are at least 18 years old


O | consent, begin the study
O I do not consent, | do not wish to participate


133

[PAGE 145]

SECTION II (Inclusion/Exclusion Questions)


2.1. Before you proceed, please complete the captcha below:
(Participants will be required to complete a captcha verification to proceed)


2.2. Have you previously taken this survey?
O Yes
O No
O Don't know


2.3. Are you at least 18 years of age or older?
O Yes
O No


2.4. Have you ever had chronic pain?
O Yes
O No


2.5. Have you ever taken a classic psychedelic substance, such as psilocybin or psilocybin
mushrooms, LSD, DMT, 5-MeO-DMT, mescaline, or ayahuasca?


Please do not count drugs that are sometimes labeled psychedelics such as cannabis/marijuana,
MDMA/ecstasy, MDA, ketamine, PCP, nitrous oxide, or salvia divinorum.


O Yes
O No


If no to any of the above questions, end survey.


134

[PAGE 146]

SECTION Ill (Health History and Pain Assessment)


3.1, Have you ever been diagnosed with fibromyalgia by a physician or other medical
professional?
O Yes
O No
O Don’t know
© Prefer not to answer


If yes: 3.2. What year were you diagnosed? (Please type your response):


3.3. Have you ever been diagnosed with any other pain conditions?
O Yes
O No
O Don't know
O Prefer not to answer


If yes: 3.4. What pain conditions?


3.5. Which of the following best describes your pain?
U] Pain exists throughout the body
U] Pain is migratory (moves around)
U Pain is limited to a specific region of the body
O Don’t know
U] Does not apply to me / | do not currently have pain
LJ Prefer not to answer


135

[PAGE 147]

3.6. Please indicate if you have had pain or tenderness in any of the areas below over the past
7 days (select all that apply).


*Shoulder girdle: muscles over your shoulder blade and collar bone


O Shoulder girdle*, Left
U] Shoulder girdle*, Right
LJ Upper Arm, Left
U Upper Arm, Right
U] Lower Arm, Left
U Lower Arm, Right
U Hip (buttock, trochanter), Left
O Hip (buttock, trochanter), Right
U Upper Leg, Left
O Upper Leg, Right
U] Lower Leg, Left
U Lower Leg, Right
O Jaw, Left
O Jaw, Right
C Chest
LJ Abdomen
O Upper Back
O Lower Back
LJ Neck
O NO PAIN
O Prefer not to answer


If any of the above pain areas are selected:

3.7. How long have you experienced this pain? (Please type your response in days, months, OR

years)
O I’ve experienced this pain for ___ days (please type # of days)
O I’ve experienced this pain for ____ months (please type # of months)
O I’ve experienced this pain for___ years (please type # of years)
O Don't know
O Prefer not to answer


136

[PAGE 148]

3.8. Using the following scale, indicate for each item your severity over the past week by selecting the
appropriate option.


Slight or mila | Moderate;
considerable
problems; Severe:
‘ problems; ; Prefer
No Problem | generally mild continuous,
often present | . : = not to
(0) or life-disturbing
. . and/or ata answer
intermittent problems (3)
(1) moderate level

(2)
Fatigue O O O O ©

Trouble thinking O O O O O
or remembering
Waking up tired
(unrefreshed) O pl si E =
3.9. During the past 6 months have you had any of the following symptoms?


Yes No Prefer not to answer
Pain or cramps in O O O
lower abdomen
Depression O O O
Headache O O O


3.10. Do you believe one or more certain events (injury, illness, experience, etc.) was linked to
the start of your pain?


O Yes
O No
O Prefer not to answer


3.11. If so, please describe the event(s):


137

[PAGE 149]

3.12. Please rate your pain by selecting the number that best describes your pain on average
in the past week.


00 O1 O2 O3 04 O5 O6 O7 08 09 O 10
No Pain as
Pain bad as you
can

imagine


3.13. What number best describes how, during the past week, pain has interfered with your
enjoyment of life?


00 O1 O2 03 O4 O5 06 O7 08 O9 © 10
Does Completely
not interferes
interfere


3.14, What number best describes how, during the past week, pain has interfered with your
general activity?


00 O1 O2 O3 O4 O5 O6 O7 O8 O9 © 10
Does not Completely
interfere interferes


3.15. Please list any medical diagnoses or health conditions you currently have, including any
current physical and mental health conditions: /f none, please enter "None"


3.16. What medications do you currently take? (Please list all current medications, including
prescribed and over-the-counter, and any supplements/vitamins): /f none, please enter "None"


138

[PAGE 150]

3.17. On average per week, how many drinks containing alcohol do you consume?
00
O 1-2
O 3-4
O 5-6
O 7 or more
O Prefer not to answer


3.18. Do you use any nicotine or tobacco products?
O Yes
O No
O Prefer not to answer


3.19. Do you use any of the following substances regularly (at least once a month)? (Select all
that apply)
O Cannabis/marijuana
O CBD or cannabidiol products
O Benzodiazepines, non-prescribed (e.g., Xanax, Ativan, Klonopin)
O Opioids, non-prescribed (e.g., OxyContin, Percocet)
O Amphetamines, non-prescribed (e.g., Ritalin, Adderall)
O Methamphetamine (crystal meth)
L] MDMA (ecstasy, molly)
O Cocaine
O Ketamine
O Salvia divinorum (salvia)
O PCP (phencyclidine)
O Kratom
O Heroin
O Synthetic cannabinoids (e.g., K2, Spice)
O Barbiturates
L] Synthetic cathinones (e.g., bath salts, Flakka)
O Not listed here (Please describe):
O | do not use any of these substances regularly
O Prefer not to answer


3.20. How would you rate your knowledge about classic psychedelics (LSD, psilocybin
mushrooms, ayahuasca, mescaline, etc.)?
O Not at all knowledgeable
O Slightly knowledgeable
O Moderately knowledgeable
O Very knowledgeable
O Extremely knowledgeable
O Prefer not to answer


139

[PAGE 151]

SECTION IV (Psychedelic Use and Relation to Pain)


4.1. On how many
separate occasions
have you taken one More
or more of the 51- 101- | than
psychedelic 2-5 6-10 | 11-20 | 21-50 | 100 300 300
substances below? Never | Once | times | times | times | times | times | times | times

Psilocybin mushrooms O O O O O ¡o O a O

Psilocybin (synthetic) O O O O ¡o O O O O
LSD (acid) O O O O O O O O O

DMT O O O O O O O O O

5-MeO-DMT O O O O O O © O O

Aya huasca O © O O (©) O O O Oo

Mescaline (synthetic,
extracted, San Pedro o O O O O O O O O
cactus, or Peyote cactus)

Other: O O © O O O O O O

Other: O O O O O O O O O


140

[PAGE 152]

4.2. How old were you when you first took a psychedelic substance?

4,3. How old were you when you most recently used a psychedelic substance?


4.4. What was the first psychedelic substance you ever used?
© Ayahuasca
DMT
5-MeO-DMT
LSD (acid)
Mescaline (Peyote cactus, San Pedro cactus, extracted, synthetic)
Psilocybin mushrooms
Psilocybin (synthetic)
Other (please describe):
Don't know
000000000 Multiple psychedelic substances (please describe):


4.5. What psychedelic substance did you most recently use?
Ayahuasca
DMT
5-MeO-DMT
LSD (acid)
Mescaline (Peyote cactus, San Pedro cactus, extracted, synthetic)
Psilocybin mushrooms
Psilocybin (synthetic)
Other (please describe):
Don't know
0000000000 Multiple psychedelic substances (please describe):


4.6. What kinds of psychedelic doses have you used?
O Only full or macrodose(s) (elicits perceptual effects)
O Only microdose(s) (very low dose, elicits sub-perceptual effects)
O Both full dose(s) and microdose(s)
O Don't know
O Prefer not to answer


4.7. For what reasons have you used psychedelics? (Select all that apply)

O For fun/recreation
O Curiosity
[|] General mental health and well-being
LJ Personal growth or self-exploration
O Spiritual exploration or experience
O To enhance an activity (such as listening to music, etc.) (Please describe):
O Social reasons (part of social context)
O To feel more connected to nature
O To broaden your consciousness/take a different perspective on the world
O To feel euphoric or elated
DL] Asan escape


141

[PAGE 153]

U To manage or treat a mental health condition (please describe):
[|] To manage or treat a health problem (please describe):
O To address a specific worry or concern in your life (please describe):
U To manage past trauma
[| No reason
CJ Other, please describe:
[| Prefer not to answer


4.8. If desired, please elaborate on your strongest reasons for using psychedelics below:


4.9. Have you ever experienced a change in your pain that was related to the use of a
psychedelic substance?
O Yes
O No
O Don't know
O Prefer not to answer


If no, skip to Section V (Demographics)


4.10. How many times have you experienced a change in your pain that was related to the use
of a psychedelic? (Please select the number of separate occasions in which you experienced
any change in your pain related to a psychedelic)
O 1 time
O 2 times
O 3-5 times
O 6-10 times
O >10 times (please enter approximate number):
O Don't know
O Prefer not to answer


142

[PAGE 154]

4.11. For the following questions, please bring to mind the psychedelic experience that was associated
with a change in your pain. If you have had multiple, different experiences you wish to describe, there
will be an opportunity to do so later in the survey.


4.12. What psychedelic substance was associated with the change in your pain?
© Ayahuasca
DMT
5-MeO-DMT
LSD (acid)
Mescaline (Peyote cactus, San Pedro cactus, extracted, synthetic)
Psilocybin mushrooms
Psilocybin (synthetic)
Other (please describe):
Don't know
000000000 Multiple psychedelic substances (please describe):


4.13. Were you using any other substances at the same time? (Select all that apply)
O Alcohol
O Tobacco or nicotine products
O Amphetamines, non-prescribed (e.g., Ritalin, Adderall)
O Antidepressants, prescribed OR non-prescribed (e.g., Prozac, Lexapro, Wellbutrin)
O Benzodiazepines, non-prescribed (e.g., Xanax, Ativan, Klonopin)
O Cannabis/marijuana
O CBD or cannabidiol products
O Opioids, non-prescribed (e.g., OxyContin, Percocet)
O Methamphetamine (crystal meth)
LI] MDMA (ecstasy, molly)
O Cocaine
O Ketamine
O Salvia divinorum (salvia)
O PCP (phencyclidine)
O Kratom
O Heroin
O Synthetic cannabinoids (e.g., K2, Spice)
O Barbiturates
O Synthetic cathinones (e.g., bath salts, Flakka)
O Other psychedelics (please describe):
O Other substances not listed here (please describe):
O Don't know
O I was not using any other substances at the same time
O Prefer not to answer


143

[PAGE 155]

4.14. How long ago was the psychedelic experience that was associated with a change in your

pain? (Please type your response in days, months, OR years)
O This psychedelic experience was ___ days ago (please type # of days)
O This psychedelic experience was ___ months ago (please type # of months)
O This psychedelic experience was ___ years ago (please type # of years)
O Don't know
O Prefer not to answer

4.15. How old were you when that psychedelic experience took place? (Please enter your age

at the time in years)


For the following items, please keep in mind the psychedelic experience that was associated with a
change in your pain.

4.16. What was the psychedelic experience like? Please describe in as much detail as possible.


4.17. How did your pain change in relation to the psychedelic experience? Please describe in
as much detail as possible.


4.18. How long did you experience the change(s) in your pain? Please be as specific as

possible.


4.19. Why do you think there was a change in your pain?


4.20. Please describe if, and how, any of your other symptoms changed in relation to the
psychedelic experience. Please include how long you experienced these changes, if any.


144

[PAGE 156]

For the following items, please keep in mind the psychedelic experience that was associated with a
change in your pain.

4.21. How would you describe the dose that was related to a change in your pain?
O Microdose (sub-perceptual effects)
© Low dose
O Moderate or medium dose
O High dose
O Very high dose
O Don't know
O Prefer not to answer

4.22. What was the dose you ingested to the best of your knowledge?

O The dose was:
O | don’t know the dose
O Prefer not to answer

4.23. How did you consume the psychedelic substance that was related to a change in your
pain?
O Orally (i.e., by swallowing, dissolving in mouth)
© Smoked or vaporized
O Nasally (i.e., snorted)
© Other, please describe:
© Prefer not to answer

4.24, Where were you during the majority of the psychedelic experience? (Select all that
apply)
O At my home
© At the home of a friend, partner, or family member
O Ata retreat or in a spiritual or religious setting (option to provide more details):
O Ina therapeutic setting (option to provide more details):
© Ata public event, such as a concert or festival (please describe):
© Outside (please describe):
© Other (please describe):
O Prefer not to answer

4.25. Who was with you for the majority of the experience?
O I was alone or by myself
© | was with 1 other person
O | was with a few other people (2-5 people)
O I was in a group of about 6-20 people
© I was in a group of about 21-100 people
© | was in a crowd of over 100 people
© Other (please describe):
O Prefer not to answer


145

[PAGE 157]

4.26. How would you describe the people you were with during that experience? (Select all
that apply)
O This does not apply to me, | was alone
O I was with one or more people | knew (a friend, spouse, partner, or family member) who
were not using psychedelics
O | was with one or more people | knew (a friend, spouse, partner, or family member) who
were also under the influence of psychedelics and/or another substance
O Some people | was with were using psychedelics and some were not
O | was with a therapist or health professional
O I was with people | did not know/l was with strangers
O Other, please describe:
O Prefer not to answer


For the following item, please keep in mind the psychedelic experience that was associated with a
change in your pain.


146

[PAGE 158]

4.27. Using the scale below, please select the number that best represents your AVERAGE PAIN LEVEL in relation to your psychedelic
experience. If you do not remember, or do not wish to answer this item, please leave it blank and continue to the next item.


Pain as
bad as
Average Pain Level No Pain you can
imagine
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10


cd
that psychedelic experience
O O o o o O O o O O O


A O O O O O O O o O O O
that psychedelic experience


IMMEDIATELY AFTER
(in the 1-2 days following) 2] (6) oO O O O O Oo O O oO
that psychedelic experience


SHORT-TERM (i.e., 1 week)
following that psychedelic [) O O 6) 0) (6) (6) [6] O O 0)
experience


LONGER-TERM (i.e., over
the next month or longer)
following that psychedelic = a = = di a se = a a m
experience


147

[PAGE 159]

You are more than half-way done with this survey!


For the following items, please keep in mind the psychedelic experience that was associated
with a change in your pain.


4.28. What was your main reason (or motivation), if any, for taking the psychedelic substance at
the time?


4.29. What prior expectations, if any, did you have about what might occur during or after the
experience?


4.30. Did you experience any negative effects from this psychedelic experience?
O Yes
O No
O Don't know
O Prefer not to answer

For this item, please keep in mind the psychedelic experience that was associated with a change
in your pain.


4.31. What negative effects did you experience?


148

[PAGE 160]

For this item, please keep in mind the psychedelic experience that was associated with a change
in your pain.


4,32. Did you experience any of the changes below? If so, please indicate whether they
occurred during and/or following the experience. (Select all that apply)


YES - DURING YES- FOLLOWING
NO the psychedelic the psychedelic Prefer not
z ; to answer
experience experience

An increase in my pain L] L] m O
A decrease in my pain O O O O
A change in my perspective on
paa O O O

A change in other fibromyalgia
symptoms, please describe: O U O O


A change in my mental health O O O O
A change in my quality of life O O O m
Other, please describe: O O O O


4,33. Please elaborate on any of the changes you selected above, if not previously described:


149

[PAGE 161]

For the following items, please keep in mind the psychedelic experience that was associated with

a change in your pain.


4,34. Did you prepare in any particular manner for the psychedelic experience?

O Yes
O No
O Don't know
O Prefer not to answer


4.35. How did you prepare?


4.36. Did anything about your use of treatments for chronic pain change after your

psychedelic experience (e.g., did you stop a previous treatment or adopt a new one, did your

use of medications change, etc.)?

O Yes
O No
O Don't know
O Prefer not to answer


4.37. How did your use of treatments change?


4.38. Did you experience any changes in the areas below following the psychedelic

experience? (Select all that apply)

Changes in relationships
Changes in work/education
Changes in social activity
Changes in physical activity or exercise
Changes in diet
Changes in alcohol use
Changes in tobacco use
Changes in drug use
None of these changes
DODODODODO Prefer not to answer


4.39. If desired, please elaborate on any changes selected above:


150

[PAGE 162]

For the following items, please keep in mind the psychedelic experience that was associated with a
change in your pain.


4.40. During the psychedelic experience that was related to a change in your pain, would you
say that you had a profound, personally meaningful experience?
O Yes
O No
O Prefer not to answer


4.41. How personally meaningful was the experience?
O No more than routine, everyday experiences
O Similar to meaningful experiences that occur on average once or more a week
© Similar to meaningful experiences that occur on average once a month
© Similar to meaningful experiences that occur on average once a year
O Similar to meaningful experiences that occur on average once every 5 years
O Among the 10 most meaningful experiences of my life
O Among the 5 most meaningful experiences of my life
O The single most meaningful experience of my life
O Prefer not to answer


4.42. What was the intensity of this experience?
© Mildly intense
O Moderately intense
O Strongly intense
O Overwhelmingly intense
O Prefer not to answer


4,43. During that psychedelic experience, would you say that you had a "spiritual or mystical
experience,” or a moment of a sudden spiritual awakening or insight?
O Yes
O No
O Prefer not to answer


4,44. Indicate the degree to which the experience was spiritually significant to you.
O Notat all
O Slightly
O Moderately
© Very much
O Among the 5 most spiritually significant experiences of my life


4.45. During that psychedelic experience, would you say that you had a psychologically
insightful experience?
O Yes
O No
O Prefer not to answer


151

[PAGE 163]

4.46. How psychologically insightful was the experience?
© Not at all insightful
© Mildly insightful
© Moderately insightful
O Extremely insightful
O Prefer not to answer


4.47. During that psychedelic experience, would you say that you felt awe, wonder, or
amazement?
© 1 (Not at all)
O2
O3
O 4 (Somewhat)
O5
O6
O 7 (Completely)
O Prefer not to answer


4.48. Do you have any additional psychedelic experiences you would like to describe?

O Yes
O No
O Don't know


If yes or don’t know is selected:

4,49. If you have had other experiences with psychedelics that you would like to describe in relation
to your pain and/or other symptoms, please do so here.


152

[PAGE 164]

SECTION V (Demographics)

5.1. What is your age? (please type in years):


5.2. What sex were you assigned at birth?
O Female
O Intersex
O Male
O Prefer not to answer


5.3. Gender identity: (Select all that apply)
CJ Cisgender man
LJ Cisgender woman
O Transgender man
O Transgender woman
U Non-binary
O Two-spirit
U] Agender
LJ Genderfluid
LJ Questioning or unsure
O Type your response:
LJ Prefer not to answer


5.4. Race: (Select all that apply)
OU American Indian or Alaska Native
O Asian
O Black or African American
O Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander
O White
U Type your response:
O Prefer not to answer


5.5. Do you identify as Hispanic?
O Yes
O No
O Prefer not to answer


5.6. What is the highest level of education that you have completed?
O Some high school or less
O High school diploma or equivalent such as GED
O Some college, no degree
O Technical, vocational, or trade training
O Associate degree (for example: AA, AS)
O Bachelor's degree (for example: BA, BS)
O Master’s degree (for example: MA, MS)


153

[PAGE 165]

O Professional or doctoral degree (for example: MD, JD, PhD, etc.)
© Prefer not to answer


5.7. What is your current occupational status? (Select all that apply)

U Employed full-time
U] Employed part-time
U Homemaker
O Disabled
O Retired
CL] Student
LJ Unemployed
O Not listed (please describe):
O Prefer not to answer

5.8. What is your current or most recent occupation?


O Please type your response: O Prefer not to answer

5.9, Sexual orientation: (Select all that apply)
O Asexual
L Bisexual
LC Gay
U Heterosexual (straight)
DLesbian
[|] Pansexual
U Questioning or unsure
LJ Type your response:
DO Prefer not to answer


5.10. What is your current relationship status?
O Single
CJ In committed relationship
U Married or in a civil union
CJ Separated
O Divorced
LJ Widowed
O Not listed (please describe):
O Prefer not to answer

5.11. Do you live in the United States?
O Yes
O No
O Prefer not to answer


154

[PAGE 166]

If yes:
5.12. In which state or territory do you currently live?
(Select from drop-down menu)


If no:
5.13. In what country do you currently live?
(Select from drop-down menu)


5.14. How did you hear about this survey?
LJ Social media
U From an organization related to fibromyalgia and/or chronic pain (please specify, if desired):


L] Froma friend
U Froma healthcare provider
U UAB website
U Not listed (please type your response):
LJ Prefer not to answer


5.15. Do you have anything to add that you think would be valuable to know? If so, please

describe below. If not, please continue to the end of the survey)


155
