[PAGE 001]

Analysing Icaros:
The Musicology of Amazonian
Ayahuasca Healing Ceremonies

Nicholas Herzberg
Music Technology Dissertation
May 2015


“At this point the old woman begins to sing. Hers is
no ordinary song, but an icaro, a magical curing song
that in our intoxicated and ecstatic state seems more like
a tropical fish or an animated silk scarf of many colours
than a vocal performance. ”

Terence McKenna, 1992

[PAGE 002]

(Contents

Chapter 1
L.1 - IMtrOCGUctiON _..............000anaannannnnnnnnennnnnnennnnenennnnn
nn nn 4
1.2 - ICaLOS 000.00000000Lnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn
nennen nennen nennen nun nennen 5
III .............0.0uaaansssssssenennnnnnnnsnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnsnnnnnnnee
nn 6
1.4A- The BreW ...00000000lnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnanennenenennnnennnnnnennen 7
1.5-Therole of the Shaman _.............eesesessnnnnnenensnnnnen 9
1.6 - Shamanism & ECStaSy eee cece eee eeeeee eee eeeeeeeanenee 10
1.8 - Music & Altered States ..............ccesnsnsnsnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn 11

Chapter
2
2.1 - Motivation and Intention ...............uuussreeensssennnnenennnnnnnnnnn 14
2.2 - Transcription asatool 1... 000cccccccccccccnnnnncnnnnnnnannnnes 15
2.3 - Problems of the Ayahuasca Ethnomusicologist ................ 16
2.4 - Analysis Categories i cccccccccnnnnnnncncccccnnononnnincnnnnnnnnss 17
2.4.1 Melodic Content
2.4.2 Rhythmic Content
2.4.3 Harmonic Content
2.4.4 Instrumentation
2.5 - Recordings Acquired .................ussnnnnenennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn 21
2.5.1 - H.G Charing & P. Cloudsley
2.5.2 - SpiritQuest Center
Chapter 3
3.1 - Ayahuasca Icaro Benjamin Ochavano ............unnssnssneeeeeeenn 24
3.1.1 - Notes on structure
3.1.2 - Melodic Content
3.1.3 - Rhythmic Content:
3.1.4 - Harmonic Content:
3.1.5 - Other observations:
3.2 - Artidoro Ayahuasca Shaman . . . . . .uuuuussseesssssssennnnnnenenennn 35
3.2.1 - Structural Content:
3.2.2 - Melodic Content:
3.2.3 - Rhythmic Content:
3.2.4 - Harmonic Content

[PAGE 003]

3.3 - Mariana Shaman [caro _.............uceeessesesnssnennnnenennnnene
3.3.2 - Melodic Content:
3.3.3 - Rhythmic Content:
3.3.4: Harmonic Content
3,4 - ElPs Bow (Extract) ..........0000usseesssseensssennessnnnesnonerenennsnonenen
3.5 - Don Rober Recordings ......................uusreeennnnennnnnnennn
nenn
3.6 - Hermana Maria Luisa Tuesta Flores...............................
3.7 - Marlene Dobkin de RÍOS SCOPE __.........uunnsssnsnsnennnnnnnnnen
3.7.1 - Structure
3.7.2 - Melody
3.7.3 - Rhythm
Chapter 4
OC06 he 5
AQ -Rhythm cece cece cee rr 5
4.3-Harmony ccoo coco occ nora nn nn nn cnn cn nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnannnananss 53
A.A-Instrumentäation ..........ucnennnannnannnnnenenenenennn
nennen nen
A.5- StLUCHUre i eeannnnnnnnnnnnnnnen
nenne nen nennnnnn nennen nenne nenn 54
Chapter 5
5.1 - Evaluation of the study ..........uu0sssasssseennsssenennnennnnn
en
5.2 - The theme of ‘variation’ .............uccaeesnsnsnssnsnnennnenen
5.2 - Psychedelic Psychology i ciiciccccccccnn cnn ncnccnnnnnn
nn nano
5.3 - Jungle Gym/Spiritual Ladder .0cccccccccnnncciccnnnnns 58
5.4 - Final Words _..............0000caesnsanansnnnnenennnnennnnnnenen
namen
6.1 - References 0 coco cc nono non cnn cnn nn nene ana nn ne nenenenanines 61
¡A 6
6.3 - Recordings Used -.. ccccccccccccnnnnnnnccnnnnnnnnnnnnnnenannnnos

[PAGE 005]

Chapter 1

Literature Review


1.1 - Introduction


Indigenous to the Amazon, the term /caro denotes a particular musical performance,
exclusive to the shamanic healing tradition known as “Ayahuasca”. Ayahuasca Icaros, as
demonstrable in present-day recordings’, often come in the form of melodic, verbal sonants,
phrases, or motifs, and are often accompanied by other instruments such as rattles and drums
. These musical phrases are employed ritualistically, by a Shaman, during the
ceremony, which centers around the ingestion of a potent entheogenic” tea Z . The
Icaros appear to take on a new form when beheld in the ecstatic state of consciousness, which the
plant-brew provokes. Native informants suggest that the icaros play a key role in invoking
visionary-type experiences, which in turn, influence other shamanic tasks such as diagnosing
psychosomatic illness and attempting to cure it, or alleviate any symptoms? (
. The intention of this research is to acquire a collection of audio recordings from
ayahuasca ceremonies, and conduct an in-depth analysis of it’s musical components in order to
further understand the nature of a type of music, employed as a therapeutic medicine in its
indigenous context.


Chapter One explores the current literature surrounding Icaro use within its ritual context.
Chapter Two explores the methodologies of previous, similar research, and the methodology of
this research.

Chapter Three exhibits all the analysis of the Icaros, ready to be discussed in Chapter Four.
Chapter Five will summarise and seek further discussion.


' The available recordings can be found in section 2.3.
2 Entheogenic is a modern term for ‘hallucinogenic’ or psychedelic which attempts to include a sense of
spirituality within its definition. The etymology suggests a meaning of ‘generating the divine within’.
3 Special weight is placed on the success of Ayahuasca in dislodging previously over-trodden thought
patterns which cause addiction or depression-like issues.

[PAGE 006]

1.2 - Icaros


On a rudimentary level, an Icaro is a song that is performed within the, now globally
known (Tupper, 2006), Ayahuasca ceremony of Amazonian shamanism. The term appears to
have a unique cultural origin, as the word itself appears across many different cultures that
surround the operation of Ayahuasca healing ceremonies | 011), and the greater
Amazonian Basin in general. The word */caro” is suggested to be linked to ‘icarar’; the Quencha

* verb meaning ‘to sing’ (Bustos, 2004. Caldicott further suggests that there may be an
association with the Quencha verb ‘curar’, meaning ‘to cure’.


These melodies that strictly accompany the Ayahuasca Ceremony, are sung, chanted,
whistled or hummed; Itis also known to be played on ethnic flutes, and even violins (
. These Icaros, while analogous to music, are performed and
experienced in a way thatis incomparable to western musics, and indeed many other musics
from the globe. The primary purpose of performing Icaros (in the belief of those who perform

and experience them) is to perform spiritual tasks. While this too, is arguably an artistic
expression through sound (therefore seemingly analogous to music), it is important to consider
that the philosophical motivation behind the performance of Icaros does not necessarily concern

any sense of aestheticism, emotional expression, or even the concept of a musical product (a

finished song). Instead, the Shamanistic intentions at the heart of the performance suggest that if
there is any “product” being sought, in the same way a composer may envision their masterpiece,
it is a Shamanic product (for example the curing of anxiety) Therefore Icaros can be argued as an
expression of shamanism, not music, and therefore cannot be compared to other musics, as the
application of air pressure changes is not being performed for the same reasons at all. However,

the use of sound can still be studied and examined under the lense of musicology, as examining
these Icaros in this way has been effective previously.


Previous research on the Icaros of Ayahuasca ceremonies, predominantly feature the
work of Musicologists Fred Katz & Dobkin de Rios, undertakenin Peru | 971). By
collecting data and analysing the Icaros they had recorded ‘in-situ’, they extended the idea of a
‘spiritual ladder’, conceptualising a model dubbed ‘the Jungle Gym in consciousness’ (Katz
| )). This theory suggests that the subjective manifestation of Ayahuasca Icaros, in an

ecstatic state of consciousness, is that of a “jungle gym” style structure. To further define this,
the authors suggest that the shamanic performance creates an inflexible, secure structure, which
allows the user some freedom to engage in independent pathfinding and exploration. At the time
of the research by Katz and de Rios, access to the music was scarce, with limited ability to
‘upload’ and share recordings or transcriptions of the music. Thanks to the advances in


* Quencha refers to the ‘singing mountaineers’ of Peru.

[PAGE 007]

technology, there is quite an abundance of recordings available online where fieldworkers and
researchers have visited the location and captured the recordings live.


Luna (2006) places a lot of stress on the idea that the very melody of the icaro itself
contains the healing ‘power’, which explains why Caldicott ponders upon the connection. The
respective people believe that it is the ‘spirits of the plants’ that teach the Ayahuasca Shamans
these melodies. The most adept Ayahuasca Shamans will have an extensive archive of Icaros, or
healing melodies, memorised, from which they pick specific ones, dependent on the intention.
This can include such things as attempting to rectify physiological or emotional side-effects of
ayahuasca, or provoking transitions between different ‘phases’ of the subjective experience. On a
more speculative level, these songs are used to commune with the Plant-spirits’ linked to the
indigenous folklore cosmology of “supernatural agents”


Susanna Bustos studied Ayahuasca Icaros from the perspective of phenomenology, and
states that, according to her informants, the experience with Icaros stand out as a pivotal moment
within the healing process that unfolds during a ceremony . As the most revered and
profound technique for aiding the participants in their asomatous travels, Icaros, acting as an
ancillary mechanism within this folklore healing tradition, draw the main attention of this
research. Deciphering the musicology of Ayahuasca may lead to understanding more about what
defines a “healing song”, and perhaps in later studies, which musical components bestow a song
with “healing qualities”.


1.3 - Ayahuasca


Ayahuascais the Quencha name for the ancient healing ceremony that has existed
amongst indigenous people for millenniain the Amazon |
. Additionally, ‘Ayahuasca’ is the cultural name of the jungle liana Banisteriopsis Caapi;
The Vine of the Souls’ in native belief. From here on, the vine Banisteriopsis Caapi shall be
named B. Caapi to avoid overusing the word Ayahuasca, and overcomplicating the word’s
meaning. The ceremony itself focuses on the digestion of an entheogenic tea made from B.
Caapi. The shamans believe that, with correct diet, ritual and state of mind (ideally the state
induced by the plant-brew), it is possible to achieve communication with plant-spirits for the
purpose of diagnosing, curing afflictions, treating psychosomatic health issues, purging the
physical body, and other shamanic tasks such as prophecy-divination ( ley, 4). In fact,
communion with the spirits of plants is a central theme in Amazonian cosmology, with
informants claiming tl
that the original ayahuasca brew was taught to the natives by ‘plant
teachers’ (Luna, 1984

[PAGE 008]

Bustos divides the ceremony into four phases which include two discussion
phases (one at the start, one at the end), where the participants and the residentiary shaman
speak. The two phases between these discussions include a ‘non-verbal working phase’, in which
the Shaman ‘charges’ the previously prepared potion with exemplary curing songs and
tobacco-smoke blowing, followed by the ‘main phase’, in which the concoction is consumed and
a heavy use of Icaros occurs. The same account informs that the ceremony is conducted in the
dark, commencing as the day approaches twilight. As the effects of the concoction can remain
active for over 6 hours, the ceremony can last extensive periods of time.


During his time observing four informant mestizo ayahuasca shamans in Iquitos, Peru,
Luna ascertained a sense of the local cosmology. He describes their belief in a bilateral

cosmovision consisting of two parallel worlds of earth and water. He further adds that there is
acknowledgment of a third, higher plane, but this contributes far less to their mythology and
legend. The more relevant mythology and cosmology includes the perception of ‘plant spirits’,
best worded by Pablo Amaringo” in the foreword to H.G Charing and Peter Cloudsley’s book
“Ayahuasca Visions”


“Every tree, every plant, has a spirit. People may say that the

plant has no mind. I tell them that the plant is alive &
conscious. A plant may not talk, but there is a spirit in it that

is conscious, that sees everything, which is the soul of the
plant, its essence, what makes it alive. The channels through

which the water & sap move are the veins of the spirit. ”


1.4 - The Brew


The archaic brew is prepared by boiling together multiple indigenous plants in a pot for
several hours. It is often referred to as ‘the purge’ (or purga”) to natives, due to the powerful
purgative quality. Jit, 2 Dobkin de Rios theorised that this ‘nausea’, and other ‘bad trip’
qualities are caused by rapid access to the unconscious. This characteristic is associated with the
bodily cleansing that ayahuasca is revered to cause, and contributes to the duality described by
many personal accounts, in which there is suggested to be a dichotomy between feeling liberated

from the body which is so susceptible to nausea, vomiting; a humbling experience.


° Pablo Amaringo is an acclaimed artist who explores the concept of Ayahuasca intoxication in the main
body of his work . He has worked with researchers, as well as having written his own
book. He attempts to depict his visions whilst under the influence of the brew.

[PAGE 009]

The vine Banisteriopsis Caapi, is the fundamental ingredient in the preparation of Yagé
in a large majority of Ayahuasca ceremonies. It is mixed with other plants such as Psychotria
Viridis which contain N-Ndimethyltryptamine (DMT), and other hallucinogenic substances
ras . B. Caapi contains harmaline; referred to in the field of pharmacology as an
inhibitor of monoamine oxidase’ | . These MAO inhibitors prevent the
deamination of DMT, and thisis the particular chemical mechanism which determines the
consistency for which various banisteriopsis species are used in conjunction with other plants.
Deliberate restraint has been used to discuss the chemistry, as the
understanding of this is not crucial to the research here, the summary which follows this line
elucidates the purpose of it being raised. For a more accurate and detailed understanding of the
chemistry please refer to the work of Strassman
Luna is one author to list the many alternatives to P. Viridis including: Tobacco,
Tangarana (Triplaris Surinamensis Chamiso), Ayahuma (Couroupita Guianensis Abl.) and many
others. During the creation of the concoction, the shaman must sing certain icaros, blow tobacco
smoke and perform the equivalent of reciting prayers or blessings.
In his first chapter of his own book, Amaringo delves into great depth and detail about
the long, spiritual process of prepared the brew, including using intuition and spiritual
communication with ‘chicua’ birds for just selecting which plant to use; constantly avoiding
interaction with bad spirits or malevolent forces . Once the plant has been
sighted, the shaman will give offerings of tobacco, banana leaves and matches to the grandfather

spirit, asking permission to take the ayahuasca vine for medicinal purposes. Many authors
describe a necessity to respect the depth of which the natives believe ayahuasca to be spiritual
and sacred. During ayahuasca visions, any questions are directed with great respect to the spirit
of ayahuasca (the grandfather spirit), such as “please help me to see that which I require to see’.
Amaringo also describes a strictness about diet, also uniformly noted by other researchers. The
diet involves avoiding salty, sweet or bitter foods, no drinking or drugs, no speaking or
interacting with bad-living people. This diet lasts a few days prior to the preparation of the
ceremony, and it is somewhat reflective of the extensive diet which the shaman follows for many
years during his training to be an ayahuasquero. Much of the ideology of the native amazonians,
including the commonly associated imagery, symbolism and mythological meaning is presented
in Amaringo’s vivid paintings.


° Dimethyltryptamine, among other tryptamines, is a potent hallucinogenic substance. As mentioned before
in the text, it is perhaps one of the most potent known, even more so when combined with the appropriate
enzyme inhibitor. Rick Strassman appears to be the authoritative figure on the chemistry and
neuroscience of hallucinogens, especially DMT.
7 As a side note it is worth mentioning that although the unique MAO inhibiting property is found in the B.
Caapi vine, the harmaline itself is also psychoactive in the human body.

[PAGE 010]

é




Brewing Ayahuasca
Photo by ABenedito © 2014 Erowid.org


Image III: Brewing Ayahuasca


1.5 - The role of the Shaman


Each ceremony is conducted by a shaman, often referred to as an ayahuasquero or
vegetalista.* The main role of this Shaman is that of an overseer, spiritual guide and emotional
counsellor. It is their primary responsibility to create the magical brew, and ensure the physical,
emotional and spiritual safety of the participants during its consumption (Bustos, 2008; Metzner >


1999; Katz et al., 1971). A Shaman's ability to achieve these three tasks, can be considered to

represent their “power” or “ability”, and Bustos states that the main expression of an Ayahuasca
Curanderos? power to facilitate the ceremony, is the use of Icaros (Bustos, 2004).


® Luna notes that ‘vegetalistas’ is more accurately understood as an umbrella term for various
plant-medicine practitioners such as Tabaqueros (Tobacco based practitioner) ‘Purgueros’ or
‘Ayahuasqueros’ (Ayahuasca/Icaro based practitioner) and others. (Luna, 1986)
° Susanna Bustos’ prefered term for Ayahuasca Practitioner. Curandero means ‘folk medicine
practitioner’.

[PAGE 011]

Why music (in the form of Icaros) is a powerful too/ in the context of Ayahuasca can be
explained with the discussion of Altered states of consciousness, particularly the studies of the
‘ecstatic’ state of consciousness achieved by the participants during an Ayahuasca ceremony.


1.6 - Shamanism & Ecstasy


The study of augmented consciousness is of prime relevance in this exploration of
ayahuasca, as the induced state of ecstasy is central to the source of the healing. As the title
quotation’® suggests, in the ‘ecstatic state’ caused by the DMT-fueled experience, the music can
manifest in bizarre forms to the user’s subjective perception | |
Stras . A state of ecstasy (or an altered state of consciousness), can be described as a
state of contemplation and awareness, coupled with sensory-overstimulation and hallucinations.
Gilbert Rouget extensively attempts to contain the characteristics ecstasy in one
single definition, but ultimately concludes that only severe reductionism can bring about an
agreement across all language and history.'' Based on Rouget’s etymology, the word ‘ecstasy’
can be traced to the word ‘éxotaotc’ (ek-stasis), which holds a meaning similar to: ‘to stand
(static), outside (ex-)’. This, coupled with other authors definitions!”, suggest that ‘ecstasy’ refers
to ‘flight of the soul, from the body”, ‘exist- outside- the mind”
. Aldous Huxley coined the term ‘psychedelic’, a word which
attempts to describe the mind manifesting before the soul.


Mircea Eliade observes similarities in global Shamanistic culture and suggests
that regardless of whether it be the use of the hallucinogenic Peyote Cactus in North Mexico
; the consumption of potent Amanita Muscaria
mushrooms in Siberian and early-Vedic Shamanism ;
Ibogaine and Datura ingestion in African spirit mediumship .J., 2004); or
the drinking of ayahuasca tea in the Amazon; the aims of the Shaman in consuming and
interacting with hallucinogenic plants, is to master the techniques of inducing, controlling,
nurturing and exploring ‘ecstasy’. McKenna propounds that even the non-plant
consuming shamans across the world are attempting to give rise to ecstasy through other means


10 “At this point the old woman begins to sing. Hers is no ordinary song, but an icaro, a magical curing song
that in our intoxicated and ecstatic state seems more like a tropical fish or an animated silk scarf of many
colours than a vocal performance.”
11 Considering this, ecstasy and trance will be used interchangeably, to describe an alteration in
consciousness without attempting to confirm which state, specifically, which the mind ends up in during
12 Friesen , Rouget and others at length discuss the theoretical definitions of difference states
of consciousness.

10

[PAGE 012]

such as drumming or fasting. This extends Eliade’s deduction, further propounding that all
practice of shamanism worldwide, is the inquest upon the state of ecstasy.”


Ayahuasca Shamans, in light of Eliade’s theories, are masters of the ecstatic state, and
express their power over ecstasy through the chanting and singing of Icaros.


1.8 - Music & Altered States


The use of Icaros as a tool to assist and facilitate a state of ecstasy, is an example of how
music can be directly used to manipulate the brain. This accurately defines the passive
motivation for examining Ayahuasca Icaros. As an isolated example of music directly
manipulating the brain, there is potential that examining the music used may reveal more

information, or yield a new understanding of consciousness, based on how consciousness reacts
and changes when subjected to music.


Gabonian Iboga initiation ceremonies are an example of where music is used to
manipulate or facilitate subjective effects of hallucinogenic substances. In these ceremonies,

participants digest iboga root'* and are subjected to polyrhythmic drumming which induces a
powerful trance or ‘spirit possession’ (Ma . The researchers attempt to decode the
polyrhythmic drumming in order to find out which rhythmic conditions had to be met in order to

entrance a Mitsogho"” participant. Researchers who have observed this practice of spirit
mediumship have been informed that music acts as a safety-rope between this world and ‘the
hereafter’, and serving as a form of locomotion between the two realms
. Jeremy Narby further extends the notion of symbolic
repetition when music features as a significant component of a hallucinogenic ritual, in which he
cites Maria Eliade’s compilation of “countless examples” of various forms of ‘shamanic ladders’

or ‘spiritual ropes’'®


Ethnomusicological data gathered regarding the Gabonian Iboga initiation and in

particular the data concerning rhythm has been of use to other researchers who study the synapse
between perception and consciousness, such as Csaba Szabo ), who details the effects of
monotonous drumming on 118 students in England. While the data here wasn’t attained by


1 “The rational, mechanistic, anti-spiritual bias of our own culture has made it impossible for us to appreciate
the mindset of the shaman. We are culturally and linguistically blind to the world of forces and
interconnections clearly visible to those who have retained the Archaic relationship to nature.” McKenna on
understanding the role of the Shaman
14 A hallucinogen.
15 Name of the tribe: The Mitsogho tribe of Gabon.
18 The term “Spiritual Ladder’ refers to the previous notion of a safety-rope between ‘two co-existing realms’.

11

[PAGE 013]

fieldwork, it is clear that there was a considerable effect on consciousness when the music was
played, and similar studies in the future can be done to compare the effects of Gabonian
trance-inducing polyrhythms, to the effects of the monotonous drumming used previously in this
experiment.


In the case of the Adyghs”” (‘Circassians’), music acts as a medicine through alleviating
disharmony between person and nature . Sokolova also indicates that optimistic
ceremonial music acts as anesthesia, citing the story of a War Hero, whom had a bullet removed
from the leg in this manner. Many archaic and traditional cultures believe disequilibrium
between person and nature is expressed as illness or disease.
It is not uncommon for cultures to centre psychotherapy or medicine around the use of
drugs and/or music, even witnessed in waves of Western culture. In a study of the House/Ecstasy
movement, Metcalfe discusses how the movement, based on psychedelic drugs and music
lead to the transcension of social codes such as gender, sexuality and race on the dancefloor, in a
way that had yet to be experienced before.


17 An Iberian-Caucasian group found in North Caucasus.

12

[PAGE 014]

I mage IV: Preparing Ayahuasca Brew


Image V: Ready to brew


13

[PAGE 015]

Chapter 2

Methodology


2.1 - Motivation and Intention


The motivation for this research, if not ascertained from the literature review, is to
contribute to the greater understanding of how music affects the brain and consciousness. By
breaking down shamanic curing songs into such constituent parts as melody, rhythm, harmony,
instrumentation, performance dynamics and structure. There is a potential for patterns to form, or
constants to be observed, which define the musical style. As this music is associated with
therapeutic healing, understanding the constituent parts may reveal more about how any “musical
component’ interact with human consciousness.


Previous examples of Ethnomusicology essays ‚ Dot |
)09), demonstrate how obtaining empirical resultsin1 this way can develop into
theses when combined with the developing theories of other researchers. Szabo (ct:
conducted an experiment where consciousness-affecting polyrhythms were used to measure the
phenomenological impact on perception'*. In a similar way, recreating the Ayahuasca paradigm
within a controlled setting, using recreated Icaros (based on the findings on this dissertation) may
be useful to explore the psychological and chemical mechanics involved with
Ayahuasca-intoxicated perception. Due to its close proximity to other fields of study, the line of
research regarding perception of sound and it’s contribution to consciousness, has the potential to
include further musicology, psychology, biology and neurochemistry”.


18 118 University Students were subjected to these recordings (210 bpm polyrhythmic drumming, perhaps
influenced by empirical data taken from ethnomusicology studies)
Including the study of how chemical reactions in the brain [such as those produced by perception of sound
and the associated psychological mechanisms] manifest as changes in consciousness.

14

[PAGE 016]

Should studying Ayahuasca curing music, which manifests as such a profound
experience in the reports of its beholders, reveal more about how perception of sound affects
consciousness, then there is reason for further research into, not just Ayahuasca, but Global
Shamanic Music in its entirety.


2.2 - Transcription as a tool


Similar ethnomusicological research on Ayahuasca Icaros
8 has been undertaken 1in the past
by the researchers mentionedin section 1.2 | 975: Bustos, 2004; 2008) and

before approaching the data acquisition stage, it would be useful to consider the methodologies
employed previously. Dobkin de Rios used transcription to describe the unconventional
performance style of the whistling; primarily following western notation with a few additional
markings. Within this score she denotes rhythm, pitch, pauses, phrasing and also attempts to
describe the structural form. While the ability to record is cheaper now, and recording
technology offers a simple solution to capturing live performances and saving the information
for later, there is still much value in transcribing the music in this way.


Bruno Nettl (2005a), a reputable musicologist, discusses at length many of the issues that
the working ethnomusicologist faces. In Essay 7, Nettl discusses how transcription acted as the
main tool of the ethnomusicologist for many years, and even as recording technology arises, is
still heavily relied upon today. It is suggestible that a desire to translate non-western music into
western notation, is an attempt to translate their music into a language that can be understood in
enough sophistication and detail [by the observer] to truly acknowledge the complex musical
ideas. In the same way western-trained musicians become very familiar with the subtle nuances
of classical harmony, violin timbres and the English language (as a few examples), it has to be
expected that western (but not strictly limited to western) fieldworkers can never ascertain every
detailed nuance pertaining to that musical expression of culture, simply because they aren’t an
integrated member of the community with as much exposure.


Within this Ayahuasca research, it is clear that the Icaros are non-tangential to a western
understanding of music, therefore utilizing the western score as a method to attempt to
understand the music, does not attempt to suggest anything more than a western understanding of
non-western musics. Should the scores not accurately relay the music, if ever recreated from the
scores, it would leave speculation that the ‘functional healing properties’ of the music is
something far less tangible to the western mind than playing certain notes at the necessary time.
This in itself would be a strong development into understanding how ‘healing music’ works in

essence.


15

[PAGE 017]

When considering previous methodologies, rather, any ethnographic work, there must be
special consideration of the human aspect. As suggested in the notions of symbolic and
interpretive anthropology , studying any kind of culture must be regarded as

interpretive, rather than experimental. Recognising that each ethnographer, researcher or
fieldworker are themselves a form of actor portraying a perspective, no single author can be
relied upon to relay the ‘true’ happenings of indigenous cultures. With this issue in mind, the
transcription seems ideal for a translation-style role, as the issues of not being able to truly relay
the non-western music is intrinsic and unavoidable in ethnomusicology. Following the logic of
Nettl and Geertz, it is clear that one’s ability to transcribe is an area in which interpretation can
massively affect how this music is perceived by readers, as a fundamental problem in academic
musicology stems from an archaic dependence on ‘proving the music exists in this way’ by
attempting to write it down. Non-written music, such as folk traditions and
word-of-mouth music cultures, is automatically skewed with any attempt to write it down, yet it
appears to be a destructive, but necessary, process for the music to be recognised by western
scholars.


2.3 - Problems of the Ayahuasca Ethnomusicologist


Nettl writes along similar lines in another essay, suggesting that, due to their
position, fieldworkers, such as those who have gathered the recordings needed for this research,
affect the field so much that they can get in the way of their own research. The very presence of
the researcher themselves has an influence of the culture being observed. Operating remotely
should avoid further disruption of the field, sidestepping this issue of affecting the field, just by
being there, however, there are further issues which is relevant to the data acquired for this
research.
The location and characteristics of the ceremony makes high quality, clear recording of
the music difficult. There is much movement around the participant group, causing difficulties in

fluent and clear recording of the melodies. Also, many Ayahuasca shamans disapprove of being
recorded, and even when permission is accepted, the ceremony lasts for extensive periods of time
making it difficult to take palatable recordings that accurately define the varying musical

performances throughout. Furthermore, the location in the rainforest also directly contrasts ideal
recording conditions, largely because of the immense background noise present in every
recording, when combined with leafy rattles there is little spectral space for some of the lower

frequency chanting to remain clear. However, as the task is to analyse what the participants of
ayahuasca ceremonies are hearing, the dominant presence of rainforest background noise cannot
be discounted as an influential sound source, so it could be regarded as valuable information for
realising the full sound content that is experienced during an Ayahuasca ceremony. This constant


16

[PAGE 018]

influx of aural information must contribute to the state of the set and setting”, and should be
included when analysing audio content in all of its components.


Dynamic information is also lost to many recordings, therefore it is better to avoid
speculating on dynamics and their relevance as the data is not reliable (is the shaman singing
quieter; or has the background noise gotten louder; or has the shaman moved away etc). In the
data acquired, there are examples of instances where rhythmic or harmonic content is
dramatically reduced or inaudible simply because assistants and performers may be stood too far
from the limited microphones. However, enough high quality data has been taken which

accurately portrays the chosen categories.


2.4 - Analysis Categories


As suggested in section 2.1, the methodology for decoding Ayahuasca Icaros shall
include transcribing the available recordings into complex extended scores, aiming to be
transparent and avoid losing musical ideas through the process of translation. Utilising a
multitude of extra markings, the scores will capture enough of the musical information to be
interpreted by other musicologists, without overlooking musical ideas or musical philosophies
exclusive to this music style. In a sense, recording technology helped to avoid this
, capturing ‘exactly’ what is being played, which allows objective listeners to attempt to
decode the musicology without the pressure of being an attending presence that impacts the
proceeding events


Thus, the upcoming specific categories for analysis will be of high priority, but do not
mark the limit to what musical information is believed to be relevant. Information such as
performance dynamics, may be a category that is only relevant when there is significant use or
application of.


2.4.1 Melodic Content


Melodic content refers to pitch and melody, and describing the spectral narrative and
physical sound qualities of the recordings. This can include favoured or recurrent modalities or
scales, as well as voicing characteristics”. Dobkin de Rios states that frequency appears

20 Set & Setting are key components of any hallucinogenic experience. According to Leary, the set describes
the mental, emotional state of the person, and the setting describes the surrounding environment. The
conditions of these two factors most accurately defines the nature of a trip, such that, if the mental state is
bad (angry, stressed, scared), and the environment is bad (exposed, controlled, uncomfortable people
present), the experience is likely to manifest as bad (Leary, et al., 1964).
21 Such as vocal range, voice type (where in the spectrum the voice sits)

17

[PAGE 019]

to be the lowest common denominator of Icaros, suggesting that, the frequency of rattling or
rapid vibratory sounds in combination with whistling or singing or chanting are very important to
the healing experience. To elucidate this statement, the author suggests that, within the context of

her previously introduced Jungle Gym in Consciousness model, the frequencies produced here
act as the modular building blocks which assemble into the fixed-path, enclosed construct.


The method for this will, as suggested in , involve transcribing the recordings, notating in
a style that attempts to remain as conventional [as a synonym of simple, affordable] as possible,
but making use of alternative notation techniques typical to ethnomusicology. The characteristics

of the music are described as different and isolated from other local, popular music styles, which
are themselves in high contrast to western style’. Therefore the expectation is that there will be a
significant dependence on these alternate markings to identify potential patterns. By, for

example, drawing the curvature of the melody, there may prove to be geometric motifs that
identify how a patterns develop.


2.4.2 Rhythmic Content


Maas and Strubelt undertook research into the role of Rhythmic content in music
that creates or accompanies hallucinogenic experience or trance. Their research offers many
useful insights into the potential roles of rhythm in ayahuasca, as well as insights into potential
methodologies best used for examining Ayahuasca rhythms. Their paper entitled ‘Polyrhythms
Supporting a Pharmacotherapy’ observes a ritual that occurs in Gabon, Africa, referred to as the
“Iboga Initiation Ceremony’. In this scenario, the participants consume pieces of ‘iboga root’
bark until it induces a powerful, ecstatic (out-of-body) experience, or ‘near death experience’, for
the sake of healing or spiritual progression. According to various accounts of Gabonian
Mitsogho”* informants, the music that accompanies this ceremony is of great importance, acting
as an interdimensional ‘safety rope’ that serves as a form of spiritual locomotion. Some of the
analysis that is offered by the authors suggests that, during the trance inducing phase of the
ceremony, there is an increase in rhythmic changes, which stimulates the cerebellum and
hippocampus in the same way as the Ibogaine substance, and so is assumed to augment the effect
of the Ibogaine.

The technique employed to trace drum patterns included using grids to identify the
individual rhythms and meters that overlap within an overall 12-beat pattern. As Nettl


22 Katz compares Icaros to Gregorian Chants, in that, they do not feature outside of their
ritual/religious context.
23 ‘Ibogaine’ is the psychoactive compound used heavily in various african cultures, found primarily in the
bark from the roots of the Iboga plant.
24 The tribe whom have been documented to engage in this use of Iboga root and polyrhythmic drumming

18

[PAGE 020]

identified, the Western mind can struggle to deal with Rhythm with as much sophistication as
harmony and melody, due to the nature of Western music and its focus on melody.


Another example is found in a study by Csaba Szabo , In which an experiment is
conducted to determine the effects of monotonous drumming on subjective experience. In a
dimly-lit laboratory environment, 118 university students were individually subjected to 30
minutes of monotonous rhythmic drumming and told to close their eyes, and to imagine a hole
leading down into the earth, (an example of Chichosz’s attentive concentration”). The
author concluded that exposure to the 210 pulse per minute drumming had a substantial effect in
altering perception of time, perception of changes in body-image and the image of the world
around, and with it, the meaning of such things. Some participants had strong experiences of
reliving moments from the past, and having sudden emotional outbursts such as crying due to
such experiences.


Within the framework of my own research it will be hard to speculate on
neurophysiological concepts in the same way as Maas & Strubelt, as there is no access to an
Electroencephalogram (EEG), or any other means (besides phenomenological approaches”%) to
measure brain activity within the context of Ayahuasca ritual. But, due to the importance of
rhythm in this and other shamanic ritual, it will be valuable to assess the rhythmic content of the

Icaro singing, chanting and percussion as this specific content has already been discovered to be

crucial.


2.4.3 Harmonic Content


Harmony, as noted by Scherzinger , has been overlooked in the past, due to a
preoccupation with rhythmic content, particularly regarding the kinetic nature of it. In

Scherzinger’s paper “Fractal Harmonies of Southern Africa” , mbira and matepe’’ music,
stated to be linked with spirit-possession, is explored from the perspective of harmony. The
method used by Scherzinger to examine harmony, mainly revolves around transcribing the
performance into a western-like score, which aids the researcher in identifying a pattern of
interest. In short, the mbira and matepe player’s individual notes formed a dyadic sequence that
moved in intervals. Perhaps only identified by the process of transcription, Scherzinger observes

an ‘intervallic palindrome’, whereby the intervals moved form a reversible sequence.


25 See section 5.2
28 Such as that engaged by Bustos
27 These instruments have been known to be associated with conjuring ancestral spirits.

19

[PAGE 021]

Figure 5. The Intervallic Palmdrome in the Dyad Sequence of Aroyiwa Mwana


— — - = == Jn == >=:
—_ rw A = ===
m (ot) +} 1 5 3 4 6 -4 4 +3 +2 (-4)
iv W wi VII Will [x x 4 All | I Mi


Example of Tntervallic Palindrome’ described by Scherzinger (2013)


Another justification for including harmony stems from the concept of binaural beats and
beating. Already renown for its implementation into psychotherapy, the subtle amplitude
modulation-like effect of layering two audio signals of a similar frequency together, known as
binaural eating, is an example of how harmonic information contributes to brain functionality
ine, et al, 198). Should there be an extensive use of very dissonant harmony, it could indicate
the deliberate application of mind-altering binaural interplay.
As the melody will be depicted by notation, and make use of ghost curvature in

describing the melodic narrative in more depth, harmony could be incorporated into the score
with ease as a second instance of drawn curvature. Roughly describing the harmony present in
the recordings using this method will reveal how often it is used; how intermittently or

persistently the occurrences are. Overlapping of the melody & harmony curves will show
complete or dissonant harmonies which can be commented upon at a later stage.


2.4.4 Instrumentation


As instrumentation is more identifiable, making a list of the recurring performance

instruments, taking into consideration the family of which they each come from, should clearly
identify the significant timbre or instrument family. Once the significant instrumentation family
has been identified, further review of literature may reveal an insight into the reason for choice.
It may prove that the instrument playing the melody is unimportant, and that it is indeed
the musical content itself, and something regarding the perception of that music that triggers it’s
healing effects. Luna (1984), as mentioned multiple times within this text, states clearly that the
natives believe that the melody itself holds the healing properties, and this would coincide with
any assumptions that specific instrumentation is less relevant in the overall proceedings.


However, due to the scarce nature of any papers questioning the relevance of
instrument/timbre types in trance-related or otherwise shamanic music, it is currently difficult to
speculate, and it could be an entire new dimension of music perception to explore, comparing the


20

[PAGE 022]

differences between trances/possessions induced by non-pitched drums and pitched percussion,
chanting icaros and incantations and so on.


2.5 - Recordings Acquired


The following repertoire has been acquired for the purpose of analysis and decomposition. As
the proper accreditation is due, the recordings will be organised by Publisher.


2.5.1 - H.G Charing & P. Cloudsley


Howard Charing has spent the last 24 years becoming an acclaimed researcher in the field
of shamanism, with extensive time spent in Peru with ayahuasqueros. Charing has co-authored
multiple books regarding various aspects of amazonian culture, in particular the arts surrounding
ayahuasca (Heaven, et a 06). Peter Cloudsley, co-author of “The Ayahuasca Visions of Pablo
Amaringo” (2011), and is known internationally as a musicologist, whose recordings have been
featured by the BBC and on CDs.


In their time they have acquired some of the highest quality recordings available, which
focus on the vocal performances of each informant shaman. Secondary information including
harmony parts and percussive parts are not always as clear as the main voice, yet have been
captured in enough detail to speculate about the role it plays (although at times it is distant and
only vaguely audible). There are a total of 8 recordings of Ayahuasca Icaro performances, each
varying between 4 minutes and 10 minutes and include some useful information such as the
particular sub-amazonian culture the performer adheres to (Mostly Shipibo and Huitoto*’). These
recordings are published on the personal ‘SoundCloud’”’ of H.G. Charing, and I have personally
contacted the owners of the recordings and have acquired permission to transcribe and examine
each article, and have received confirmation that they are indeed ‘in-situ’ recordings (Chari


2.5.2 - SpiritQuest Center


Located on the banks of the Rio Momón, an hour from Iquitos (Peru), the SpiritQuest
center offers a retreat for local and international ayahuasca seekers, which work closely with the


28 Huitoto (Also: Witoto) and Shipibo people are indigenous tribes of the Amazon rainforest. Both are known
to engage in Ayahuasca ceremonies.
22 A popular music hosting and sharing website. www.soundcloud.com


21

[PAGE 023]

native communities’ shamanic traditionalists to conduct secure and peaceful ayahuasca
ceremonies in their intended location. The sanctuary acts as a hub for many different holistic,
mystic or natural healing methods and provide much information for those who are interested.
Due to the close relationships developed with the shamans, they have been able to capture and
acquire many ‘in-situ’ recordings.


In order to differentiate the source of the recordings, I will also be utilising the library of
recordings available from the SpiritQuest Ayahuasca centre. It is likely that, while mainly
focusing on the extremely high quality, and more recent recordings available from Charing and
Cloudsley, using the vast array of shorter recordings to test consistency of any observations.
Such that, if a particular scale is identified as a constant amongst the HG Charing recordings, it
will be of great use to then consider the SpiritQuest recordings comparatively.


Image VI: Fanning the flames


22

[PAGE 024]

Chapter 3

Analysis


This Chapter contains the analysis of several Ayahuasca Icaros, based on the acoustic
analysis of the recordings acquired (see 2.6). This section will contain scores and graphs, as well

as text that attempts to fully describe the musical content of each recording. Sections 3.1-3.4 are
Icaros taken from H.G.Charing’s Soundcloud and have been analysed using the transcription
style, as described in section 2.3. Sections 3.5-3.7 are further examples of Ayahuasca Icaros, in
which recordings available on the SpiritQuest website are examined more holistically.


Please note that uppercase-lettering marked in italics refers to the name of the phrase
being discussed, and any uppercase lettering marked in bold refers to musical pitches
(frequencies).


23

[PAGE 025]

H. G. Charing Recordings
3.1 - Ayahuasca Icaro Benjamin Ochavano
Published by H.G Charing on Soundcloud:
Track Length: 10:08


= Pehushed ar und Clee)
by H.C Checing
iy


Baa |
en
en
ige
4

[PAGE 026]

N


25

[PAGE 027]

26

[PAGE 028]

ATA


IE


ArckırS

[PAGE 029]

Figure VIT: Section II structure, written out as ‘phrases’.


3° All phrases marked red are recognised to be improvised repetitions of the same phrase, therefore
sounding different but strongly related to other phrases marked red. The superscript numbering that
accompanies the phrase names (A, B, C etc.) in Figure VI € VII, attempt to describe this evolving nature of
the melodies.

28

[PAGE 030]

3.1.1 - Notes on structure


In Section I, I have defined the most significant phrases as A and B, as they make
up the majority of the section. Phrase C shares similarities in rhythm, but has
significantly different spectral content. C* is very similar to C, with a slightly altered
ending. D is a unique phrase, featuring the only non-diatonic melodic content.


The second half (Section I) starts out in a similar way, with unique phrases A, B
and C. A is very similar to B, differing in the opening phrasing. As there is only one use
of A, perhaps it could be suggested that it is actually another variation of the phrase
dubbed B. At approximately half way, the Shaman uses a phrase C*, which is similar to
C, differing only in the ending. What follows is a breaking of the repetitive, cyclic
structure, with the shaman chanting seven unique phrases named D, E, F, G, H, I & J.
Phrase F has been coloured red to mark its similarity with phrase C/C-.


3.1.2 - Melodic Content


| |
a A
-soae fl | | |
3.00Hz 10.00Hz 30.00Hz 100.00Hz 300.00Hz 1000.00Hz 3000.00Hz 9000.00Hz


Figure VII: Frequency Spectrum for Opening 9 Phrases - X axis is Frequency (Hz), Y Axis is Volume
(dB)


Figure VIII shows the frequency spectrum of the opening 9 phrases of Section A,
which, as shown in Figure VI is comprised of phrases A, B and C. Immediately, an
accentuation of the upper-middle frequencies can observed, with 300 Hz-2000 Hz being

29

[PAGE 031]

the most active area. The majority of the low-end frequencies are accounting for the
background noise and the percussive instruments. The graph also shows the dominant
frequencies being created by the chanting in the form of ‘peaks’. There are a significant
peaks near 30 Hz, 110 Hz, 260 Hz, 420 Hz and 540 Hz. These frequencies translate as
pitches B (borderline C), A, C, A*** and C. Both the frequencies (in Hz) and the pitches
are approximations, as each frequency ‘peak’ on Figure VIII represents a band of

frequencies, the most accentuated of which is the dominant frequency (referring to the
frequency that is most present and therefore becomes its classification). The most present
frequencies suggest that the song is harmonically rooted in C.


Continuing further, the score demonstrates the use of notes which correspond to,
what appears to be a diatonic pentatonic scale rooted in C; aligning with the frequencies
found in Figure VIII. All the changing melodies are constructed from these pitches, except
one deviation found in phrase D. This root of C shifts gradually throughout the
performance however, and this is mentioned in 3.1.4.


Sa

a
Figure IX: Pentatonic scale observed in Benjamin Ochavano Icaro.


Phrase D contains the only part in the Icaro that deviates from the diatonic
structure, exhibiting use of pitch G b ata point in the song where the 5-note scale is not
including this note. In section II there are changes in rhythm and pulse, but the melodic
content remains similar; the section continues to follow the C/C#-rooted pentatonic that
preceded the transition between sections.


As the scores (Figures I, II, III, IV & V) depicts in yellow, the general melodic
movement tends to follow an undulating pattern. In Section I, phrases A and B, show a


%1 The peak is less clear as to which pitch it is describing.

30

[PAGE 032]

movement of ‘down, up, down’, while phrase C exhibits movement of ‘up, down, up’.
Phrase C differs largely from A & B (in terms of melodic content), as it is based on the
dominant note”? of the scale G/G#. The transcriptions were made aurally using a pitch
reference, and the frequency spectrum adds more evidence to support their accuracy in
capturing the essence of the music.


—100.00Hz 300.0042 1000.00Hz 3000.004z 9000.00%z


Figure X: Spectral analysis of the last 7 phrases of the Benjamin Ochavano Icaro


As described in 3.1.4, the song drifts upwards in pitch, eventually reaching a tonic
of C#. At this point, despite the change in ‘key’ or root note the five note scale structure
stays the same. Figure X shows a comparison between the frequency spectrum of the
opening phrases to the frequency spectrum for the closing phrases. What can be clearly
observed is movement from a higher register, to a slightly lower one defined by an


% A western term that regards cadences (intervallic relationships).

31

[PAGE 033]

increase in the lower middle frequencies. Section II appears to make more use of lower
frequencies.


3.1.3 - Rhythmic Content:


There is a heavily-swung feel to the rhythm (resulting in a heart-beat-like pulse)
which has been notated on the score as a ‘dotted quaver - semi-quaver’ rhythm. Figure XI
depicts this dotted rhythm, as this pattern stands out as a significant rhythmic motif.


Figure XI: Example of the ‘dotted quaver - semiquaver’ rhythm.


However, each “phrase” is disconnected from each other by irregular pauses, and
these irregularities intervene with accurately determining more than an empirical grasp
on the pulse, or BPM (beats per minute). Many of the phrases fade-out towards the end”,
which results in further loosening of this rhythm. In light of these complications, the
general pulse of Section I has been found to be around 103 pulses per minute, however,
the strong sense of flexibility, variation and loose rhythmic strictness could be interpreted
as a dominant, therefore significant, rhythmic motif worthy of explanation in the Further
discussions of Chapter 5. The method ultimately used for finding this pulse involved
using ‘Logic Pro X’** to compare fragments of the track to a timing guide*. By taking
loops of individual phrases and overlaying them onto the metronome, a sense of pulse
could be more accurately determined.


In Section II, there is a clear change of pace, and a more determinable rhythm.
There is an apparent lyrical change which also contributes to the bouncier rhythm of the


2 Due to mumbling and lack of clarity in the chanting towards the end of every phrase.
** An industry-standard Digital Audio Workstation, specialised in handling and manipulating audio.
In this case a metronome and the sequencer grid in Logic Pro X.

32

[PAGE 034]

second movement”. The beat has been determined to be approximately 128 pulses per
minute, although the singer seems to slow down quite considerably as the pitch descends.


As mentioned in the Methodology, there is an underlying issue found in lack of
visual accompaniment making it difficult to tell whether the seemingly dramatic change
in rhythm and pulse aligns with a new, inter-ceremonial phase. Perhaps the speeding up is
the shaman now employing a new ‘Icaro’ from his ‘collection’, a ‘technique of ecstasy’
as described in sections 1.6, and 4.4 (Eliade, 1964),


3.1.4 - Harmonic Content:


Figure XII: Comparison of opening and closing periods of the recording of Benjamin
Ochavano’s Icaro


3° The phonetics sound more rounded and rhythmic with the lyrical changes in place.

33

[PAGE 035]

When notating the harmony, one intention was to identify when and where, and in

how much quantity, there is use of secondary voices or instruments. The general pattern
found when observing this was that the harmonic content of Section I (notated in green in
Figures I-V) there appeared to be harmonic accentuation around the middle of each phrase.

These changes in volume could be caused by an issue outlined in the
methodology, whereby movement within the ceremonial grounds can affect the

recording. However, due to lack of stereophonic movement it can be suggested that the
harmony singer stayed in a similar position. This second voice quietly hums a detuned,
simplified imitation of the Icaro, appearing to follow the lead. The second voice avoids
making sound at the very start of the phrase. The detuned voice creates a dissonance
when blending with the lead, this could be a sound tactic in generating binaural beating;
another shamanic technique for altering or manipulating ‘ecstasy’.


A second interesting aspect of Harmony that can be discussed in this Icaro is the
shift in the ‘root’. As supported by the frequencies in Figure XII, by the end of the Icaro,
the harmonic root has shifted upwards to C#. It is difficult to speculate on whether this is
an intentional shift or not. If the shift is intentional, then there is reason to speculate upon

the effects of shifting harmony in music and/or psychedelic experience. If the shift is not
intentional, then there is reason to investigate the lack of strincess in keeping the ‘tonic’
consistent. If, as Luna states, the melody contains the healing power, a lack of strictness
in which pitch is being generated or sung could indicate that the intervallic qualities*’ of
each consecutive note could potentially be more significant than specific pitches.


3.1.5 - Other observations:


After phrase B’, there is a fairly long pauses for tobacco blowing*® which is not
repeated again in the Icaro. There are shorter pauses that feel more rhythmic, and these
more frequent pauses do not appear to relate to the long pause that occurs after Icaro B’.
This break, being at an irregular time, suggests that this recording may have been taken
midway through a ceremony. As these recordings were made in-situ , the
irregular timing of brief interlude can suggest that the recording is potentially not a

complete musical movement, but an extract of a much longer performance.


97 The rhythmic and spectral distance between each note.
38 This can be referred to as ‘Ikaray’, the word for ‘blow smoke’ in the Quencha language.

34

[PAGE 036]

3.2 - Artidoro Ayahuasca Shaman
Published by H.G Charing on Soundcloud: www.soundcloud.com/hgcharing
Track Length: 4:07


35

[PAGE 037]

3.2.1 - Structural Content:


Figure XV: The structure of Artidoro’s Icaro presented as a chart.


The structure of this song can be described as five cycles of six phrases. This is
shown in Figure XV as five iterations of phrases 4-F. Phrases A-E are very similar, with
subtle variation. However phrase F is shorter, containing a resolving quality in the
rhythm and melody, forming the end of the cycle.
The subtle variations in the phrases can be inferred as an attempt to develop the
music in a progressive manner while maintaining a specific structure which would
indicate significance in the structure of Icaros.


3.2.2 - Melodic Content:


This Icaro demonstrates a minimal amount of melodic variation, with very simple
phrasing that doesn’t change over the performance. With such repetitive phrasing, the
majority of spectral variance stems from the natural timbral shaping produced by
language. While the modulating lyrics do subtly affect the melodic nature of the Icaro in
this way, It is unclear how much these timbral changes impact and contribute to the
success or purpose of the song. Cultural literature (Luna, 1986) suggests great importance
in the melody, but the lack of study or discussion on lyricism doesn’t prove
unimportance.


36

[PAGE 038]

-30d8 |

36 | |

ao | I ¡ |


-54dB: a alt IN | | |
| | TTS CR i i]
a Wet a TE
oca IIER... EEE li 118, dl
a. AA a AIN | URN| 1 |


7200
-75d|
i, AA.
hdd
LTAy ul
75 0 O O
OO
OO MI
-B4dB !

-87d8
OS O U
eee
3Hz 5Hz 10Hz 20Hz 40Hz 100Hz 200Hz 400Hz 1000Hz 3000Hz 7000Hz 16000Hz


Figure XVI: Frequency Spectrum for Artidoro’s Ayahuasca Icaro


The spectrum in Figure XVI shows the spectral content in the opening minutes of
Artidoro’s chanting. There are dominant peaks are 153 Hz, 209 Hz, 252 Hz and 417 Hz”,
which translate approximately as D#, GH, B and A#. Each phrase consists of a long chain
of G# notes, dropping to D# in the middle, and rising to B at the end of each phrase. This
forms an interesting pattern of repetitively rising and falling. Occasionally, the Shaman
will commence a phrase with by swinging up or down bya single step of the scale before
the first note.
At the end of each phrase denoted A there is a sharp rise in pitch upon the final
note, which is sustained for multiple beats until it has completely faded out. B
significantly differs from this melodic upswing, remaining straight on the note G#. This
has been depicted on the score as a crotchet - minim connected with a tie, because the
final B is more of a slide upwards than a defined note.


3.2.3 - Rhythmic Content:


Considering the heavy repetition of a simple, slightly monotonous”? melodic
motif, it can be suggested that, in this Icaro, the rhythmic content is more prominent
feature. Matching the Benjamin Ochavano Icaro, Artidoro’s melody is based on a dotted


39 It is an interesting side note that the dominant frequency here (417 Hz), is a member of the Solfeggio
frequencies. To remain brief, as speculating upon this archaic concept is far beyond the scope of this
research, these frequencies are dominant in both Gregorian chanting and Ancient Indian music, and are
suggested to be ‘healing frequencies’. (Hulse, 2009)
40 In that it remains on a G# for a significant amount of time.

37

[PAGE 039]

quaver - semi-quaver rhythm, identical to that in Figure XI*. It continues with this
rhythm throughout the entirety of the song. The last phrase of the cycle, F, ends with a
change of rhythm, which grants the phrase a resolving quality, marking the end of the
cycle.


3.2.4 - Harmonic Content


The predominant interval structure, or scale, is based on what is analogous to a
CH pentatonic scale”, although the heavy focus on the note G# could suggest otherwise.
If there is a relation to the CH, then this Icaro is the second Icaro to be linked to the
harmonic frequencies of C/C#. However, overall there appears to be little harmonic

interest in this Icaro.


*1 As can be seen in the score in phrase A-F.
*2 In that, the notes used form a scale comprised of the same notes as a CH major pentatonic, only the focus
is on the Dominant 5th GH.

38

[PAGE 040]

3.3 - Mariana Shaman Icaro
Published by H.G Charing on Soundcloud: www.soundcloud.com/hgcharing
Track Length: 8:38


39

[PAGE 041]

40

[PAGE 042]

pp


m.




+1


ma 4

[PAGE 043]

3.3.1 - Structural Notes:


A B A? B

B? A? Bt AS

A? B® A? B’

B? AL Bi AB


In Mariano’s Icaro, there is a cycle of two phrase archetypes, denoted A and B,
and, as indicated by the superscript numbers, each phrase changes slightly each
repetition. As Mariano cycles through these repetitions, the phrases become longer and
more complex. Despite the developing nature, the two ‘voices’, ‘A’, and ‘B’, remain
distinct enough that they are audibly recognisable as being related to the previous


42

[PAGE 044]

iteration of that archetype*, and because of this the structure of this Icaro can be defined
as a call and response pattern. It appears as a conversational structure, in which the
phrases denoted as A, act as voice one, and appears to lead, with the response coming in
the form of phrase B and its variations.
There is a counterpoint phrase in which the song appears to turn around, which
has been labelled C. It stands out from either voices with a start which is not seen in the
rest of the Icaro, yet, as the score reveals, the phrase C features an ending that is very
similar to the phrase B.


DE


EN os
Figure XXII: An alternative demonstration of the structure, attempting to show a pattern


Figure XXII shows an alternative way of displaying the structure. Here, the
structure can be shown as a palindrome, using C as a turning point. Due to the limitations
discussed in 3.1.1 and 3.2.1, as , it’s difficult to tell whether the piece commenced before
the recording, and whether the recording captures the whole Icaro. Should the
performance have gone beyond what the recording captured, this structure does no longer
appear to be as symmetrical.


43 All A phrases are recognisable as an A phrase, despite the fact they are gradually changing, and the
same applies to all B phrases.

43

[PAGE 045]

Figure XXIII: An abstract transcription of Mariano’s Ayahuasca Icaro


A third alternative score displays the Icaro as a spiral, and this more aptly
demonstrates the modulating nature of the Icaro. As the spiral expands from the centre,
the length and complexity increases, in the same way, each cycle gets more complex and
longer. The break from the balanced cycle, depicted as an awkward, extended line in red
is the C phrase near the middle.

3.3.2 - Melodic Content:


As suggested in the Structural Content section, the two main melody lines, 4 and
B, evolve as the song goes on. Each phrase differs slightly in melodic rhythm, following
a vague melodic pathway, with no more than 3 or 4 minor changes per cycle. However, ,
by the 6th repetition, A is completely different to what it started out as. This evolving
quality substantiates previous findings regarding variation, in that, all Icaros seem to
directly avoid straight repetition. This could be a lack of performance ability, or a loose
strictness towards rhythm, or another example of variation.


“4 The timing interval between each note in the melody, rather than the grid or structure which the melody is
overlayed (coming in the form of the Schacapa rattling in this Icaro).

44

[PAGE 046]

-30dB: bs


-36d6:

-42dB |
-48dB |
-54dB N
-60dB


-66dE

-72d

-78dB

-84dB

-90dB

3Hz 5Hz 10Hz 20Hz 40Hz 100Hz 200Hz 400Hz 1000Hz 3000Hz 7000Hz 16000Hz


Figure XXIV: Frequency Spectrum for Mariano's Ayahuasca Icaro


Once again, the tonic is centred on the C-C# region, using the same pentatonic
scale structure as the other pieces. This is shown in figure XXIV, with prominent peaks at
142 Hz (C#), 427 Hz (G#) and 484 Hz (B) The frequency spectrum (figure XXIV) shows
that there is also a leniency towards the middle frequencies throughout the song.
Considering the lower frequencies consist of the rattling and background noise, it’s
suggestible that the vocals consist of the middle and high frequencies, coinciding with the
other Icaros.


3.3.3 - Rhythmic Content:


What immediately stands out about this piece is the utilisation of a strong pulse
kept in constant motion with a rattle. This pulse (depicted in Figure XXV) is kept through
the entire duration in a comparably strict rhythm, not stopping with any vocal pauses. It is
only at the end where the rattling stops and the shaman repeats the icaro once alone. The
pulse of the Shacapa is approximately 105 beats per minute.


Figure XXV: The pulse of the Schacapa in Mariano’s Ayahuasca Icaro. Steady
Quavers.


45

[PAGE 047]

3.3.4: Harmonic Content


Mariano’s Icaro doesn’t exhibit any signs of a secondary voice, or any facets of
interest in the melodic harmony, other than the limited nature. In this sense, the harmonic content
is similar to that of Artidoro’s Icaro (3.2).


3.4 - Elf’s Bow (Extract)
Published on Soundcloud: www.soundcloud.com/hgcharing


Figure XXVI: A transcription of a brief extract from the beginning of Mariano’s ‘Elf’s bow’ Icaro.


Rigid straight pulse that makes minimal rhythmic changes every so often, as if trying to
catch the listener off guard. The instrument named ‘Arc de Duende” (Elf’s bow), described by
Charing (2014) as a ‘magical stringed instrument’, is quite likely to be similar to a Berimbau.
This instrument is strongly associated with Capoeira dancing (Downey, 2002). Downey suggests
that Capoeira instrumentalists describe the experiential effects of sound textures, especially those
created by the Berimbau, in such a way that has proven difficult for ethnomusicologists to grasp
in the past.
The melody that resonates off this instrument is subtle, very faint changes in pitch. The
timbre of the instruments resonance is similar to a formant filter sound. In this sense, the Elfs
bow creates a human-vocal quality. The methodology is quite insufficient for dealing with this


46

[PAGE 048]

music, and an alternative has been devised to at least demonstrate some of the musical qualities,
as this is too, a healing song.


What has been depicted in the score (Figure XX VI) is a steady crotchet pulse with
melodic movements overlayed. The selected extracts contain a general sense of how the melody
moves upwards and downwards in steps around the central B note*. It is possible that, due to the
instrument and how it is best played to produce sound, constant step variation is required to
exhibit a sense of rhythmic melody.


Spirit Quest recordings

3.5 - Don Rober Recordings
Published on SpiritQuest: Available at: http://biopark.org/icaros.html


A series of recordings available from the SpiritQuest centre includes a folder entitled
‘Rober recordings”
.* There are 4 pairs of recordings which could possibly showcase the
differentiating Icaros of one long Ayahuasca ceremony, conducted by Don Rober Acho Jarama.
In these short recordings, a singing and whistling style is employed in a similar way to the
previous recordings that have been examined so far. Each of the ‘Rober’ extracts contain a pulse
played by a schacapa.* These recordings also demonstrate similar use of harmony, in that, one
backing singer, perhaps the apprentice or an assistant to the shaman, intermittently applies a
dissonant harmony to the lead voice, layering the sound into an even more spectrally complex,
polyphonic sound.
SpiritQuest bring extra attention to the high level of experience held by the performer
here (Don Rober), noted to be the incomparable maestro. Ayahuasca shaman authenticity, and
their ‘power’ is suggested to be based in their repertoire of icaros and their knowledge of how to
employ them ritualistically. Having access to the recordings of a maestro is useful in identifying
which other icaros are coherent with the, almost platonic, Ayahuasca Icaro


3.6 - Hermana Maria Luisa Tuesta Flores.


Upon inspecting the vocal performances of this adept, there is an immediate factor which
separates it from the others. In the recordings filed under her name, Maria’s icaros appear to have


“© The main pitch of the instrument is a low B note created by hitting the string in its primary position.
46 This refers to Don Rober Acho Jarama, an ayahuasquero involved with the Spirit Quest centre.
*7 Similarly to the Huitoto shaman Mariano

47

[PAGE 049]

more than one performer overlapping multiple melodies. While she remains the dominant voice,
there is a second voice present (in the form of whistling), both accompanied with a Schacapa
rattle playing a straight rhythm.


Figure XXVII: The transcription of a short extract from the beginning of Maria Tuesta Flores’
Ayahuasca Icaro


The whistling and the chanting have no rhythmic connection, with the chanting following
the rhythm of the shacapa, and the whistling appearing to operate totally independently. With
this in mind, the whistling has been treated as the dissonant harmony that usually accompanies
Icaro chanting. Markings on the score extract show how the harmony part appears to cease
during times that the main voice falls to a slightly lower register.


3.7 - Marlene Dobkin de Rios score


This score is available in the paper ‘Hallucinogenic Music’ by Fred Katz and M. Dobkin
de Rios (1971). The score describes an Icaro that the pair had recorded during their time in Peru.
It stands as a valuable information source to compare to my own scores.


48

[PAGE 050]

1
+ Y Hh
yl
bene un LS + F#2E e... e. + 0, 6 Al


Figures XXVIII & XXIX: The transcription produced by Marlene Dobkin de Rios (1971)


3.7.1 - Structure


The structure can be written out as A, B, A - C, D, E - A, B, A. This structure, if it
is the entire length of that particular Icaro, appears to be another instance of structural
symmetry. When written out this way, it also appears to be more of a strophic structure

than other Icaros, and could be written as Verse - Chorus - Verse.


49

[PAGE 051]

3.7.2 - Melody


The score appears to be suggesting a tuning of C major/A minor (no sharps or
flats), and shows a dominant use of the note ‘C’. This key signature doesn’t change
throughout, suggesting limited shifting of pitch*. The transcriber also notes


3.7.3 - Rhythm


Dobkin de Rios describes a changing metre throughout the song, a feature that
hasn’t been observed in the scores produced in response to the HG Charing recordings,
perhaps highlighting areas in which the any further transcriptions can be improved.
The transcription notes a few instances of the dotted-quaver rhythm’, but it does appear
to be a prominent rhythm throughout, featuring only in four phrases. At 143 pulses per
minute, the tempo is also higher than other Icaros that have been analysed here.


48 Such as the pitch shifting observed in Benjamin Ochavano Icaro.
49 A recurrent rhythm throughout the Icaros.

50

[PAGE 052]

Chapter 4

Discussions


4.1 - Melody


In a large majority of pieces analysed, including the score of Marlene Dobkin de Rios
(Figures XXVIII & XXIX, 1971), there is a central melodic theme, best described as a diatonic
scale comprised of 5 unique pitches. This contrasts the expectations in the methodology,
whereby western notation proved quite appropriate to describe the movement in pitch. It is
interesting to note that many of the Icaros analysed also root this 5-note scale on a pitch between
C and C#. The ‘Benjamin Ochavano Icaro’ piece starts in the key of C, but as described in 3.1,
slowly shifts upwards until it no longer resolves to a C tonic, but C#. Due to the significant use
of this pitch, further research could be done into the relevance of certain frequencies.
An interesting observation is that, these five-note scale structures, such as that depicted in
figure IX, use intervals that appear analogous to a pentatonic scale that 1s also found in many
other cultures. It must be noted that little allowance for any microtones has been made, as it is
difficult to say for certain whether there is deliberate detuning, accidental detuning, or even
accidental microtonal inaccuracies.


It is proposed by the author that, melodic movements of up and down”, have a particular
phenomenological perception (for example ‘soothing’) which in turn produces a change in
consciousness for the participant. The literature suggests that the Shaman deliberately employs
Icaros as a ‘tactical’ method of manipulating consciousness (Molina, 2009; Eliade, 1964;
McKenna, 1992), and inducing phenomena in perception could be an example of this.


4.2 - Rhythm


Multiple Icaros analysed (3.1, 3.2, 3.3 ) make use of a dotted crotchet rhythm, either in a
dominant way (3.1, 3.2), or less dominant but still highly utilised (3.3). This suggests there is a


5° Such as that in Benjamin Ochavano phrases A & B.

51

[PAGE 053]

significance to this rhythm within the Ayahuasca ceremony, and therefore perhaps has a
significant effect on the brain or perception.
Many of the Icaros analysed (3.3, 3.5, 3.6) included the thematic use of Schacapa rattling.
This straight rhythm creates a strong sense of pulse for the melody to be sung to. Icaros that
included the Schacapa hada stricter sense of rhythm in the melody, as it can be used as a timing
guidance. The Schacapa also generates a large array of frequencies making it a significant
contributor to the overall harmony too.


4.3 - Harmony


There are different applications of Harmony presented in the Icaros, from little harmonic
interest (3.2), to a dissonant second voice (3.1), to a totally overlapping pair of musical ideas

(3.6).
The main role of the harmony part, across all applications of a second voice, is to give the
melody a more complex frequency range. Furthermore, the main theme of the harmony created
can be described as dissonant and counterpoint. The frequencies do not tend to match, with the
dissonance stemming from the seemingly deliberate spectral contrast. As discussed in 2.5.3, the
binaural beating caused by two almost identical frequencies clashing, could be the purpose of
this dissonance. Binaural beats interact with the brainin a similar way to polyrhythmic
drumming, specifically regarding theta brainwaves Atwe )7). It
appears that these theta waves are closely connected to music and altered states of consciousness.
The author suggests that the use of hallucinogenic substances, when relating to music, is to put
the subject in the right state of mind for the music to take hold of, and control the frequency of
the brain.


4.4 - Instrumentation


Anthropological literature on amazonian culture suggests that non-verbal sound is one of
the specific ways to communicate with spirits. y ) This includes whistling,
chanting, humming. Chaumeil goes on to say that Yagua shamans use certain exercises to enable
singing in very high frequencies, which they say corresponds with the way the spirits speak.
Chaumeil (2011b) cites Yvinec, who suggests that it is not ‘what is being communicated’ that
matters, only that they ‘are communicating/connecting’; the very principle of engaging in an
alternate process of communication. The Ayahuasca Icaros analysed have demonstrated a
significant use of high frequencies, across the different instruments used to create them, which
could be linked to the process of engaging in alternate communication methods exhibited by the
Yagua.


52

[PAGE 054]

It has been observed in these recordings that Ayahuasca Icaros include whistling,
chanting, humming, Berimbau and a recurrent Shacapa. None of these featured a flute, which
contradicts some literature . While not limited to, the
dominant instrument type is wind instruments or more accurately, aerophones. ‘Burst of Breath’

explores the many examples of aerophonic significance in many South American
cultures. Further research could be conducted into the sonic characteristics unique to aerophones,
as well as psychological studies of how aerophones are perceived differently to other instrument
types. Chanting and vocalisations can be understood as containing nuances that are unique to the
human voice, a sound the brain is incredibly adept at analysing for semantic information or
subtle differences.


The use of Berimbau also exhibits a complex sound with varying resonances creating a
formant effect, which in a sense liken it to the human voice in terms of versatility and complexity

and timbre. Stringed instruments that vibrate in this way, as well as bowed instruments like the
violin, create very complex sounds that could also influence the brain in a different, but equally
intense way, thus worthy of further research as well. As observed in the recordings of Huitoto

Shaman Mariano, Shamans use more than one instrument during a ceremony. Mariano’s (3.3)
chanted Icaros have a completely different overall feeling to the Icaro produced by the
Berimbau. Perhaps as an extension of the “techniques of ecstasy’ notion (Eliade; 1964), Mariano

is changing instrument to change the effect the Icaro is having on the participant, in a way that is
similar to Molina’s notion of ‘changing the boundaries’ of the realm being visited by
Ayahuasca participants.


4.5 - Structure


There is a lot of symmetrical, palindromic structures, but most examples have required

some forced perspectives to observe that pattern, such as in figure XXII. There have been
instances where structural content has been difficult to assess due to the limitations of the
recordings (3.1, 3.3, 3.5, 3.6). With this in mind, it is clear that to further assess the significance
of the structure, much more must be known about the corresponding events that are occurring
during the ceremony.


53

[PAGE 055]

Image VIT: Meditating


54

[PAGE 056]

Chapter 5

Further Discussion


5.1 - Evaluation of the study


In order to evaluate the methodology at this late stage, the research intention must be
reconsidered. The original task was to determine a detailed understanding of ‘Ayahuasca Icaro’
musicology, and the success of the methodology can be considered in relation to this. It was
achieved, to the extent that general melodic themes of Ayahuasca Icaros have been adequately
understood. Contradicting the methodology, handling the melodic content through the use of
transcription felt much more comfortable than had been expected. However, limited observations
in the rhythmic content suggests that comprehending rhythm requires a new method.


As a suggestion as to which direction the analysis of Ayahuasca Icaros may pursue, it
will be interesting to consider the lyrical content in a similar way to Caldicott . In this Ph.D
thesis, the author examines the language used in Icaro chanting. Investigating lyricism in relation
to the melodies could reveal particularly powerful words that have been scripted to accentuate
particular melody lines.


5.2 - The theme of ‘variation’


Variation stands out as a strong musical characteristic of Ayahuasca Icaros, which exhibit
minimal changes on a large scale, creating evolving melodies and rhythms and changing
structures. Previously mentioned research also found variation to be a
significant characteristic in Gabonian hallucinogenic ritual music. The article uses a picture to
demonstrate how subtle variation of simple motifs can create a vast tapestry that is repetitive but
evolving and interesting.


55

[PAGE 057]

Figure XXX: Image demonstrating the artistic effect of minor variations in a large, repetitive
tapestry


Maas describes this as ‘periodic repetitions with continuous minimal changes’, and
suggests that there is specific reason for utilising this music for the intended purposes. When
following a repetitive pattern, the listener begins to generate expectations of each musical idea
and, due to the constant minor variations, have them systematically deceived. This
circumvention, as suggested by a Mitsogho informant (2007), keeps the listener in a state of
251
‘open attention’. This African tribe uses music to set the listener to the appropriate mental state
that is required for the psychological and spiritual healing.


In the same way, Ayahuasca shamans may use minor variations their music to generate
musical expectations, and deliberately contradict these expectations; preventing the mind from
being able to gain any familiarity, causing it to stay transfixed on the music as the brain searches
for patterns and repetitions. It could be suggested that consistent use of familiar frequencies
(such as the recurring pitch *C”) are used to set up expectations in the mind of the listener,
followed by other techniques such as gradual movement in tuning and melodic variation to
contradict those expectations.


5.2 - Psychedelic Psychology


Maria Chichosz of the University of Toronto writes about the concept of concentration,

and the ‘power’ of paying attention, suggesting that much of the value of ‘tripping’ stems from
being forced a serving of (‘ethical’) attentiveness (Chichosz, 2014). Chichosz’ case is such:


51 Another example of Chichosz’ ‘attentiveness’ a theme discussed in section 4.3

56

[PAGE 058]

‘Attentiveness’ proves to be an ethical effort, because it requires us to unhinge the natural,
hardwired default state of staying alert, instead of becoming ‘hypnotized by the constant
monologue in one’s head’. If the Ayahuasca Icaros are causing the effect described in 5.2°°,
ayahuasca-drinker appears to be shepherded towards this state of ‘ethical attentiveness


Similar psychological mechanisms are demonstrated in Colombian Tomas de Yajé. This
ceremony focuses on the consumption of a plant-brew known as Yagé”*. While the ceremony
follows a slightly different conduct, the central principles of consuming a Banisteriopsis Caapi
brew, and being subjected to extensive musical content for the purposes of healing. In simple
terms, it is believed that music and sound construct the place which is visited during the ‘trip’.

The taitas” of Colombian tomas de Yaje, use sound tactically to create and
modulate temporary, sonically-bound ‘places’ which the mind of participants travel to during the
ceremony. Molina writes of “placeness”, and how non-verbal sound is used to index the sounds
of the Amazon (Rivers, Wind, Animals), to anchor the participants in their location. This could

stand as an example of Maria Chichosz’ ( ethical attentiveness, using sonic tactics to help
define the participants sense of ‘place’ during their incorporeal travels. Molina notes a valuable
area of further study, in understanding the nature of which non-verbal sound defines ‘place’,

somewhat combining the realms of semantic (such that it contains information useful to the
observer) sonic information and musical sonic information to greater understand just how much
external frequencies interact with internal anatomical or cerebral frequencies.


5.3 - Jungle Gym/Spiritual Ladder


The idea of ‘anchoring’ discussed in 5.3 ties directly into the aforementioned notion of
spiritual ladders and ropes
. It has been previously proposed that the music associated with hallucinogenic
ritual acts as a guide rope between one realm and another (perhaps one that has been ‘created’>®),


% The internal monologue refers to the conversation that the mind appears to undergo when evaluating and
assimilating the direct information of the present moment, Chichosz suggests that our contextual
understanding of things form a backdrop to the information being perceived in the present moment, a
mechanism which prevents us from the aforementioned hypnotization or ‘entrancing’.
% Whereby the music prevents the brain from finding a true rhythm, causing it to stay search
% This plant-brew shares chemical composition with traditional Amazonian Ayahuasca, such that it is
comprised of Banisteriopsis Caapi and Psychotria Viridis (or the many variations). The conduct of the
ceremony is different, as they likely have a different cosmological perspective and thus engage with the
spirits in a unique manner. However different though, fundamental principles of Plant Spirit communication
and dependence on music remain ever present in Tomas de Yajé
°° Taitas is the Colombian term for the musical shaman that conducts Tomas de Yajé.
°° Referring back to 5.2, where it was suggested that the taitas in Colombian Tomas de Yajé use music to
create a ‘sonically bound’ dimension.

57

[PAGE 059]

such that it anchors them in reality, assisting a safe return and acting as a permanent link back to
a state of normal waking consciousness. Once again referring to 5.2, Molina suggests that
Colombian taitas use their sonorous instruments to create temporal ‘places’ that are ‘sonically
bound’, and modulate their boundaries while the participants explore them. This shares a striking
familiarity to the Jungle Gym in Consciousness concept developed by Katz and Dobkin de Rios,
where they propose that the shamanic Icaros sung during Ayahuasca ceremonies act as a
self-contained structure for the participants. While the findings of this research aren’t enough to
further shape this theory, 35 years after it’s conception, modern Ayahuasca related research
continues to confirm the idea that Shamans create a plane in which the user’s ecstatic
consciousness can exist within.


5.4 - Final Words


The final area of discussion includes the potential this research has to go beyond its

current field of study. Research by Carhartt-Harris suggests that psychoactive substances
can interfere or modulate with the default mode network (DMN)°’. The concept of the “ego” is
currently believed to be an emergent property of the DMN, and it is considered as the location of
metacognition, area of the brain; where the brain ‘thinks about thinking”. If the ego 1s the
internal, hypnotic conversation that accompanies the reality being experienced by everyone, it
can be quite clear to envision how interference with the DMN (often described as
ego-dissolution), can drastically affect how reality is perceived*’. The neurobiological
understandings of consciousness are beyond the scope of this paper, however, the results found
in this musicological research can be useful to researchers who study the synapse between music
and its manifestation as a change in consciousness””. Section 5.2 demonstrates one direction of
further study that the findings of Ayahuasca Icaros could pursue, and the further neuroscientific
discussions emerging around these psychological questions demonstrate that these results
directly feed into other fascinating research.


57 This DMN has been dubbed ‘the orchestrator of the self
5 Due to the loss of the inner-commentary, or, as Chichosz suggests, a force-serving of ethical
attentiveness
°° Carhartt-Harris further states, in a short online lecture, that all positive and negative experiences
had during the psychedelic experience can have therapeutic and psychological benefits should it be properly
mediated . This makes clear the importance of the shaman role within ayahuasca ceremonies,
and highlights the importance of further studying ayahuasca icaros, as they are the main tool with which the
shaman mediates the experience.

58

[PAGE 060]

59

[PAGE 061]

6.1 - References


Aldridge, D. (2009) Music, Consciousness and Altered States. Music & Altered States:

Consciousness, Transcendence, Therapy and Addictions. Jessica Kingsley.


Arguedas, J.M. (2010) The Singing Mountaineers: Songs and Tales of the Quencha People.
University of Texas Press.


Atwater, F.H. (1997) Access anomalous states of consciousness with binaural technology.
Journal of Scientific Exploration. Vol. 11(3) pp. 263-274


Beattie, J., Middleton, J. (2004) Spirit Mediumship and Society in Africa. London: Routledge.


Brabec de Mori, B. (2011) Tracing Hallucinations: Contributing to a Critical Ethnohistory of
Ayahuasca usage in the Peruvian Amazon. The Internationalisation ofAyahuasca. Verlag
Munster.


Bustos, S. (2004) The Healing power of Curanderos’ songs or Icaros: A phenomenological
study. California institute of integral studies: PHD dissertation proposal.


Bustos, S. (2008) The Healing power of the Icaros: phenomenological study of ayahuasca
experiences. California institute of integral studies: PHD thesis.


Caldicott, C. (n/a) Mantay Kunay Kayadididi: A lyrical analysis of the Icaros of a Peruvian
Curandera. Ph. D research: University of Florida. Available online at: www.neip.info


Castaneda, C. (1968) The teachings of Don Juan: A Yaqui way of Knowledge. Washington
Square Press.


Carhartt-Harris, R. (2014) How do drugs work on the brain. Lecture at Imperial College London.

Available online at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=]T5dZDnJ6J4&spfreload=10


Carhartt-Harris, R, et al. (2014) The Entropic Brain: a theory of conscious states informed by

neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. Vol. 8(20)


Charing, H. G (2015) Interview regarding information about the recordings, with Howard

Charing. 10th May 2015.


60

[PAGE 062]

Charing, H. G (2014) Song description for Mariano’s Ayahuasca Icaro (a recording that has
been analysed in this research) Available online at:
https://soundcloud.com/hgcharing/ayahuasca-icaro-arc-de-duende


Charing, H. G., Cloudsley, P., Amaringo, P. (2011) 4yahuasca Visions of Pablo Amaringo. Inner
Traditions Publishing.


Chaumeil, J.P. (2011b) Speaking Tubes: The Sonorous Language of Yagua Flutes. Burst of
Breath: Indigenous Ritual Wind Instruments in Lowland South America. University of Nebraska
Press.


Chichosz, M. (2014) The potential of paying attention: Tripping and the ethics of affective
attentiveness. Journal of Emotion, Space and Society. Vol.10. 55-62. Elsevier.


Demange, F. (2002) Amazonian vegetalismo: A study of the healing power of chants in
Tarapoto, Peru. University of East London, Master’s thesis.


Devereux, P. (2008) The Long Trip: A Prehistory of Psychedelia. Daily Grail Publishing: UK.


DMT-Nexus Forum (2015) DMT-Nexus Forum - Learn, Share, Expand. A Popular online
community for discussion of subjective psychedelic experiences.


Dobkin de Rios, M. (2009) The Role of Music in Healing with Hallucinogens: Tribal and
Western Studies. Music & Altered States: Consciousness, Transcendence, Therapy and
Addictions. Jessica Kingsley.


Downey, G. (2002) Listening to Capoeira: Phenomenology, Embodiment, and the Materiality of
Music. Journal of Ethnomusicology. Vol. 46(3). pp. 487-509


Eliade, M. (1964) The Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


Furst, P. (1976) Hallucinogens and Culture. Chandler & Sharp. ISBN: 0-88316-517-1v


Friesen, J.G. (2001) Enstasy, Ecstasy and Religious Self-reflection: A history of Dooyeweerd’s
ideas of pre-theoretical experience. obtained from
http://www.members.shaw.ca/aevum/Enstasy.pdf


Geertz, C. (1973) Thick Description: Towards an Interpretive Theory of Culture. Basic Books.

61

[PAGE 063]

Gow, P. (1996) River People: Shamanism and History in Western Amazonia. Shamanism,
History, and the State: Nine case studies of shamanic practice in widely different cultures.
University of Michigan Press.


Hanegraaff, W.J. (2012) Entheogenic Esotericism. Contemporary Esotericism, Chapter 19, p393.
Equinox: Sheffield. [Acquired on www.academia.edu 22nd October 2014]


Heaven, R., Charing, H.G., Amaringo, P. (2006) Plant Spirit Shamanism: Traditional techniques
for Healing the Soul.


Hill, J., Chaumeil, J.P. (2011) Burst of Breath: Indigenous Ritual Wind Instruments in Lowland
South America. University of Nebraska Press.


Hulse, D. (2009) Fork in the road: An inspiring journey of how Ancient Solfeggio frequencies
are empowering personal and planetary transformation. Author House.


Huxley, A. (2011) The Doors of Perception: Heaven and Hell. Frontal Lobe publishing.


Katz, F., Dobkin de Rios, M. (1971) Hallucinogenic Music: An analysis of the role of whistling
in Peruvian Ayahuasca healing sessions. The Journal ofAmerican Folklore, Vol. 84, no. 333 pp.
320-327


Katz, F., Dobkin de Rios, M. (1975) Some relationships between Music & Hallucinogenic
ritual: the “Jungle Gym” in consciousness. Ethos 3(1) pp.64-76


Labate, B. C., Cavnar, C. (2013) The Therapeutic use ofAyahuasca. Heidelberg: Springer.


Lane, J., Kasian, S., Owens, J., Marsh, G. (1998) Binaural Auditory Beats Affect Vigilance
Performance and Mood. Journal of Psychology & Behaviour. Vol. 63(2) pp. 249-252


Leary, T., Metzner, R., Alpert, R. (1964) The Psychedelic Experience: A manual based on the
tibetan book of the dead.


Luna, L.E. (1986) The concept of ‘Plants as Teachers’ amongst 4 mestizo Shamans in Iquitos,
northeastern Peru. The Journal of Ethnopharmacology. Vol. 11. 135-156.


Luna, L.E., Amaringo, P. (1991) Ayahuasca Visions: The religious Iconography of a Peruvian
Shaman. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.

62

[PAGE 064]

Maas, U., Strubelt, S. (2009) Polyrhythms Supporting a Pharmacotherapy: Music in the Iboga
Initiation Ceremony in Gabon. Music & Altered States: Consciousness, Transcendence, Therapy
and Addictions. Jessica Kingsley.


Mabit, J. (2007) Ayahuasca in the treatment of addictions. Psychedelic Medicine (Vol. 2): New
Evidence for Hallucinogenic Substances as Treatments


McKenna, D. J., Towers, G. H. N. (1984) Biochemistry and pharmacology of tryptamines and
B-carbolines: A minireview. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 16: pp. 347-358.


McKenna, T. (1992) Food of the Gods: A Radical history of Plants, Drugs and Human
Evolution. Bantam Books: USA


Metcalfe, S. (1997) Ecstasy Evangelists and Psychedelic Warriors. Psychedelia Britannica.
Turnaround Books.


Metzner, R. (1999) Ayahuasca: hallucinogens, consciousness, and the spirit of nature. New
York: Thunder’s mouth press.


Molina, A. J. G. (2014) The Sound Tactics of Upper Putumayo Shamans. University of
California, Berkeley. M.A Thesis.


Narby, J. (1999) The Cosmic Serpent: DNA and the Origins of Knowledge. Putnam; Reprint
edition.


Nettl, B. (2005a) Chapter 7 - I can’t say a thing until I’ve seen the score: Transcription. The
study of Ethnomusicology: Thirty-one Theories and Concepts. University of Illinois Press.


Nettl, B. (2005b) Chapter 14 - You do not understand this music. The study of Ethnomusicology:
Thirty-one Theories and Concepts. University of Illinois Press.


Rouget, G. (1985) Music & Trance: A Theory of relations between Music and Possession.
University of Chicago Press: USA. ISBN: 0-226-73005-0


Scherzinger, M. (2013) The Fractal Harmonies of Southern Africa. Analytical approaches to
World Music. 3(1). pp.62-91


63

[PAGE 065]

Sessa, B. (2008) Is it time to revisit the role of psychedelic drugs in enhancing human creativity.
Journal of Psychopharmacology. 22(8) pp. 821-827. SAGE publications.


Sokolova, A. N. (2009) Music as Medicine: The Adygh’s Case. Music & Altered States:
Consciousness, Transcendence, Therapy and Addictions. Jessica Kingsley.


Strassman, R. (1994) DMT: The Spirit Molecule: A doctor’s revolutionary research into
Near-Death and Mystical experiences. Vermont: Park Street Press


Szabo, C. (2009) The Effects of Listening to Monotonous Drumming on Subjective Experiences.
Music & Altered States: Consciousness, Transcendence, Therapy and Addictions. Jessica
Kingsley.


Tupper, K.W. (2008) The globalization of Ayahuasca: Harm reduction or benefit maximisation?
International Journal of Drug Policy. Vol.19. 297-303


Uzendoski, M. A., Calapucha-Tapuy, E. F (2011) The Ecology of the Spoken Word: Amazonian

Storytelling and the Shamanism among the Napo Runa. University of Illinois Press.


Vickers W. T. (1993) The Anthropology of Amazonia: Essays. Latin American Research review.

Vol.28(1) 111-127.


Wagley, C. (Ed.). (1974). Man in the Amazon. University Presses of Florida.


Znamenski, A. (2009) Quest for Primal Knowledge: Mircea Eliade, Traditionalism, and “Archaic
Techniques of Ecstasy”. University of Memphis Press.


6.2 - Images


ImageI: Shaman at work -


1.9832
lImage II: The River Amazon - http://www.thousandwonders.net/Amazon+River

Image III: Brewing Ayahuasca -


0083_disp.ipg


64

[PAGE 066]

Image IV: Preparing Ayahuasca Brew -

http://botanicscience.blogspot.co.uk/2011/01/etnofarmakologia-i-dopalacze.html

Image V: Ready to Brew - http://www.justsciencenews.com/2015/04/06/page/3/

Image VI: Fanning the flames -

http://www.mensjournal.com/magazine/down-the-monkey-hole-20 1403 10?page=4

Image VII: Meditating - http://www.incaglossary.org/s.html


6.3 - Recordings Used


Charing, H. G., Cloudsley, P. (2012) Benjamin Ochavano Ayahuasca Icaro. Published on
Soundcloud at: https://soundcloud.com/hgcharing/ayahuasca-icaro-shipibo-shaman


Charing, H. G., Cloudsley, P. (2014) Ayahuasca Icaro by Shaman Artidoro. Published on
Soundcloud at: https://soundcloud.com/hgcharing/ayahuasca-icaro-by-shaman


Charing, H. G., Cloudsley, P. (2014) Ayahuasca Icaro by Huitoto Shaman Mariano. Published
on Soundcloud at: https://soundcloud.com/hgcharing/ayahuasca-icaro-by-huitoto


Charing, H. G, Cloudsley, P. (2014) Ayahuasca Icaro - Arc de Duende (Elf's Bow) played by
Mariano 2003. Published on soundcloud at:
https://soundcloud.com/hgcharing/ayahuasca-icaro-arc-de-duende


SpiritQuest (2015) The incomparable maestro banco ayahuasquero: Don Rober Acho Jarama.
Published online at: http://biopark.org/icaros.html


SpiritQuest (2015) Maestra Oracionista: Maria Hermana Tuesta Flores. Published online at:
http://biopark.org/icaros.html


Note: There is worked out to be 2,500 words in figure titles, references, contents page, titles,
image captions and other. This brings the main body word count to roughly 11,500.


65
